GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner who was working as Sub Divisional Engineer in the Public Works Department (B&R) of the Government of Haryana before being removed from service has challenged the charge-sheet dated 3011986, the enquiry report, Annexure P-(1) and the order of punishment dated 2281991 by which he has been removed from service and recovery of an sum of Rs. 48,750/- has been ordered from him by the Government.
Brief Facts:_  2.
The petitioner joined service as Sub Divisional Engineer being on selected by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
There has been a lot of litigation regarding the claim of the ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers like the petitioner in the matter of their seniority, pay fixation and promotion.
Writ petition filed by the petitioner and some others claiming the benefit of military service was rejected by this Court but no appeal, their Lordships of the Supreme Court upheld his claim and directed the Government to give credit of entire military service for the purpose of seniority and all other benefits as would appear from the judgment of the Apex Court in Ex-Captain KC Arora and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(2) SLR 97.
In a subsequent petition filed by the Government, their Lordships clarified their earlier order and limited the benefit of military service only to the extent of emergency period.
The second round of litigation ensued between ex- Emergency commissioned Officers and other officers when the Government amended the Service Rules in order to nullify the effect of the judgment given by the Apex Court.
In BN Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1987(5) SLR 531, a Division Bench of this Court struck down the amendment and directed the official respondents to consider the case of the petitioner and other similarly situated persons for retrospective promotion.
3.
More then one contempt petitions were filed by the petitioner before the Apex Court as well as this Court alleging non-complinace of the orders passed in his favour.
In these contempt petitions a number of officials including the Commissioner and Secretary, PWD (B&R) and Engineer-in-Chief were impleaded as respondents.
4.
Petitioner's effort to get himself promoted to the post of Executive Engineer proved abortive due to initiation of three disciplinary proceedings including the one which has been challenged in this writ petition.
He has separately challenged the action of the Government to supersede him by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 3911 of 1988.
5.
Vide memo dated 10th January, 1986, the respondent-Government initiated enquiry against the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
The allegation levelled against the petitioner was that he alongwith S/Shri VK Munjal, Executive Engineer, Provincial Division, Faridabad, RD Goel, Sub Divisional Engineer, Palwal, NK Jain, Junior Engineer, Faridabad and OP Dhankar, Junior Engineer, Palwal had allowed exorbitant rate for carriage of cement to Shiv Lal, Contractor and thus caused loss to the Government to the then of Rs. 1,62,500/-.
The petitioner submitted reply to the charge-sheet on 1061986 and denied all the allegations.
On 631987, the Governor of Haryana passed order, Annexure P-7, appointing Shri Nihal Singh, Superintending Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R) Circle, Hisar, to conduct enquiry into the allegations levelled against the petitioner and four other officials.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report, Annexure P-8, to the Government with a finding that the charges levelled against all the delinquents were fully proved.
The Government accepted the enquiry report and issued a show cause notice dated 2791988 to the petitioner and others.
In response to that notice, petitioner submitted a detailed reply dated 6th December, 1988.
Thereafter, the Government passed the impugned order and imposed the penalty of removal and at the same time ordered recovery of Rs. 48,750/- from the petitioner.
At the same time Shri VK Munjal has been punished with stoppage of two increments only and Shri RD Goel has been punished with an order of recovery of the alleged excess payment made in the carriage of cement.
6.
The petitioner has challenged the enquiry proceedings on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice and also on the ground that no charge can be treated as proved against him and, therefore, the Government did not have jurisdiction to penalise him.
The main grounds on which the proceedings of enquiry and the order of punishment have been challenged are:-  (a) No evidence was produced during the course of enquiry to substantate the allegations levelled against the petitioner and, therefore, the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer holding the petitioner guilty are perverse.
(b) The Enquiry Officer did not afford reasonable opportunity of defence to the petitioner.
(c) The Enquiry Officer did not conduct the proceedings in an impartial manner, inasmuch as, he recorded findings on the basis of personal knowledge.
(d) That the documents produced during the course of enquiry were neither proved nor were they shown to the petitioner.
(e) That different punishments have been awarded to the similarly situated officers without any reason or justification.
(f) Two disciplinary proceedings were initiated by the Government vide different orders but the same were entrusted to the same Enquiry Officer namely Shri Ninal Singh, who held the proceedings simultaneously and mixed up the two cases while recording his findings and this has caused serious prejudice to the petitioner.
(g) That the Enquiry Officer did not consider the case put forward by the petitioner while holding him guilty of the charges levelled against him.
(h) That the proceedings have been held against him with mala fide intention, inasmuch, as the officers of the department were greatly prejudiced with the petitioner due to the fact that he had invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court and the Supreme Court and had impleaded the officials of the Government as parties in person in contempt proceedings and there was a determined effort by the departmental authorities to deprive him promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
7.
During the course of arguments, the learned Assistant Advocate General produced the original file of enquiry conducted against the petitioner and other officers.
On the pages 1 to 5 of this file proceedings of the Enquiry held on 1851987 against Shri IS Goel, Executive Engineer and two other officials have been recorded.
On page 6 also the proceedings of enquiry held on 861987 against Sarv Shri IS Goel, SN Juneja and RD Goel have been recorded.
From pages 7 to 21 the proceedings held on 2371987 have been recorded and the presence of S/Shri RK Jain, Superintending Engineer, Gurgaon, IS Goel, Executive Engineer, SN Juneja, RD Goel, KC Arora, SC Chhabra, RK Duggal have been recorded.
In the proceedings on 1781987, the presence of S/Shri RK Jain Presenting Officer, KC Arora, RD Goel and SC Chhabra have been recorded.
8.
Other records produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General show that the Government had simultaneously ordered initiation of enquiry against two sets of officers.
This record also reveals that replies filed by the each of the delinquent officers was considered and analysed by the office before the final order of punishment was passed.
9.
Proceedings recorded by the Enquiry Officer show that on the first date of enquiry i.e. 1851987, the Enquiry Officer took note of the allegations made against Shri IS Goel.
He then recorded the comments of Shri IS Goel and Shri SN Juneja.
The Enquiry Officer then recorded the version of the Presenting Officer.
On the second date of enquiry, the proceedings adjourned due to election duties.
On the third date, the proceedings began with the submission of Shri IS Goel followed by the submission of Shri RK Jain, who referred to the enquiries made regarding the rates from different transport companies.
Then again the version of Shri IS Goel has been recorded followed by that of RK Jain.
Once again the version of Shri IS Goel has been recorded followed by the one of Shri SC Chhabra, who was the Assistant Presenting Officer.
Then the version of Shri RK Duggal and Shri SN Juneja has been recorded.
In the Part II of the proceedings on 2371987, statement of Shri RK Jain (Presenting Officer) has been referred to followed by the version of the petitioner.
Then again version of the Presenting Officer, the petitioner has been repeated twice over.
The proceedings of 1781987 also show that the versions given by the delinquent and the Presenting Officer were recorded turn by turn.
10.
From the proceedings of enquiry, it is crystal clear that nobody had appeared as witness in the departmental enquiry to prove the allegations against the petitioner.
Rather the departmental officials made certain enquiries at their own level and got certain information from different sources which were placed on record during the course of enquiry.
11.
The findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer show that he relied on his own knowledge in respect of the proceedings of enquiry held against the Executive Engineer, Sonepat.
This would be evident from the following extract of the enquiry report:-  "In another case of carriage of cement by EE Sonepat in which I have been appointed as Inquiry Officer simultaneously, the prosecution has brought out that EE Sonepat has paid Rs. 580/- per MT for carriage or cement from the same course to Sonepat during 7/82 about 2 months later than the carriage done by S/Shri VK Munjal, EE and others.
The department has not accepted his rate also and contended that the actual rate for carriage from Basant Nagar to Sonepat was Rs. 480/- per MT as verified by the department during 11/83.
In similar circumstances the rates were also verified in case of carriage of cement to Sonepat during the month of 5/84 to know the fact of the mango season and the same agency i.e. M/s Apsra Lorry Transport Co quoted a rate of Rs. 550/- per MT two years after having carried out the work during 7/82 @ Rs. 580/- per MT Keeping in view the normal rise in price index for 2 years the rate quoted by the firm during 5/84 was much less than they had arranged rate during 7/82.
The department has thus argued that the rates of Rs. 580/- per MT paid during 7/82 was not reasonable and was much higher than the reasonable market rates.
The department has held that the rate of Rs. 480/- per MT was reasonable for Sonepat being away about 100 to 80 Kms.
to Palwal/Faridabad.''
12.
While discussing the case of the department against Shri VK Munjal, the Enquiry Officer has recorded the following conclusion :-  ``Thus VK Munjal, Executive Engineer is fully responsible for all the shortcomings and lapses committed in the process by this committee as he had fully approved all the actions of the committee.''
Regarding the petitioner, the Enquiry Officer simply recorded a finding that the affairs of the committee were managed by Shri KC Arora and other members were not effective and thus the charge is fully proved against him.
In the background of the above, it is how required to be considered whether the impugned order of punishment is vitiated by an error of law.
13.
A look at Annexure P-1 shows that enquiry was vitiated against the petitioner under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 (hereafter referred to as `the Rules').
Rule 7 of the Rules contains the procedure which is required to be followed for holding an enquiry before imposition of the penalties of dismissal, removal or reduction.
Rule 7(2) of the Rules which is quite relevant in the context of this case is reproduced below:-  ``7(2).
The grounds on which it is proposed to take such action, shall be reduced to the form of definite charge or charges which shall be communicated in writing to the persons charged, together with a statement of allegations on which each charge is based and of any other circumstance which it is proposed to take into consideration in passing orders on the case, and he shall be required within a reasonable time to state in writing whether he admits the truth of all, or any, or the charges, what explanation or defence, if any, he has to offer and whether he desires to be heard in person.
If he so desires or if the authority empowered to dismiss, remove or reduce him so directs, an oral enquiry shall be held at which all evidence shall be heard as to such of the charges are not admitted.
The person charged shall, subject to the conditions described in sub-rule (3), be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give evidence in person and to have such witnesses, called as he may wish, provided that the officer conducting the enquiry may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to call any witness.
The proceedings shall contain a sufficient record of the evidence and a statement of the findings and the ground thereof: Provided that - (a) it shall not be necessary to frame any additional charge when it is proposed to take action in respect of any statement of allegation made by the person charged, in the course of his defence; (b) the provisions of the foregoing sub-rule shall not apply where a person is dismissed, or removed or reduced on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove him, or reduce him in rank is satisfied that, or some reason to be recorded by him in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to give him an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him, or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person such an opportunity.
(c) if any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to give to any person an opportunity to defend himself under sub-rule (2), the decision thereon of the punishing authority shall be final.''
On a perusal of the above quoted rule, it becomes clear that the first step which is required to be taken for making an enquiry in terms of Rule 7(1) is the communication of the charges together with the statement of allegations to the delinquent.
He is required to be given time to admit the charges or to submit his explanation or defence and also indicate whether he desires to be heard in person.
In the event of denial of the allegations, an oral enquiry is required to be held at which the evidence in respect of charges not admitted by the delinquent is required to be produced.
The delinquent is entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give evidence in person and produce witnesses.
The proceedings of enquiry must contain sufficient record of evidence and a statement of finding as well as the grounds on which such findings have been arrived at.
It is thus evident that the delinquent employee is entitled to know not only the charges and allegations but also other adverse circumstances which are likely to be taken into consideration in passing the final order by the competent authority.
He is also entitled to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the department and adduce evidence in defence.
14.
What has happened in the present case is a complete negation of the procedure laid down in the Rules.
Record of the case shows that after the memo, Annexure P-2, was communicated to the petitioner, he had submitted reply Annexure P-6, and denied the allegations levelled against him and also prayed for personal hearing.
Thereafter the Governor appointed Shri Nihal Singh, Superintending Engineer as Enquiry Officer.
However, thereafter the Enquiry Officer did not fix any date for production of evidence of the department and he did not follow the procedure laid down in Rule 7(2).
Instead he adopted a novel method of calling upon the delinquents to make their statements in the first instance and gave similar opportunity to the departmental representative to make his statement and to produce documents from time to time.
He then proceeded to submit his report holding the petitioner and others guilty of the allegations levelled against them.
In this report, the Enquiry Officer relied on the findings recorded by him in connected enquiry to buttress his conclusion that the petitioner was guilty of the allegations levelled against him.
In my opinion, the procedure adopted by the Enquiry Officer did not conform to the requirement of the statute, inasmuch as, no evidence was produced by the department to substantiate the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Mere filing of documents by the departmental representative which he has collected from different sources cannot amount to production of evidence by the department to substantate the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Neither the person who prepared those document was produced nor the person who collected those documents were produced as witness and the petitioner had no opportunity to cross-examine such person to substantiate their defence that the rates for the cartage of cement were justified and there was no ulterior motive to help the contractor or to cause loss to the department.
Not even this, the copies of documents which were filed during the course of proceedings of inquiry were not made available to the petitioner so as to enable him to prepare his defence to counter those documents.
This glaring defect in this proceedings of the enquiry caused grave prejudice to the petitioner, inasmuch as, he could not defend himself properly.
In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chintaman Sadashiva Waishampayan, AIR 1961 SC 1623, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court indicated the parameters of reasonable opportunity in disciplinary proceedings and held:-  ``When an order of dismissal passed against a public servant is challenged by him by a petition filed in the High Court under Article 226 it is for the High Court to consider whether the constitutional requirements of Articles 311(2) have been satisfied or not.
In such a case it cannot be contended that the infirmities on which the public officer relies flow from the exercise of discretion vested in the enquiry officer.
The enquiry officer may have acted bona fide but that does not mean that the discretionary orders passed by him are final and conclusive.
Whenever it is urged before the High Court that as a result of such orders the public officer has been deprived of a reasonable opportunity it would be open to the High Court to examine the matter and decide whether the requirements of Articles 311(2) have been satisfied or not.
In such matters it is difficult and inexpedient to lay down any general rules; whether or not the officer in question has had a reasonable opportunity must always depend on the facts in each case.
The only general statement that can be safely made in this connection is that the departmental enquiries should observe rules of natural justice, and that if they are fairly and properly conducted the decisions reached by the enquiry officers on the merits are not open to be challenged on the ground that the procedure followed was not exactly in accordance with that which is observed in Courts of Law.
Stating it broadly and without intending it to be exhaustive it may be observed that rules of natural justice require that a party should have the opportunity of adducing all relevant evidence on which he relies, that the evidence of the opponent should be taken in his presence, and that he should be given the opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses examined by that party, and that no materials should be relied on against him without his being given an opportunity of explaining them.
The right to cross-examine the witnesses who give evidence against him is a very valuable right and if it appear that effective exercise of this right has been prevented by the enquiry officer by not giving to the officer relevant documents to which he is entitled, that inevitably would mean that he enquiry had not been held in accordance with rules of natural justice.''
(Underlining is mine) 15.
In Kashinath Dikshita v. Union of India and others, AIR 1986 SC 2118, the Supreme Court held that non-supply of copies of statements of witnesses and copies of documents relied upon by disciplinary authority amounted to violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
In M/s Braeilly Electricity Supply Co Ltd v. The Workmen and others, 1971(2) SCC 617, their Lordships held:-  ``The application of principle of natural justice does not imply that what is not evidence can be acted upon.
On the other hand what it means is that no materials can be relied upon to establish a (sic) facts which are not spoken to by persons who are competent to speak about them and are subjected to cross-examination by the party against whom they are sought to be oused.
When a document is produced in a Court or a Tribunal the question that naturally arises is, is it a genuine document, what are its contents and are the statements contained therein true ?
When the appellants produced the balance sheet and profit and loss account of the Company, it does not by its mere production amount to a proof of it or of the truth of the entries therein.
If these entries are challenged the appellant must prove each of such entries by producing the books and speaking from the entries made therein.
If a letter or other document is produced to establish some fact which is relevant to the enquiry the writer must be produced or his affidavit in respect thereof be filed and opportunity afforded to the opposite party who challenges this fact.
This is both in accord with principles of natural justice as also according to the procedure under Order 19, Code or Civil Procedure and the Evidence Act both of which incorporate these general principles.''
16.
Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the report of the Inquiry Officer is vitiated because he used his personal knowledge for recording a finding adverse to the petitioner deserves to be accepted.
Perusal or the report of the inquiry officer clearly shows that while holding the petitioner guilty, the Inquiry Officer relied upon the findings recorded by him in a different inquiry regarding which the petitioner had no notice and with reference to which the petitioner could not possibly defend.
This extraneous factor may not be itself a proof of bias of the Inquiry Officer but it does lend credibility to the charge made by the petitioner that the Inquiry Officer did not conduct the proceedings fairly.
17.
Another ground which deserves to be taken note by me relates to the plea of discrimination.
Though in ordinary circumstances the Court cannot sit in appeal over the decision of the employer in the matters involving punishment but in the peculiar facts of this case I deem it necessary to observe that the respondents have failed to explain any rational ground for meeting out different punishments to the petitioner on the one hand and Shri VK Munjal on the other hand.
Admittedly, Shri VK Munjal was the leader of the team which was constituted by the Government for arranging cement and the final decision was in the hands of Shri VK Munjal.
If Shri VK Munjal has been let off with a penalty of two increments and recovery of Rs. 48,000/- it is not discernible to me why the petitioner was chosen to be removed from service.
Though the allegations levelled against some of the officers of the department may not have been substantiated to such an extent which may justify the recording of adverse finding by the Court against such officers, the imposition of extreme penalty of removal from service upon the petitioner lends credibility to his plea that the respondents have acted arbitrarily.
However, I did not want to express any final opinion on the quantum of punishment because in my opinion the impugned order of punishment deserves to be quashed or the ground of violation of Rule 7(2) as well as the principles of natural justice.
18.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 2281991 is quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits except the back wages.
Back wages shall be payable to the petitioner only on his producing cogent evidence before the Government that he was not earning elsewhere during the intervening period.
It is also made clear that the respondent-Government shall be free to hold fresh inquiry against the petitioner and the quashing of the order dated 2281991 shall in no manner prevent the Government from taking a fresh decision in accordance with law.
It is, however, made clear that such decision should be taken by the respondent-Government within a period of three months from today.