NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Barnala, whereby the appeal filed by the Punjabi University, Patiala, was accepted, thus dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
Briefly put, plaintiff has sought a declaration to the effect that he has passed BA (T.D.C.)
Part II examination held by the defendant- University in April, 1988 and the order passed by the University disqualifying him for one year from appearing in the examination is illegal and without jurisdiction with a consequential relief of mandatory injunction directing the defendants to declare the result of the plaintiff on the basis of the examination held in April, 1988 and further seeking a direction restraining the defendants from refusing to accept the admission form BA for (T.D.C.)
Part III examination to be held in April, 1989.
3.
According to the plaintiff, to secure this candidature for examination, he had to file CWP No. 2307 of 1988 against the Punjabi University which was decided on April 4, 1988 and he was allowed to appear in the examination in pursuance to the directions given by this Court.
It is on account of this grudge against him that an unfair means case has been made against him which, in fact, is based on false and procured report from the Examiner of English compulsory paper and so the order be declared to be illegal, ultra vires the University Regulations/Ordinance and also violative of principles of natural justice and hence a nullity and non est.
4.
The suit was contested by the University, inter alia, on the ground that the civil court at Barnala had no jurisdiction to entertain or try the same; that the defendant has no ill will or bias against the plaintiff; that previously admission to BA (T.D.C.)
Part III class was granted to the plaintiff at his own rick and responsibility subject to the condition that in the event of his disqualification, the fee paid by him for the next higher class was not to be refunded, that the Ordinance 42 of the Ordinances relating to Unfair Means Cases provided for such a course and it further provided that in the event of disqualification of an examinee due to Unfair Means Case, his result of the lower examination shall stand cancelled.
On merit, it has been stated that as per report of the examiner, his answer sheet of compulsory English paper disclosed that question No. 3 "Meaning Part" and in question No. 6 "Corrections" somebody else helped him in his/her own handwriting; that the additions/alterations made in the answers to these questions in the answer sheet were in different ink/handwriting.
The whole matter was examined by the Unfair Means Cases Committee of the Punjabi University, Patiala, which consisted of eminent persons, namely, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. KS Sidhu (Retired), Mr. RG Verma, Principal (Retired), Mr. Inder Singh, Principal (Retired) and Mr. Gurdial Singh, Advocate, who after examining the case finally took a lenient view of the matter and disqualified the plaintiff from appearing in the Punjabi University Examinations for one year under Ordinance 16(C) of the Ordinances.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order disqualifying the plaintiff conveyed vide letter No. 1357/UMC/88 dated 181088 is illegal, null and void as alleged ?
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the injunction prayed for ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff has the locus standi to file this suit ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the court has got territorial jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPP.
5.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped to file this suit by his act and conduct ?
OPD.
6.
Relief.
The trial court decided these issues in favour of the plaintiff, thus decreeing his suit as prayed for.
6.
The appellate Court once again examined the matter and has chosen to decide issues No. 1 and 4 against the plaintiff, thus dismissing the suit of the plaintiff with costs.
7.
With a view to seek reversal of the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, learned counsel for the appellant has once again highlighted the factual as well as legal aspects as noticed by the trial Court.
According to the counsel, even as per findings of the Unfair Means Committee, there is no clear proof on record that the so called addition/alteration in the answer sheet were in the handwriting of the appellant.
Even the ink in respect of addition/alteration differ with the body of the answer sheet.
Precisely for this reason, even the Unfair Means Committee has not reached at any definite conclusion.
So in the absence of the same, benefit of doubt ought to have been granted to the appellant.
In any case, it was for the defendant-University to prove beyond an element of doubt that the appellant is guilty of using Unfair Means.
Even the finding of the lower appellate Court with regard to lack of jurisdiction is unsustainable for the reason that the decision imposing the punishment was received by the plaintiff at his permanent place of residence.
This way the Court at Barnala has jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate the same.
Reliance has been placed on the decision in case reported as Jaswinder Singh v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Chandigarh, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 16 and Board of High School and Intermediate Education, UP Allahabad and another v. Bagleshwar Prasad and another, AIR 1966 SC 875.
8.
Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, argued that the lower appellate Court on carefully considering the evidence led and on perusal of the documents especially the answer sheet has come to the conclusion that the decision taken by Unfair Means Committee is perfectly just in the facts and circumstances of the case calling for no interference.
The court has further highlighted the fact that the Committee consisted of Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. KS Sindhu (Retired), Mr. RG Verma, Principal (Retired), Mr. Inder Singh, Principal (Retired) and Mr. Gurdial Singh, Advocate, who had no bias or ill will against the appellant.
In fact, Unfair Means Committee has rather taken a lenient view of the matter and so disqualified the appellant-plaintiff for one year only.
It is on account of addition/alteration made in the answer sheet that the plaintiff was able to secure 27 marks out of a total of 75 marks else he would have been declared as unsuccessful.
Similarly, the Court rightly came to the conclusion that the civil court at Barnala has no jurisdiction to entertain/try the suit of the plaintiff for the reason that part of cause of action arose at Bhatinda where BA (T.D.C.)
Part II examination was held in April, 1988 or the suit could be instituted at Patiala which is the seat of Panjabi University and its administrative offices.
Even the order passed by the Unfair Means Committee was at Patiala.
The finding recorded by the lower appellate Court essentially being a finding of fact and otherwise not vitiated, are not amenable for reappraisal in regular second appeal.
9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused some of the documents as well as statement of the plaintiff.
The matter in controversy revolves around a very narrow compass whether the plaintiff has been rightly held to be guilty of using unfair means or the same deserves to be declared illegal ?
Panjabi University is an autonomous body and is governed by its own Rules and Regulations.
Courts normally do not interfere is their working unless any of its action is found to be palpably illegal or contrary to its own Rules and Regulations or otherwise per se unjust.
On the basis of a report from the Examiner, a case of using unfair means in the examination in respect of paper of English (compulsory) was referred to the Unfair Means Committee for its examination and if found guilty, for proposing appropriate punishment.
Unfair Means Committee offered an opportunity of hearing to the appellant and after considering the matter chose to propose punishment of debarring him from appearing in any examination in the University for a period of one year under Ordinance 16(c).
While arriving at its conclusion, the Committee scanned the answer sheet and found that in respect of certain answers, there were certain additions/alterations, though in different ink.
Precisely for this reason, the Committee did not record that these additions/alternations were in the handwriting of the plaintiff.
Despite this, the Committee yet came to the conclusion that these additions/alterations were at the instance of the plaintiff and but for these corrections the plaintiff could not have secured pass marks.
10.
I have examined the original answer sheet, Exhibit P-2.
At number of places where alterations/corrections have been made though in different handwriting are marked 'A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E' & 'F' and 'F1'.
On the basis of corrections made in respect of these questions, the plaintiff has been awarded marks which if excluded would bring his score to 22-23 out of 75.
So it is reasonable to infer that but for corrections (additions/alterations) the plaintiff would have failed.
In fact, the plaintiff in his cross-examination had accepted this i.e. but for the corrections he would not have been awarded any mark in respect of these questions.
The lower appellate Court has made reference to relevant portion of the statement of the plaintiff in cross- examination in para No. 6 of the judgment.
11.
Whether the order of disqualification for a period of one year was passed out of hostile bias or animus is again a point which has been pressed by the counsel for the appellant.
No worthwhile evidence has been led by the plaintiff in support of this plea.
It is unthinkable that the University authorities will try to implicate the student merely for the reason that he happened to get a favourable order from this Court.
In the context of the present case, I find no substance if this plea of the appellant-plaintiff either.
12.
The decision rendered by the apex Court in Board of High School and Intermediate Education UP Allahabad and another's case (supra) does not advance the case of the appellant in any manner.
In the instant case, Unfair Means Committee headed by a retired Judge of High Court on examining the matter has found the plaintiff guilty of having used unfair means in the examination.
Various additions/interpolations in the answer sheets have also been accepted by the plaintiff.
Thus, it cannot be said to be case of no evidence.
In fact, but for the corrections in the answer sheets, the plaintiff would not have secured pass marks.
Similarly, the appellant cannot derive any benefit from the decision in Jaswinder Singh's case (supra).
In Jaswinder Singh's case (supra) the court came to the conclusion that the order impugned is without any evidence.
The facts of the above case are entirely different.
Resultantly, finding no merit in the appeal, the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.