VK Bali, J - By this common order we propose to decide three connected Civil Writ Petitions bearing Nos. 3587, 5533 and 5397 of 1996 as common questions of law and fact are involved in all these cases.
On consent of the learned Counsel representing the parties, the facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 3587 of 1996.
2.
Madan Lal Duggal along with SN Arora through present writ petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seek issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents 1 and 2 i.e. State of Haryana and Engineer-in-Chief, PWD (B&R) Branch, Haryana to consider them senior to private respondents i.e. respondents 3 and 4 for promotion to the post of Superintendent.
The facts in wake whereof the relief aforesaid has been asked for reveal that the petitioners are members of general category whereas respondents 3 and 4 belong to Backward/Scheduled Caste respectively.
Concededly both the respondents were junior to the petitioners on the lower posts of Clerks and Assistants.
However, on the basis of reservation in promotion, they were promoted as Deputy Superintendents prior in time to the petitioners and as such were being treated senior to them.
The petitioners as also respondents 3 and 4 were initially appointed as Clerks in the respondent department.
They were thereafter promoted as Assistants and still further Deputy Superintendents.
In the category of Clerks and Assistants, the petitioners were senior to respondents 3 and 4.
The respective dates of appointment/promotion of the petitioners and respondents 3 and 4 on various posts like Clerk and promotion to the posts of Assistants and Deputy Superintendents have been detailed in paragraph 3 of the petition.
It may be mentioned at this stage that the facts as narrated in paragraph with regard to particulars of the petitioners and respondents 3 and 4 are have not been disputed.
3.
The services of the petitioners and respondents 3 and 4 governed by rules known as Haryana Public Works Department (B & R) Branch Headquarters Office Ministerial Service (Group C) Rules, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as 1979 Rules).
Rule 9 provides method of recruitment and reads as under :-  "Rule 9.
Method of recruitment : (i) Recruitment to the Service shall be made in the manner indicated below :- (a) in the case of Deputy Superintendent :- (i) by promotion from amongst Assistants and senior Scale Stenographers in the Service; or (ii) by transfer of an official working on a similar post either in the service of the Government of India or of any State Government.
(b) In the case of Assistants :- (i) by promotion from amongst Clerks, Stenotypists, Junior Scale Stenographers in the Service; or (ii) by transfer of an official working on a similar post either in the service of Government of India or of any State Government.
(c) & (d) xxx xxx xxx (e) xxx xxx xxx (f) In the case of Clerks :- (i) 80 per cent by direct recruitment; (ii) 20 per cent by promotion from amongst Restorers, Gestetner Operators, Drivers or Group C employees whose pay scale is less than that of Clerk; and Group D employees : Provided that they shall be granted annual increments on qualifying a test in typewriting in Hindi/English at a speed of 25 and 30 words respectively within a period of one year from the date of appointment as a Clerk; or (iii) by transfer of an official working on a similar post either in the service of the Government of India or of any State Government.
(2) xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx (3)(i) When any vacancy occurs, or is about to occur, the appointing authority shall determine the manner in which the same shall be filled in, (ii) All promotions shall be made by selection based on seniority- cum-fitness."
Seniority is governed by rule 11 which reads thus :-  "Rule 11 : Seniority of members of the Service : Seniority inter se of members of the Service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the service; Provided that where there are different cadres in the service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre; Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows : (a) a member appointed by direct appointment shall be senior to a member appointed by promotion or by transfer; (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer; (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or by transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different Cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by the length of their service in the appointments and if the length of such service is also the same, the older member shall be senior to the younger member."
Respondents 3 and 4 were promoted as Deputy Superintendents prior to the petitioners despite the fact that the petitioners were senior to them in the feeder cadre of Assistants.
This promotion was given to these respondents by applying the reservation policy of the State wherein 20% of Class III and Class IV posts are reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes whereas 10% posts are reserved for members of backward classes.
This reservation came into being by instructions dated 921979 and 1891987 copies whereof have been attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-2 and P-3 respectively.
Respondents 3 and 4 superseded members of the general category including petitioners on the basis of reservation provided in promotion vide instructions referred to above.
All that further requires to be mentioned is that promotion from the post of Deputy Superintendent is to Class II post of Superintendent.
There is no reservation for Class I and II posts in Haryana for the purposes of promotion.
Two vacancies of Superintendents became available in the Department which were sought to be filled by the State by treating respondents 3 and 4 as senior to petitioners.
A panel was prepared in which the names of respondents 3 and 4 were shown above the petitioners, as they were being treated senior to the petitioners.
When the order of promotion of respondents 3 and 4 were under issue, at that stage that the petitioners came to this Court asking for the relief as has been indicated in the early paragraph of the judgment.
4.
The main or rather the only contention raised by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel representating the petitioners is that weightage of earlier promotion to the reserved candidate cannot be given when he competes for further promotion to a next higher post with a general category candidate senior to him in the cadre post as that would amount to reverse discrimination and would be violative of guarantee of equality as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
For his aforesaid contention, the learned counsel relies upon the decision of the Apex court in Ajit Singh Januja and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(2) SCT 278(SC) rendered in Civil Appeals Nos. 3792-3794 of 1989 on 1st of March, 1996.
5.
The cause of the petitioners has been contested and two separate but identical written statements, one on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and the other on behalf of respondent No. 4 have been filed.
It has been averred that even though respondents 3 and 4 were promoted to the posts of Deputy Superintendents because of reservation but since they were appointed earlier in point of time than the petitioners, no occasion had for the petitioners to claim seniority over and above respondents 3 and 4.
Respondents 3 and 4, in other words, were in continuous service for a period more than that of the petitioners and as per rule 11, reproduced above, seniority of the members of the service who were appointed by promotion or transfer has to be determined according to the seniority of such members on the appointments on which they were transferred/promoted.
The fact that there is no reservation for Class I and II posts has been admitted.
In so far as reliance of the learned Counsel on Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra) is concerned, it is pleaded by the respondents that the said judgment is distinguishable.
The Counsel for the respondents during the course of arguments have sought to distinguish the judgment of Supreme Court in Union of India v. Virpal, JT 1995(7) SC 231 : 1995(4) SCT 695(SC) and Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra) on the ground that in the case decided by the Supreme Court the rule in clear terms mentioned that it is the seniority fixed in the feeder posts that shall be determining factor for promotion to the next higher rank whereas there is no such rule in the rules known as 1979 Rules.
Learned counsel for the respondent-State, in support of his contention, also places reliance upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Karam Chand v. HSEB, AIR 1989 SC 261.
6.
From the pleadings of the parties and the contentions raised by learned counsel representing them, the question that needs adjudication is as to whether the weightage of earlier promotion to the reserved candidate can or cannot be given when he competes for further promotion to the next higher post with the general category candidate, senior to him in the cadre post and as to whether, if the weightage is given, the same would amount to reverse discrimination and would be violative of guarantee of equality as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
As mentioned earlier, the counsel representing the petitioners relies upon a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Januja v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1996(2) SC 727 : 1996(2) SCT 278(SC).
It shall be useful to straightaway examine the facts of the said case and to see whether the same squarely covers the case of the petitioners as is the contention of their counsel.
The appellants in the aforesaid case were petitioners in the High Court and petitions filed on their behalf were dismissed by the High Court.
They were working on the posts of Superintendent Grade I, Superintendent Grade II and Assistant in Punjab Civil Secretariat Chandigarh.
They were members of the cadre of Punjab Civil Secretariat.
In the connected petition, petitioners were working on the posts of Under Secretaries/Superintendent Grade I in the Punjab Civil Secretariat and were members of the cadre of Punjab Civil Secretariat.
In yet another connected petition, the petitioners were working on the posts of Deputy Secretaries/Under Secretaries in the Punjab Civil Secretariat and were members of the State Service Class-I.
Their main contention was that the policy for reservation in respect of candidates belonging to Schedules Castes and Backward Classes was being implemented by the State Government in a manner, because of which the members belonging to Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes were holding posts in excess to their reservation quota.
The same was not only prejudicial but detrimental to their right for being considered for promotion to higher grade.
The Government had issued from time to time various circulars/instructions in respect of reservation for members of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes.
One such circular was issued on 19101949 making 15% reservation of posts in favour of Scheduled Castes.
Vide orders dated 1981952 the percentage of 15% was increased to 19%.
Vide yet another order dated 2911959 roster system was introduced for implementing the policy of reservation.
By an order dated 14.1.1964 reservation was fixed in all classes of posts i.e.
I, II, III and IV.
However, by an order dated 23.8.1968 the State withdrew reservation for Class I and II posts but the reservation in respect of Class III and IV posts was increased to 20%.
Vide clarification issued on 1971968 the Government ordered that in direct recruitment the roster points should be taken as seniority points for Scheduled Castes.
By another order dated 451974 reservation was reimposed even in respect of Class I and II posts and it was fixed at 16% (14% for Scheduled Castes and 2% for Backward Classes).
This reservation was to be provided by applying the roster system.
By an order dated 661974, the quota of reservation was increased to 25% for Scheduled Castes and 5% for Backward Classes w.e.f.
631974.
On 711980 the State issued an order saying that "it is made clear that those scheduled castes/backward classes employees who get appointed/promoted against reserve points on the basis of their merit/seniority should not be counted for the purpose of reservation but that reserve point should be carried over to the next point on the roster and filled up by a candidate/employee belonging to Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes so that the deficiency of representation in service is made up".
The writ petitions were referred to a Full Bench of the High Court and in the case reported as Jaswant Singh v. The Secretary to Government of Punjab, 1989(4) SLR 257, it was said that "non-consideration of Scheduled Caste candidates against general category posts for purpose of appointment or promotion will be hit by Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution."
It was also observed that "there was no bar to the appointment/promotion of larger number of members of Scheduled Castes.
The members of the Scheduled Castes, appointed on merit or promoted on seniority-cum-fitness basis shall not be taken into consideration for working out the reserved percentage."
The High Court also said that "roster points were seniority points".
Some of the points that were raised in Jaswant Singh's case (supra) came up for consideration before a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, JT 1995(2) SC 351 : 1995(2) SCT 646(SC).
The decision rendered by the Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal's case (supra) was also relied upon by the employees representing general category and after noting some of the observations from the two judgments i.e. Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, JT 1992(6) SC 273 : 1993(1) SCT 448(SC) and RK Sabharwal's case, the Supreme Court culled out the question that required determination in deciding the present case i.e. Ajit Singh Januja's case.
The precise controversy therein was as to whether, after the members of Scheduled Castes/Tribes or Backward Classes for whom specific percentage of posts have been reserved and roster has been provided having been promoted against those posts on the basis of 'accelerated promotion' because of reservation of posts and applicability of the roster system, can claim promotion against general category posts in still higher grade on the basis of their seniority which itself is the result of accelerated promotion on the basis of reservation and roster ?
The relevant circular dealing with reservations in the said case dated 451974 was to the following effect :-  "I am directed to refer to the subject noted above and to say that at present reservation for scheduled castes and Backward Classes is applicable in promotions to and within Class III and IV posts only.
Since these Castes/Classes are poorly represented in various higher services in the State Government, it has been under the active consideration of the State Government that some reservation in promotions within higher services as well should be made for them.
It has now been decided that except in the case of All India Services, 16% of the posts to be filled by promotion to or within Class I and II services under State Government should be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes (14% for members of Scheduled Castes and 2% for members of Backward Classes) subject to the following conditions : (a) the persons to be considered must possess the minimum necessary qualifications; and (b) they should have a satisfactory record of service.
(2) In a lot of 100 vacancies occurring from time to time, those falling at serial numbers mentioned below should be treated as reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes : 1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80, 87, 94 and so on.
Vacancies falling at serial numbers 26 and 76 should be treated as reserved for the members of Backward Classes.
(3) The reservation prescribed shall be given effect to in accordance with a roster to be maintained in each Department.
The roster will be implemented in the form of a running account from year to year."
The circular quoted above was held to be invalid insofar as it said that the reservation prescribed shall be given effect to in accordance with a roster to be maintained which will be implemented in the form of a running account from year to year, in view of the judgment in RK Sabharwal's case (supra).
The facts of case i.e. Ajit Singh Januja's case appear to us to be identical to the facts of the present case.
Learned counsel for the respondents could not distinguish the facts of the case in hand and those of Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra) during the course of arguments.
It was held by the Supreme Court that :-  "If the contention of the respondents is accepted as has been done by the High Court that such appointees/promotees can be considered against posts meant for general category candidates merely because they have become senior on basis of accelerated promotions, then according to us, that exercise shall amount to circumventing the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in the Sabharwal's case, because for all practical purposes the promotions of such candidates are being continued like a running account although the percentage of reservation provided for them has been reached and achieved.
Once such reserved percentage has been achieved and even the operation of the roster has stopped, then how it will be permissible to consider such candidates for being promoted against the general category posts on the basis of their accelerated promotion, which has been achieved by reservation and roster."
Further, relying upon the judgment rendered in Virpal Singh Chauhan's case (supra), it was held that :-  "Once the quota is full and roster has stopped for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes in respect of whom reservation has been made and roster has been prescribed, then their case for promotion to still higher grade against general category posts have to be considered not treating them as members of the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes "on any crutch".
They cannot be promoted only on basis of their "accelerated seniority" against the general category posts.
In RK Sabharwal's case it was said that the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes who compete on their own merit along with general category candidates then they are not to be counted within the percentage of reservation made for such candidates in the service, because they have competed with the general category candidates on their own merit.
The same principle which has been enunciated by the Constitution Bench in the aforesaid case shall be applicable whenever a member of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes has got accelerated promotion to a higher grade and is to be considered for further promotion to still higher grade against general category posts.
The accelerated promotions are to be made only against the posts reserved or roster prescribed.
There is no question of that benefit being available when a member of Scheduled Castes or Backward Class claims promotion against general category posts in the higher grade.
(Emphasis supplied.")
It need hardly be pointed out that such candidates who are members of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes and have got promotion on basis of reservation and application of roster before their seniors in the lower grade belonging to general category, in this process have not superseded them, because there was an inter se comparison of merit between them.
As such then such seniors who belong to general category, are promoted later it cannot be said that they have been superseded by such members of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes who have been promoted earlier.
While considering them for further promotion against general category posts if the only fact that they have been promoted earlier being members of Scheduled Castes or Backward Class is taken into consideration, then it shall violate the equality clause and be against the view expressed not only in the case of RR Sabharwal (supra) by the Constitution Bench, but also by the 9 Judges Bench in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra) where it has been held that in any cadre reservation should not exceed beyond 50%.
The 50% posts already being reserved against which promotions have been made, then any promotion against general category posts taking into consideration that they are members of the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes, shall amount to exceeding the limit fixed in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra)."
While concluding, the Apex Court, relying upon Virpal Singh Chauhan's case (supra) further held that :  "We respectfully concur with the view in Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan (supra) that the seniority between the reserved category candidates and general candidates in the promoted category shall continue to be governed by their panel position i.e. with reference to their inter se seniority in the lower grade.
The rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, but it does not give the accelerated 'consequential seniority'.
If a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate is promoted earlier because of the rule of reservation/roster and his senior belonging to the general category candidate is promoted later to that higher grade the general category candidate shall regain his seniority over such earlier promoted scheduled caste/tribe candidate.
As already pointed out above that when a scheduled caste/tribe candidate is promoted earlier by applying the rule of reservation/roster against a post reserved for such scheduled caste/tribe candidate, in this process he does not supersede his seniors belonging to the general category.
In this process there was no occasion to examine the merit of such scheduled caste/tribe candidate vis-a-vis his seniors belonging to the general category.
As such it will be only rational, just and proper to hold that when the general category candidate is promoted later from the lower grade to the higher grade, he will be considered senior to a candidate belonging to the scheduled caste/tribe who had been given accelerated promotion against the post reserved for him.
Wherever a question arises for filling up a post reserved for scheduled caste/tribe candidate in still higher grade then such candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste/Tribe shall be promoted first but when the consideration is in respect of promotion against the general category post in still higher grade then the general category candidate who has been promoted later shall be considered senior and his case shall be considered first for promotion, applying either principle of seniority-cum-merit or merit-cum-seniority.
If this rule and procedure is not applied then result will be that majority of the posts in higher grade shall be held at one stage by persons who have not only entered in service on basis of reservation and roster but have excluded the general category candidates from being promoted to the posts reserved for general category candidates merely on the ground of their initial accelerated promotions.
This will not be consistent with the requirement of the spirit of Article 16(4) or Article 335 of the Constitution."
The decision of this Court in Jaswant Singh's case (supra) was overruled.
7.
From the perusal of facts and findings of the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra), it is rather clear that the only question mooted out in this case and which has been framed in earlier part of the judgment, has to be returned in favour of the petitioners.
In our considered view, the present case stands on a better footing as concededly, there is no reservation in Class I and II posts to which promotional posts the petitioners are claiming precedence over the employees belonging to the reserved category.
The observations made by the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra) in paragraph 9 and which, though have been quoted above, may be reiterated that "the accelerated promotions are to be made only against the posts reserved or roster prescribed.
There is no question of that benefit being available when a member of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes claims promotion against general category posts in the higher grade."
8.
It is no doubt true that the judgment of the Supreme Court, relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents in Karam Chand's case (supra), to some extent, does support the case of the respondents but, in view of later decision of the Supreme Court in Virpal Singh's case (supra), which is based upon the decision of Constitution Bench in RK Sabharwal's case (supra) and in which the arguments of reserved category candidates based upon Karam Chand's case (supra) were considered, it is the earlier judgment in Virpal Singh's and Ajit Singh Januja's cases (supra) that should prevail.
The contention of learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Appellants-Union of India and others in Virpal Singh's case (supra) based on the judgment in Karam Chand's case (supra) was considered in paragraph 43 of the report.
In Paragraph 44 the contention of general category candidates was considered.
It was argued by Shri S Murlidhar, learned counsel that injustice was being done to general candidates by applying not only the rule of reservation at every stage of promotion but also because the rule of seniority enunciated by the Railway Board in its several circulars was not being followed by the authorities concerned.
It is also true that while determining the controversy in Virpal Singh Chauhan's case (supra) circulars issued by the Railway Board did talk of giving accelerated promotion to the reserved category candidates but not the seniority.
But no such distinction is decipherable from the latest judgment of the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra).
On the other hand, it has been clearly observed that the accelerated promotions are to be made only against the posts reserved or roster prescribed and there is no question of that benefit being available when a member of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes claims promotion against general category posts in the higher grade.
This has been said despite the fact that there was a circular dated 451974 which has been reproduced above and by which some percentage of posts for promotion were earmarked for employees of reserved categories in Class I and II service.
Concededly, in the case in hand no reservation at all has been prescribed in Class I and II posts, for which posts only there is a contest between the parties.
9.
For the reasons stated above, petitioners succeed and the writs filed on their behalf deserve to be allowed.
The employees belonging to reserved category, simply on account of their accelerated promotions over their seniors in the lower post, cannot claim promotion earlier to the general category employees.
In other words, the mere fact that the reserved category employees have been promoted prior in point to time from their admitted seniors, they cannot claim promotion to the next higher post in Class I or II service on the basis of their having been promoted from the lower posts earlier in point of time.
The authorities concerned are, thus, directed to consider the case of all the concerned employees in light of observations made by us in this judgment and accordingly promote them to the next higher posts i.e. in Class I and II service.
In peculiar facts and circumstances of the present cases, there shall be no order as to costs.