KA Swami, CJ.
- This writ appeal is preferred against the order dated 29.11.1994 passed by the learned single Judge in WP No. 4006 of 1994.
2.
Learned single Judge has issued the following direction:-  "In fine, the writ petition is allowed, with a direction to the Corporation to absorb the petitioners by giving them first preference in respect of the existing vacancies and in respect of future vacancies until the entire list of 102 petitioners is absorbed.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
There will, however, be no order as to costs."
Therefore, the respondents herein have come up in appeal.
3.
Writ Petitions 20708 of 1994, 1197 of 1995 and 21610 of 1995 are also connected with the Writ Appeal, inasmuch as in these writ petitions, the petitioners have sought for issue of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents who are the appellants in the appeal, to absorb the petitioners as apprentices/assistants in the Life Insurance Corporation of India with effect from 1.7.1993 with all consequential benefits and to post such other orders as may be deemed fit in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Therefore, on our direction the writ petitions are also posted along with the writ appeal and all the matters are heard together.
4.
Learned single Judge after holding that the rights of the petitioners are governed by the scheme framed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India, has nevertheless issued the aforesaid direction on the basis that those who had undergone the scheme, have been absorbed outside the division therefore, the same benefit should be extended to the petitioners, respondents herein.
5.
Having regard to the contentions urged on both sides, the following points arise for consideration:-  (i) Whether the petitioners, respondents herein, are entitled to claim as of right for appointment under the Life Insurance Corporation of India beyond the scope of the scheme ?
(ii) What is the scope of the scheme introduced by the Life Insurance Corporation of India as Vocational Course at +2 Level of 10+2 pattern of education under CBSE ?
(iii) Whether the direction issued by the learned single Judge calls for interference ?
Points (i) and (ii) :  6.
These points go together, therefore we deal with them together.
7.
Before we answer point (i), it is necessary to consider point (ii) as to the scope of the scheme in question.
8.
Learned single Judge has considered the scope of the scheme and also reproduced certain portions of the scheme as contained in Annexure-II.
As it is necessary to give a complete picture of the scheme, we quote Annexure-II in its entirety:-  "Employment opportunities will be provided for the Students who come out successful in 12th Std.
in the Life Insurance Vocational Course, as per the following details: I For appointment to the cadre of Assistants/Typists/Stenographers.
(a) Minimum qualification for eligibility will include : Those who have passed +2 level under CBSE in Life Insurance Stream other than in Grade D1 and D2.
(b) Limitation on number of persons to be considered for selection under this category : The restrictions imposed under Clause 6(vi) of LIC Recruitment (of Cl. III & Cl. IV staff) Instructions 1979 in respect of the number of candidates to be called for test shall not apply to those who have passed the +2 level of CBSE in insurance Stream.
They will be allowed to compete irrespective of the number who have applied for the post.
(c) Recruitment Test : All those who pass +2 level of CBSE with Grade C1 and C2 will appear for the pre-recruitment test along with other candidates.
However, those who have passed +2 level CBSE in Life Insurance stream with grade B2+ and above will be exempt from entry test.
Of course for Typist/Stenographers the trade test shall be necessary in all cases.
Not more than 25% of the vacancies arrived at after providing reservation for SC/ST etc. in the Division where the schools having vocational course are situated shall be filled by the candidates who have passed +2 level of CBSE.
The reservations will commence from 1991/92 when the first batch will be eligible for selection and that the number will be based on vacancies arrived at the subsequent financial year.
(d)Training/Apprenticeship - Those appointed on the basis of +2 level will be taken on apprenticeship for a minimum period of 12 months in place of 3 months training prescribed for other recruits.
The stipend payable during apprenticeship will be equal to the gross salary a new as Assistant could draw at the beginning of the scale.
II.
Career Agents : Minimum qualification for eligibility : Passing of +2 level of CBSE with Life Insurance Stream shall also be treated as eligible minimum qualification for selection as Career Agents both urban and rural."
It is not in dispute that such of the students who had undergone the course, according to the aforesaid scheme, have been absorbed for the years 1989-91 and 1990-92.
The present batch is one which has completed the course in June, 1993.
They have not so far been absorbed.
Therefore, they have come up with these writ petitions.
It is not in dispute that all these petitioners have undergone the course as per the scheme and they are also eligible to be appointed as Assistants.
Therefore, the question that would arise for consideration is as to whether they are as of right entitled to be absorbed no sooner they complete the course.
9.
The contentions of the petitioners are that the scheme is a promise made to the youngsters who leaving aside the other course, joined the course at 10+2 level and as a result thereof, no other avenue is open to them, therefore no sooner they undergo the course, they are entitled to be absorbed in the Life Insurance Corporation.
10.
Whereas it is the contention of the Life Insurance Corporation that the petitioners cannot claim any right beyond the scheme, therefore the rights of the petitioners to seek employment de hors Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution is confined to the terms of the scheme and as such, the Life Insurance Corporation has been absorbing them as per the terms of the scheme, as and when the vacancies arise in Madras Division, the petitioners will be absorbed.
According to the case of the Corporation, as per the scheme, not more than 25% of the vacancies arrived at, after providing for reservation for SCs and STs etc. in the division where the school having vocational course is situate, shall be filled by the candidates, who have undergone the CBSE course and such reservation commenced from 1991-92 when the Ist batch will be eligible for selection and that the number will be based on the vacancies arrived at in the subsequent financial year.
The rest of the provisions contained in the scheme are not material for the purpose of determining the right of the petitioners to get themselves absorbed in the Corporation service, no sooner they complete the course.
Therefore, we have to analyse clause (c) of the scheme as contained in Annexure-II.
From the aforesaid clause (c) in Annexure - II, it is clear that what is reserved for the candidate who pass +2 level CBSE is 25% of the vacancies that would remain after providing reservation to SCs and STs, etc. in the division in which the school having vocational course is situate.
It is urged before us that Division means the entire Tamil Nadu State and not merely the Division wherein the school having vocational course in question issituate, that at the time when the scheme was introduced, there was nothing like Madras Division.
11.
On the basis of the records produced and the averments made in the petition and the counter-affidavit, it is not possible to hold that there was no division known as Madras Division, when the scheme was introduced and the division referred to in the scheme can be interpreted as the one covering the entire State of Tamil Nadu.
In fact, the Life Insurance Corporation of India called for applications from Indian citizens on 881992, which is produced at page 11 of the typed set of records, in which the vacancies existing of Assistants, Typists and Stenographers in the Divisions of Coimbatore, Madras (including Zonal Office, etc), Madurai, Salem, Thanjavur, Tirunelveli and Vellore are stated.
There is no other material placed before us to show that on the date when the scheme was introduced, these divisions did not exist.
As per the said Notification, the date of examination was 8th November, 1992 and the last date for filing the applications were 3181992.
This covered the vacancies that came to occur during the year 1992-93 as per clause (e) of Annexure - II of the scheme.
We have already pointed out that those who had completed the course prior to 1992-93, have been absorbed.
Of course, while absorbing them, it is not disputed that some of them have been absorbed even in other divisions without limiting to Madras Division, on the basis of which an argument has been constructed, which, we will consider a little later.
12.
As far as the scope of the scheme is concerned, there can be no doubt that the candidate availing the scheme, will not be entitled to claim that he should be absorbed in a vacancy, which would arise outside the division, in which the school having vocational course is situate and wherein he undergoes CBSE Course and appears for the examination.
It may be pointed out that such a scheme which excludes others, in respect of 25% of the vacancies that are arrived at after providing reservation to SCs and STs, can be explained in terms of Articles 14 and 16 only on the ground that such a right is available to those who avail the benefit of the special scheme which is open to one and all and as such if respondents to avail the scheme and become eligible for selection, but at the same time, it does not confer a right on those who become eligible to enter Corporation's service as a matter of right without due regard to the vacancies becoming available as per the terms of the scheme.
In S Nagaraj and others v. State of Karnataka and another, 1994(1) SCT 99 (SC) : 1993 Supp (4) SCC 595, it has been observed at paragraph 21 thus:-  ".... Framing of scheme in keeping with constitutional goal to provide jobs to unemployed cannot be construed as a right of such incumbents to enter civil service as a matter of right either due to length of service or because the allowance paid is lower than others who have entered civil service under the rules."
Therefore, the framing of the scheme to provide jobs to unemployed cannot be construed as conferring a right on those who undergo the special course to enter civil service as a matter of right.
In the instant case, if the contention of the petitioners that those who have undergone the course as per the scheme, are entitled to be absorbed, anywhere in Tamil Nadu or anywhere under the Life Insurance Corporation, is accepted, it would undermine Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, because the scheme is confined to certain percentage of the vacancies arising in the Division and that too on undergoing a certain course as provided in the scheme.
Providing of public employment without calling for applications and without satisfying Articles 14 and 16 cannot be justified except as stated above under a proper scheme which does not contravene Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The contention of the petitioners that the previous batches have been absorbed outside the division and as such, it must be held that the Corporation has interpreted the scheme in such manner that those who have undergone the course, can be absorbed anywhere in its service, cannot be accepted as a correct proposition of law.
It is a fact that some of the candidates who had undergone the CBSE Course in the past, have been absorbed outside the division.
As interpreted by us, the scheme does not enable such absorption.
Therefore, such absorption can be considered as being outside the scheme, and as such it is not possible to hold that such aborption is in accordance with law.
If that be so, such absorption cannot be made a ground to seek relief that the petitioners should also be absorbed outside the division.
As long as the scheme does not provide for it would not be open to the Court to issue such a direction.
Any act of the Corporation which falls outside the scope of the scheme, cannot be made a basis for the purpose of claiming absorption outside the scheme as of right.
An act which is not supportable under law, cannot form a basis for seeking any relief.
In fact, the legal position is well settled.
In this regard, we may only refer to a decision of the Supreme Court in Chandigarh Administration and another v. Jagjit Singh and another, 1995(2) RRR (291) (SC) : JT 1995(1) SC 445, in which it has been held thus:-  "We are of the opinion that the basis or the principle, if it can be called one, on which the writ petition has been allowed by the High Court is unsustainable in law and indefensible in practice.
Since we have come across many such instances, we think it necessary to deal with such pleas at a little length.
Generally speaking, the mere fact that the respondent- authority has passed a particular order in the case of another person similarly situated can never be the ground for issuing a writ in favour of the petitioner on the plea of discrimination.
The order in favour of the other person might be legal and valid or it might not be.
That has to be investigated first before it can be directed to be followed in the case of the petitioner.
If the order in favour of the other person is found to be contrary to law or not warranted in the facts and circumstances of his case, it is obvious that such illegal or unwarranted order cannot be made the basis of issuing a writ compelling the respondent-authority to repeat the illegality or to pass another unwarranted order.
The extra-ordinary and discretionary power of the High Court cannot be exercised for such a purpose.
Merely because the respondent-authority has passed (sic) unwarranted order, it will not entitle the High Court to compel the authority to repeat that illegality again and agan.
The illegal/unwarranted action must be corrected, if it can be done according to law - indeed wherever it is possible, the court should direct the appropriate authority to correct such wrong orders in accordance with law - but even if it cannot be corrected, it is difficult to see how it can be made a basis for its repetition.
By refusing to direct the respondent-authority to repeat the illegality, the court is not condoning the earlier illegal act/order nor can such illegal order constitute the basis for legitimate complaint of discrimination.
Giving effect to such pleas would be prejudicial to the interests of law and will do incalculable mischief to public interest.
It will be a negation of law and the rule of law.
Of course, if in case the order in favour of the other person is found to be a lawful and justified one, it can be followed and a similar relief can be given to the petitioner if it is found that the petitioner's case is similar to the other person's case.
But then why examine another person's case in his absence rather than examining the case of the petitioner who is present before the Court and seeking the relief?
Is it not more appropriate and convenient to examine the entitlement of the petitioner before the Court to the relief asked for in the facts and circumstances of his case than to enquire the correctness of the order made or action taken in another person's case, which other person is not before the Court, nor is his case.
In our considered opinion, such a course - barring exceptional situations - would neither be advisable nor desirable.
In other words, the High Court cannot ignore the law and the well accepted norms governing the writ jurisdiction and say that because in one case, a particular order has been passed or a particular action has been taken, the same must be repeated irrespective of the fact whether such an order or action is contrary to law or otherwise.
Each case must be decided on its on merits, factual and legal, in accordance with relevant legal principles.
The orders and actions of the authorities cannot be equated to the judgment of the Supreme Court and High Court nor can they be elevated to the level of the precedents, as understood in the judicial world.
(What is the position in the case of orders passed by authorities in exercise of there quasi-judicial power, we express no opinion.
That can be dealt with when a proper case arises)."
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the petitioners having been persuaded to undergo the course, having lost the chance of seeking employment anywhere else and having also lost the opportunity of undergoing any other study, they legitimately expected that they will be absorbed in the service of the Life Insurance Corporation.
Of course, there is no doubt that the expectation of the petitioners cannot be held to be impermissible or that the same was not legitimate.
But the question is not one of denial of absorption.
The question is one of absorption, according to the scheme.
The Corporation cannot deny or refuse to absorb the petitioners according to the terms of the scheme.
Therefore, such absorption has to take place as and when the vacancies arise as per the scheme in the Division.
The scheme itself provides that during each financial year, the vacancies in the Division that would arise after providing reservation to SCs and STs, etc., 25% of the remaining vacancies are to be made available to the CBSE candidates.
Therefore, it becomes the duty of the Life Insurance Corporation that it should determine the vacancies at the end of such financial year in the relevant division where the scheme is operated and after providing reservation for SCs and STs and other Backward Classes as per the law, in the remaining vacancies, it has to provide, until all the candidates who have passed the CBSE Course are exhausted, 25% of such vacancies to be reserved for CBSE candidates.
Therefore, we are of the view that the contention of the petitioners that they are entitled to be absorbed outside the Division as has been done in the case or previous batch of candidates cannot be accepted (sic).
Point (i): The right of the petitioners to seek absorption on complying with the requirements of the scheme is confined to the availability of the vacancies as per the scheme in the division in which the CBSE Course as per the scheme is conducted and undergone by the petitioners.
They are not entitled to claim absorption outside the division.
Point (ii): The scope of the scheme is to set apart 25% of the vacancies arising in a financial year in the division in which the CBSE school is situate after proving for SCs and STs and other reservation as per law as provided in Clause (c) of Annexure II as extracted in para 8 above.
14.
Point (iii): In view of the conclusions arrived at by us on points (i) and (ii), it becomes clear that it is not possible to sustain the direction issued by the learned single Judge.
We accordingly modify the said direction and issue the following directions:-  The vacancies arising in the Madras Division every year shall be determined at the end of each financial year and out of those vacancies, after providing for SCs and STs and other Backward Classes if any, in the remaining vacancies, 25% of the vacancies shall be set apart for CBSE candidates, until all the candidates who have undergone the CBSE course in Madras Division, are absorbed.
The submission made on behalf of the Corporation that if in this process, some of the candidates become age barred, they will also be absorbed on relaxing, if need be, the age restriction is placed on record.
The Corporation shall also make efforts to ensure that all these petitioners are absorbed as early as possible at any rate not later than five years from today.
15.
The writ appeal and writ petitions are disposed of accordingly.
The CM Ps.
and WM Ps.
are also disposed of.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.