SS Sudhalkar, J - Both these writ petitions are filed by Lieutenant Colonel GR Vinayak (hereinafter referred to as 'the petitioner').
The first writ petition is filed by him because he was not promoted to the post of Colonel though his name was approved for the promotion and his juniors were also promoted.
He has also asked for the other relief such as quashing the order of the respondents granting special review and quashing the punishment of severe displeasure awarded to him.
He has also asked for quashing of the show-cause notice dated 791992 and he has prayed that the respondents may be ordered to consider his case for promotion to various other ranks in comparison with his course-mates from the date they were so considered and grant him all other consequential reliefs.
2.
In the second writ petition, the petitioner's prayer is for quashing of the circular dated 511989, which provides for awarding of censure to the officers and Junior Commissioned Officers as the same is illegal, unconstitutional and beyond the scope of Army Act and also quashing of the punishment of severe displeasure awarded to the petitioner by respondent No. 1  3.
The petitioner's contention is that he can make an averment in regard to the nature of the entire reports earned by him because of the promotions earned by him, though he will not be in a position to know the nature of the reports.
He has stated that his turn for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel came during September-October, 1983.
Because of his comparative merit and the nature of reports earned by him, he did not find any difficulty and accordingly, he was approved for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel on 9.2.1984 and, therefore, it can safely be averred that his reports up to the year 1983-84 were exactly upto the mark or at any rate comparable to his batch-mates.
4.
The petitioner further contends that his turn for promotion to the rank of Colonel became due in the year 1986.
The petitioner was approved for promotion to the rank of Colonel.
Intimation in this regard was conveyed to him by a letter dated 29101986, which is Annexure P-1.
It is also mentioned in the letter that the petitioner was approved for promotion as a fresh case of 1965 batch and that the promotion is subject to satisfactory performance and acceptable medical category.
5.
However, officers of the batch of the petitioner and juniors started receiving promotions some time in the year 1987, the petitioner was not promoted without assigning any reason.
On making enquiries, he was informed that he was not being promoted on account of want of certain medical documents.
However, on medical examination, the petitioner was upgraded to medical category SHAPE-1 and, thus, eligible for being promoted.
But, despite this, promotion was not given to him.
In the meantime, a Court of Inquiry was ordered on 2741988 for some administrative lapses in the Unit commanded by the petitioner.
He was awarded a recordable censure by GOC 4 Corps on 2461988.
The petitioner contends that he could not have been denied promotion in July, 1987 when his juniors were promoted as nothing was pending against him on that date.
According to him, even no enquiry was contemplated against him at that time and Court of Inquiry into the matter was initiated only on 2741988.
He has contended that to deny the benefit of promotion, the disciplinary or criminal proceedings should be pending at the stage when the charge-memo or charge-sheet has been issued to the employee at the relevant time.
6.
The petitioner also contends that he was informed that his promotion was not implemented on the basis of a report received in June, 1987.
He also contends that award of censure does not debar an officer before being considered for promotion and may not affect his promotion but, while it is operative, it is taken cognizance of as a part of officer's overall record of service in assessing the performance.
7.
He has also contended that there is no provision in the Army Act for the punishment of censure and, therefore, the whole procedure for awarding censure is against law and this being so, his promotion cannot be withheld because of the same.
He has also contended that the administrative action of awarding censure is in accordance with the custom of service and because it is not specifically provided, it cannot be legally awarded.
8.
The petitioner also has the grievance that the show-cause notice dated 791992 in respect of some so-called alleged lapses which took place in the year 1982-83 was issued against him and such a stale incident raked up only with an aim to somehow justify the illegal action of the respondents in denying him promotion.
9.
The petitioner has also challenged the subsequent show-cause notice dated 791992.
10.
In the second writ petition, the petitioner has mainly challenged the illegality/punishment of censure in view of the fact that there is no provision in the Army Act or Rules for such punishment and that the said punishment based on custom, cannot legally be awarded.
He has requested for quashing of circular dated 511989 and punishment of severe displeasure awarded to him.
It can be seen that more than once the petitioner was awarded such type of punishment.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has averred that the punishment provided under the Army Act can be awarded and punishment of censure not being provided in the Army Act, cannot be awarded.
He has relied the case of Major General PC Puri v. Union of India and others, (C.W.P.
207 of 1992) which has been decided by a Division Bench of Jammu and Kashmir High Court.
It has been held therein that in advanced societies the matters like conditions of service cannot be decided on the basis of custom and the respondents in that case have miserably failed to establish that there was any such custom of service which acquired the force of law before 2611950 and the instructions cannot be sustained on the strength of the custom.
It was held by the learned Judges of the Division Bench that the circular dated 511989 authorising the award of severe displeasure recordable, was not issued by the competent authority or persons authorised by law to issue the same.
It was also held that the award of severe displeasure, was a punishment.
11.
Various judgments of this Court were discussed while coming to the said conclusion by the learned Judges of the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir.
However, learned, Mr. Pipat, for the respondents has cited before us the judgment in the case of Union of India and others v. Brig.
JS Sivia (Civil Appeal No. 1321 of 1995) decided by the Supreme Court on April 25, 1995.
It has been held by the Supreme Court therein as under :  "From the scheme of the Act, Rules, Regulations and the various Army orders issued from time to time, it is clear beyond doubt that the award of censure is part of the custom of the Army and has the binding force."
It is further held therein that :  "Keeping in view the status, responsibility and functions of the Chief of the Army Staff, it would be permissible for him under law to issue Army Orders from time to time for the maintenance of discipline and keeping control on the Army which is under his command."
12.
The Supreme Court also held that the High Court fell into patent error in reaching the conclusion that the Army authorities have no jurisdiction to award censure either in the form of displeasure or severe displeasure and, therefore, the judgment of the High Court was set aside.
In that case, the High Court had allowed the writ petition primarily on the ground that the recording of censure in the service record of an Army officer amounted to punishment and since the Army Act, 1950 and the Army Rules, 1954 and the Regulations for the Army do not provide for the award of censure as a punishment, the Army authorities had no jurisdiction to award the same.
As mentioned above, this finding has been set aside by the Supreme Court.
13.
In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and others v. JS Sivia (supra) this dispute as to validity of awarding censure has been set at rest.
In view of the above fact, the argumentsof the learned counsel for the petitioner regarding the validity of the award of censure, cannot be sustained.
14.
Next comes the question as to at what stage the procedure of awarding censure should be pending so as to deny the promotion to an officer.
The learned counsel Shri Randhawa, for the petitioner has placed reliance on the case of Union of India etc. etc. v. KV Jankiraman etc. etc. reported in 1991(3) SCT 317(SC) : A.I.R. 1991 SC 2010.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in that case that it is not only when the charge-memo in a disciplinary proceedings or a charge-sheet in a criminal prosecution is issued to the employee, it can be said that the departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is intiated against the employee.
Regarding the sealed cover procedure, it is held that the sealed cover procedure is to be resorted to only after the charge-memo/charge-sheet is issued and the pendency of the preliminary investigation prior to that stage will not be sufficient to enable the authorities to adopt the sealed cover procedure.
It is also held in the said casethe plea that when there are serious allegations and it takes time to collect necessary evidence to prepare and issue charge-memo/charge-sheet, it will not be in the interest of purity of administration to reward the employee with a promotion, increment etc., will not be tenable.
It is held in that case that to deny the said benefit, the departmental proceedings or the criminal proceedings must be at the relevant time pending at the stage when charge-memo/charge-sheet has already been issued to the employee.
15.
In dealing with Civil Appeal No. 4379 of 1990 amogsts various other cases dealt with in the common judgment (Jankiraman's case supra), the Supreme Court held that admittedly no charge-memo was served on the employee till the date the Departmental Promotion Committee met on February 1, 1988 and it was held that the Tribunal has, therefore, rightly directed the authorities to open the sealed cover.
16.
It has been argued by learned counsel Shri Pipat that the principles of Jankiraman's case (supra) do not apply so far as Army officers are concerned.
He has cited before us the case of Lieutenant Colonel KD Gupta v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1989 SC 1393.
This argument is based on the observations in paragraph 8 of the judgment.
In the said paragraph, it has been held that :  "the defence services have their own peculiarities and special requirements.
The considerations which apply to other Government servants in the matter of promotion cannot as a matter of course be applied to defence personnel of the petitioner's category and rank.
Requisite experience, consequent exposure and appropriate review are indispensable for according promotion and the petitioner, therefore, cannot be given promotions as claimed by him on the basis that his batch-mates have earned such promotions.
Individual capacity and special qualities on the basis of assessment have to be found but in the case of the petitioner these are not available.
We find force in the stand of the respondents and do not accept the petitioner's contention that he can be granted promotion to the higher ranks as claimed by him by adopting the promotions obtained by his batch-mates as the measure."
17.
However, the respondents cannot get advantage of the above principle laid downin the case of Lt. Col. KD Gupta (supra).
In the said case, the question was regarding granting of promotion by adopting the promotions obtained by batch-mates as a measure.
Here, we are dealingwith the question of blocking the promotion in case if the departmental enquiry procedure has already started.
There is nothing to show that the above principle laid down in Jankiraman's case (supra) cannot be made applicableto the presentcase.
Moreover, in this present case, as mentioned above, the petitioner was approved for promotion but the promotion was withheld first because of medical reports and subsequently because of the disciplinary action that was to be taken against the petitioner.
It has also to be kept in mind that while deciding the case of KD Gupta (supra) the question or the questions dealt with by the Supreme Court in the Jankiraman's case (supra) were not under consideration.
18.
However, while applying the principles of the case of Jankiraman (supra), it is also to be seen that in the present case there is no charge- sheet served on the delinquent but, in this case, there is serving of a show-cause notice for showing cause as to why censure should not be awarded.
There are cases where the departmental proceedings may end in any of the various types of punishments ranging from censure to dismissal.
In such cases when the charge is for the major offence, the proceedings can end in awarding of the most minor punishment of censure.
In such a case, the charge has to be issued against the delinquent.
In the cases of censure of the type with which we are dealing at present, this is not the position.
The procedure for the award of censure as per the department's letter dated 511989 is that the authorities concerned will have to obtain an explanation of the officer or the JCO concerned in regard to his involvement or responsibility in respect of lapse before the issue of a letter of displeasure or severe displeasure.
Therefore, when the question of awarding customary censure arises, the proceedings are initiated by the issuance of a letter for showing cause, there will be no question of issuing any charge-sheet.
19.
In the light of this situation, we have to interpret the principles laid down in the case of Jankiraman (supra) in view of the procedure for the customary censure which are to be applied.
Therefore, considering the promotion for awarding customary censure and the principles laid down in the case of Jankiaraman (supra), the proceedings of censure would be deemed to have been started on the issuance of a show-cause notice.
Any departmental action earlier to that for gathering evidence etc. after any complaint is received, cannot be considered to be a proceeding initiated for awarding censure so far as the question of promotion is concerned.
20.
With this principle in the background, we will have to see the position of the case before us.
The petitioner has also put on the record at Annexure P-1 the letter dated 29101986 in which it is stated that the petitioner was approved for promotion as a fresh case of 1965 batch.
The petitioner has also stated in paragraph 7 of C.W.P.
5923 of 1993 that his juniors were promoted to the rank of Colonel w.e.f.
July, 1987 onwards.
In reply to these contentions, the respondents have not denied that letter, Annexure P-1 was written.
It is also admitted that the officer junior to the petitioner was promoted as Colonel in July, 1987.
21.
The defence taken is that the petitioner was placed in Low Medical Category for 12 weeks w.e.f.
2031987 and he was upgraded to Medical Category SHAPE-I vide order dated 681987.
It is further mentioned that vide DGBR letter dated 1761987, intimation was received that a Court of Inquiry held on 12111986 to investigate the deficiencies of various steel items and salvage stores held on charge of 1332 Base Depot (GREF) had blamed the petitioner and disciplinary action was contemplated against him.
It is further said in the written statement that DV Dte vide their note dated 781987 intimated that promotion of the petitioner be withheld till further communication from them.
Subsequently, since the petitioner was awarded severe displeasure as intimated vide letter dated 571988, he could only be promoted if cleared by No. 3 Selection Board by Special Review Board as a 'Drop in Performance' case.
It is further contended that the petitioner though medically upgraded was not promoted on account of a disciplinary ban at the initial stage and subsequently due to drop in performance.
22.
Unfortunately nothing has been shown to us from record as to when the petitioner was given show-cause notice for the censure to be awarded to him in connection with the allegations which withheld his promotion in July, 1987.
This is an important question which goes to the root of this case.
Of course, it is stated that 'DV Dte' had intimated vide their note dated 781987 that the promotion of the petitioner be withheld till further communication.
Now, it is not shown that there was any Provisional Ban(PB) imposed against the promotion of the petitioner.
Though DV Dte had intimated that the promotion of the petitioner be withheld, yet there is no specific averment regarding the PB being imposed.
23.
Even if we leave aside this technical point, the major aspect which comes in the forefront from the averments in paragraph 7 of the written statement is that first because of Low Medical Category, the promotion was withheld and, thereafter it was withheld because of 'DV Dte' letter.
However, the petitioner was placed in Low Medical Category for 12 weeks from 203.
1987.
This period would end on or about 20.6.1987.
There is no reason shown that why he was not then upgraded till the order dated 681987.
It is to be seen that on the very next date of 681987, the DV Dte's letter is written.
The gap after 12 weeks of 2031987 till 781987 is also not a small period in which the petitioner had a right to gain his promotion which was withheld for a particular period only because of Low Medical Category.
This period of not granting promotion in this regard is not explained by the respondents and the petitioner certainly shall get the benefit of the same.
24.
Moreover, as stated above, it is not shown as to when the show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner for the censure which prevented him from being promoted in July, 1987.
It may be mention at this stage that contention has been taken in paragraph 8 of the written statement that the petitioner could have been awarded censure even without issuing show-cause notice but at the same time it is also contended that the petitioner had not asked for a copy of the 'Court of Inquiry' proceedings while replying to the show-cause notice.
So, show-cause notice was already issued to him and the question whether it should have been issued or not loses importance.
25.
As a result of the above finding the petitioner's prayer for commanding the respondents to promote him to the post of Colonel with effect from the date his junior was promoted in the year 1987, is to be granted.
However, his other prayers such as the quashing of the circular dated 511989, order directing quashing of punishment of severe displeasure awarded to the petitioner, quashing show-cause notice dated 791992, cannot be granted in view of the fact that we have held that censure is a punishment which can be awarded though it is not provided under the Army Act or Rules.
26.
The prayer regarding quashing the order of respondent granting special review, therefore, becomes infructuous so far as question of promotion in July, 1987, is concerned.
The prayers in C.W.P.
10924 of 1993 also cannot be granted in view of the above finding.
27.
In view of the above findings, we order the respondents to promote the petitioner to the rank of Colonel with effect from the date his junior was promoted in the year 1987.
Rest of the prayers in C.W.P.
5923 of 1993 stand rejected.
Civil Writ Petition No 10924 is dismissed.
28.
We make no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.