NK Sodhi, J - What is challenged in this bunch of petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is the scheme dated December 8, 1993 framed by the Central Government under Section 9 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (hereinafter called the 1980 Act) read with Sub Para (4) of Para 5 of its earlier Scheme dated September 4, 1993 whereby the placement of employees (officers and workmen) of the New Bank of India in Punjab National Bank was determined.
Facts giving rise to these petitions lie a narrow compass and are as under :-  The New Bank of India Limited, a private banking company, was taken over by the Central Government and its entire capital came to vest in and stood allotted to the Central Government by virtue of the provisions of the 1980 Act and a new corresponding bank known as the New Bank of India came to exist as a body corporate.
The Reserve Bank of India as the Central and Controlling Bank of the country has been monitoring on a continual basis the performance of various public sector banks and it was brought to the notice of the Government of India by the Reserve Bank of India that the financial position of the New Bank of India was extremely unsatisfactory.
The losses of this Bank including loan losses exceeded its reserves as a result whereof paid up capital and its deposits stood eroded.
The New Bank of India declared a loss of Rs. 1152 crores in its published accounts for the year 1991-92.
The possibility of this Bank earning reasonable profits in the near future was rather remote.
The Reserve Bank of India, therefore, was of the view that the best solution to save it was to merge it with another stronger nationalised bank.
The Government of India accepted its recommendation and decided to amalgamate the New Bank of India with the Punjab National Bank essentially for the reason that the New Bank of India had its branches in North India where the Punjab National Bank also had sizable presence.
Thus, to amalgamate the two banks the Central Government in exercise of its powers under Section 9 of the 1980 Act framed a scheme dated 491993 called the New Bank of India (Amalgamation and Transfer of Undertakings) Scheme, 1993 (for short the Amalgamation Scheme).
In terms of this scheme the undertakings of New Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as the transferor bank) stood transferred to and vested in the Punjab National Bank (referred to hereinafter as the transferee bank) on the commencement of the scheme.
The Amalgamation Scheme came into force on 491993.
On the commencement of this Scheme the Board of Directors of the transferor bank stood dissolved and every officer or other employee of the transferor bank became the officer or other employee of the transferee bank and they all started holding office on the same terms and conditions on which they were working immediately before the transfer of undertakings of the transferor bank.
In case any officer or other employee of the transferor bank did not want to continue his service with the transferee bank, he was given an option to leave his office or service on the same terms and conditions on which he would have left if the undertakings of the transferor bank had not been transferred.
The Amalgamation Scheme also provided that the Central Government will make a scheme in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India for determining the placement of the employees of the transferor bank including the determination of their inter se seniority vis-as-vis the employees of the transferee bank.
Para 3 and sub-paras (2), (3) and (4) of para 5 of the Amalgamation Scheme which are relevant for our purpose are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :  "3.
Undertaking of New Bank of India to vest in Punjab National Bank - On the commencement of this Scheme, the undertakings of New Bank of India shall be transferred to and shall vest in Punjab National Bank.
5(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Scheme, every officer or other employee of the transferor bank shall become, on the commencement of this Scheme an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the transferee bank and shall hold his office or service in that bank on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if the undertakings of the transferor bank had not been transferred to and vested in the transferee bank subject, however, to such facilities being available at the time of the transfer to similarly placed officers and employees of the transferee bank and continue to do so unless and until his employment in the transferee bank is terminated or until his remuneration, terms or conditions are duly altered by the transferee bank.
5(3).
Any officer or other employee of the transferor bank who does not want to hold his office or service in the transferee bank under sub- clause (2) shall be entitled to leave his office or service on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if the undertakings of the transferor bank had not been transferred to and vested in the transferee bank.
5(4).
The Central Government shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Scheme, make a Scheme in consultation with Reserve Bank of India for determining the placement of the employee of the transferor bank including the determination of their inter se seniority vis-a-vis the employees of the transferee bank.
While making the Scheme the Central Government shall take account of relevant factors such as experience of the employee of the transferor bank."
On the amalgamation of the two banks it was necessary that the placement of the employees of the transferor bank including their inter se seniority vis-a-vis the employees of the transferee bank be determined.
Thereafter the Central Government on December 8, 1993 in exercise of its powers under Section 9 of the 1980 Act read with sub-para (4) of para 5 of the Amalgamation Scheme framed another scheme called the New Bank of India (Determination of Placement of Employees (Officers and Workmen) of the New Bank of India in Punjab National Bank) Scheme, 1993 (hereinafter called the Placement Scheme).
Para 4 of this Scheme makes a provision for determining seniority of the officers/employees of the transferor bank in the transferee bank.
This para reads as under :-  "4.
Seniority of Officers/employees of transferor Bank -- For the purpose of determining the seniority of the employees (Officers or Workmen) of the transferor bank vis-a-vis employees (Officers or workmen) of the transferee bank, the following norms shall be applied :-  Workmen Employees (a)(i) Provisions of settlements, understandings and clarifications agreed to by the transferee bank with the workmen unions or associations from time to time in the matter of promotions from the subordinate cadre to clerical cadre and from clerical or Special Assistant Cadre to Officers Cadre (JMG Scale-I) and promotion of Head Cashier, Cashier-in-charge/Cashier as Cash Officers shall become automatically applicable to the workmen employees of transferor bank in the same manner as applicable to workmen employees of transferee bank subject to other provisions of the Scheme.
(ii) The settlements, rules and practices as in force in the transferee bank in the matter of posting of Clerks as Special Assistants/Tellers, Head Cashiers, Cashier-in-charge and other posts carrying special allowance in the clerical cadre as well as Draftry and Cash Peons and other posts carrying Special Allowances in the subordinate cadre shall become applicable to the workmen employees of the transferor bank subject to the other provisions of the Scheme.
(iii) The procedure for computation of years of service rendered in the transferor bank for the purpose of determining the minimum length of service for promotion from subordinate cadre to clerical cadre as also from the clerical cadre to officer cadre and also for the purpose of posting in the posts carrying special allowance, shall be computed in the ratio of 2 :1, that is, two years of service in transferor bank as equivalent to one year of service in the transferee bank.
For this purpose, total service in the respective cadre of the workmen employees, that is, clerical or sub-staff in which the official is placed at the time of transfer, shall be reckoned but fractions of a month shall be ignored, for example, if a workman employee has rendered two years and nine months service in the clerical/sub staff cadre, as the case may be, in the transferor bank at the time of amalgamation with transferee bank, it shall be reckoned as equal to one year and four months service in the clerical or sub staff cadre, as the case may be, in the transferee bank.
(b)(i) All officers of the transferor bank shall be placed in the same grade or scale or pay in the transferee bank as they were holding in the transferor bank, with suitable change in the designation, if required, on the lines of the prevailing system in the transferee bank.
(ii) For the purpose of seniority or fitment or for promotion to the next grade or scale, the service rendered by an officer in the transferor bank shall be computed, after amalgamation, in the ratio of 2 : 1, that is, two years of service in the transferor bank as equivalent to one year service in the transferee bank.
For this purpose, total service in the scale in which an officer is transferred shall be reckoned but fractions of a month shall be ignored.
For example, if an officer has rendered two years nine months service in Scale-II in the transferor bank at the time of amalgamation with the transferee bank, it shall be reckoned as equal to one year and four months service in Scale-II in the transferee bank."
2.
According to clause (iii) of para 4(a) the service rendered by workmen employees in the transferor bank for promotion from subordinate cadre to clerical cadre, as also from clerical cadre to officer cadre and also for the purpose of posting on the posts carrying Special Allowance is to be computed in the ratio of 2 : 1, that is, two years of service in transferor bank, will be equivalent to one year of service in the transferee bank.
Similarly for the purposes of determining seniority or fitment for promotion of an officer to the next grade or scale, the service rendered by him in the transferor bank shall after amalgamation be computed in the ratio of 2 : 1, or in other words, two years of service in the transferor bank will be equivalent to one year of service in the transferee bank.
Again, for counting total service in the transferee bank fractions of a month are to be ignored.
It is this Placement Scheme and particularly clause (iii) and (ii) and sub- para (a) and (b) respectively of para 4 that have been impugned in these petitions which have been filed by and on behalf of the erstwhile employees of the transferor bank except Civil Writ Petition 3102 of 1994 which has been filed by employees of the transferee bank who have also felt aggrieved by Placement Scheme on th ground that employees of the transferor bank have not been placed at the bottom of the cadre in which they joined at the time of merger.
3.
The language used is sub-clauses (iii) and (ii) and paras (a) and (b) of para 4 of the Placement Scheme could give an impression that the total service rendered by a workman/officer in the transferor bank is to be reduced by one half in the transferee bank for the purpose of considering him for further promotion but the illustrations given in these two sub-clauses make it clear that the total service rendered in the cadre, grade or scale of pay in which the employee/officer was working at the time of amalgamation alone is to be reduced by one half for the purpose of considering him for further promotion and not that the full length of service in the transferor bank will be reduced.
Shri VR Reddy, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India, categorically stated before us admitting the factual position that it is not the total service of an employee in the transferor bank that is being reduced to one half but only the service rendered in the cadre, grade or scale of pay in which he was at the time of amalgamation that has been so reduced.
We are, therefore, proceeding to examine the validity of the Placement Scheme on this hypothesis.
4.
Before dealing with the contentions raised by the petitioners challenging the Placement Scheme it may be mentioned that the transferee bank prior to its take over by the Central Government in the year 1970 was also a private banking company working under the name and style of the Punjab National Bank Limited.
It was taken over along with some other banking companies under the provisions of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (for short, the 1970 Act) and the provisions of this Act are almost similar to the provisions of the 1980 Act under which the New Bank of India Limited was taken over and the transferor bank came to exist.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in different writ petitions have challenged the Placement Scheme on various grounds.
It was submitted by Mr. HC Arora, Advocate, that after the amalgamation of the transferor bank with the transferee bank the employees of the former became the employees of the latter and therefore, by virtue of the provision of Section 19 of 1970 Act the Board of Directors of the transferee bank alone had the power to frame regulations providing for their terms and conditions of service including seniority.
The argument is that the Central Government had no power to frame the Placement Scheme for determining the placement of employees of the transferor bank in the transferee bank at the time of merger of the two Banks nor could it lay down any criteria for the purpose of determining the seniority of employees of the transferor bank vis-a-vis the employees of the transferee bank.
The Placement Scheme has further been challenged on the ground that the service conditions of the employees of the transferor bank have been altered to their prejudice in violation of the kprovisions of Section 9-A and Section 25-FF of the Industrial Disputes Act (for brevity, the ID Act) read with the 4th Schedule thereto.
However, the primary ground on which the Placement Scheme has been vehemently challenged by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners is that the same is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
What is argued by the learned counsel is that the employees of the transferor bank and those of the transferee bank before the merger were governed by analogous and pari materia statutes i.e. 1980 Act and the 1970 Act and that they were getting the same scales of pay and were equal in all respects having similar terms and conditions of employment and, therefore, after merger the employees of the transferor bank could not be given a discriminatory treatment by reducing to one half the serving rendered by them in the cadre in which they were serving at the time of the merger.
It was contended that when merger of one corporation with another takes place, the employees always carry with them their respective seniorities and the Central Government was, therefore, not justified in providing otherwise in the Placement Scheme.
The Amalgamation Scheme was also challenged on the ground that Section 9 of the 1980 Act gave only a rule making power to give effect to the provisions of the Act and there being no specific provision in it for amalgamation of two or more banks, the Amalgamation Scheme is ultra vires the 1980 Act.
It was also contended that the transferor bank taken over under the 1980 Act could not be merged with the transferee bank which was governed by the provisions of the 1970 Act and, therefore, the Amalgamation Scheme was contrary to law.
6.
Mr. Khehar learned counsel for some of the petitioners while challenging the Placement Scheme contended that Section 9 of the 1980 Act under which the same was prepared does not provide any guideline to the Central Government in the matter of determining the service conditions or the placement of employees on merger and, therefore, guidance should have been sought from the provisions of an analogous Act namely the Banking Regulations Act, 1949 (for short, the 1949 Act).
This Act regulates the banking business in the country including those of the transferor bank and the transferee bank.
Particular reference is made to Section 45 of this Act to contend that even in cases where the Central Government makes an order or moratorium in respect of a banking company and the Reserve Bank frames a scheme for its reconstruction or amalgamation with another banking company, clause (i) of sub-section (5) of section 45 of the 1949 Act enjoins that such scheme must make a provision for the continuance of the services of the employees in the transferee bank at the same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of service as they were getting immediately before the order of moratorium.
The contention is that this provision in the 1949 Act was a sufficient guideline for the Central Government which it should have followed in the instant case while framing the Placement Scheme under the 1980 Act.
Since the Central Government has not followed the guiding principle and has provided for the reduction in the length of service of the employees of the transferor bank to one half in their respective cadres in which they were working at the time of merger, this action, according to the learned counsel, is contrary to the Legislative mandate/Scheme.
He then contended that the Placement Scheme is discriminatory and arbitrary inasmuch as it discriminates between the two sets of employees who were equally placed before the merger and were governed by the same sets of Rules and Regulations and were equally controlled in their working by the Reserve Bank of India.
To put it differently, it is urged that being similar in every resect with their counterparts in the transferee bank the services of the employees of the transferor bank could not be reduced to one half in the cadre in whch they were working at the time of amalgamation.
Learned counsel strenuously contended that merely because the transferor bank before its merger was running into losses, is no ground to discriminate against its employees after merger with the transferee bank.
7.
Respondents in their separate written statements have controverted the pleas of the petitioners.
The reason for the merger that has been given in the reply of respondent No. 1 is that the transferor bank which was comparatively of smaller size with 591 branches was running into heavy losses.
The Reserve Bank of India evaluated its functions and brought to the notice of the Government of India various deficiencies found in its working some of which as stated in the reply are as under :-  (i) The calibre and quality of officials in the Senior Management Cadre was inadequate.
(ii) The supervision and control exercised by the Head Office over the controlling offices and the branches was unsatisfactory.
The internal working of the branches was also far from satisfactory.
(iii) Funds of management had been a weak area.
The bank had been lending much beyond what its core resources would permit, relying heavily on market borrowings.
With the constraints on resources the bank would find it difficult to serve even its existing borrowers.
(iv) The bank had not been able to bring about any improvement in credit management despite repeated advice.
The appraisal of credit proposals showed several deficiencies.
Discretionary powers had not been exercised properly by the functionaries at various levels including the top executives.
Ad hoc/spot sanctions/excess drawals had been allowed frequently.
The post disbursement supervision of advances was also unsatisfactory.
(v) The Bank was saddled with substantial load of sticky advances amounting to Rs. 43866 crores as on 3131992 which formed 392% of the total advances.
(vi) The bank did not comply with the minimum capital requirement under the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act.
The bank was prima facie a fit case for descheduling.
(vii) The bank was not in a position to pay the depositors in full as and when their claims accrue and its methods of operation are far from satisfactory.
It did not satisfy the requirements under Section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act for carrying on banking business although the said provisions do not apply to nationalised banks.
Under the policy followed with reference to private sector banks this would be a fit case for compulsory merger.
8.
In view of the deficiencies as referred above, the Reserve Bank was of the view that the possibility of the transferor bank earning reasonable profits in the near future was remote and that if it remained a separate unit, financial assistance of substantial magnitude would have to be given to it.
The Reserve Bank also thought that the extremely weak senior management structure of the transferor bank as well as the deficiencies in its lower echelons would not infuse confidence that even with such financial assistance, the management would be able to remove the weaknesses in its working and make it a viable unit in the near future.
The Reserve Bank, therefore, recommended that it be merged with the transferee bank essentially for the reason that the transferor bank had branches in North India where the transferee bank was also operating in a big way and had sizable presence.
The Central Government accepted the recommendations of the Reserve Bank and consequently framed the Amalgamation Scheme under Section 9 of the 1980 Act.
It is further pleaded by respondent No. 1 that the Amalgamation Scheme and the Placement Scheme are 'law' for the purpose of Article 31-A of the Constitution and, therefore, these could not be challenged on the ground that they contravene Articles 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
It is further stated that the two schemes are also 'law' within the meaning of Article 31-C of the Constitution inasmuch as they have been framed with a view to give effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution and are, therefore, immune from challenge under Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
As regards the Placement Scheme it is further submitted that it is only the service rendered in the transferor bank by an employee/officer in the grade/scale in which he was placed at the time of amalgamation alone is being computed in the ratio of 2 : 1 and that too only for the purpose of considering him for promotion to the next grade/scale and for the purpose of posting on a post carrying special allowances.
For all over purposes, the services rendered by an employee in the transferor bank is treated at par with service the employees of the transferee bank and they are all equally treated.
The justification given for treating the aforesaid service in the ratio of 2 : 1 is that comparison of the transferor bank with the transferee bank in terms of productivity, volume of business, staff strength, time taken for promotion etc. shows that the employees of the transferee bank were having a higher productivity per employee and higher level of responsibilities and higher average business per branch.
The promotional avenues available to them were, however, far less and, therefore, if on merger the number of years of service of the employees of the two banks had been equated, the employees with longer years of service of the transferee bank would have become junior to the employees with lesser period of service with the transferor bank.
Some facts and figures in this regard have been mentioned in the written statement to indicate that equation of service of the employees of the two banks would have caused hardship to the employees of the transferee bank.
It is also pointed out by the respondents that promotions of officers in the transferor bank were faster than of those in the transferee bank and for this reason it was necessary to reduce service of the employees of the transferor bank to one half in the grade/scale in which they were working at the time of the merger for the purpose of considering them for the next higher scale/grade.
The zone of consideration for promotion of officers in the transferor bank is also stated to be lesser as compared to the position in the transferee bank.
As regards promotion in the clerical cadre, it is pleaded that one out of eight clerks was elevated to the position of a special Assistant in the transferor bank whereas only one out of 12 Clerks got this position in the transferee bank.
It is, thus, for all these considerations that the Placement Scheme is being defended and justified.
9.
Before we deal with the validity of the Placement Scheme we may first dispose of the contention of Mr. Arora in regard to the challenge made to the Amalgamation Scheme.
The argument is that Section 9 of the 1980 Act under which the Amalgamation Scheme has been framed gives only a rule making power to the Central Government and not that a schemefor the amalgamation of two or more banks could be framed thereunder.
This argument is being noticed only to be rejected and the learned counsel too did not press it very seriously.
A plain reading of Section 9 will show that power has been given to the Central Government to frame a scheme after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India for carrying out the provisions of the Act.
Clause (c) of sub-Section (2) of Section 9 provides that the scheme may provide for the reconstitution of any new corresponding bank into two or more Corporations, the amalgamation of any corresponding new bank with any other corresponding new bank or with another banking institution.
It cannot, therefore, be said that there is no provision in the 1980 Act for the amalgamation of the transferor bank with the transferee bank.
The argument is based on a misreading of the provisions of Section 9 and is, therefore, patently erroneous.
10.
Now we may deal with the contention as to whether the Placement Scheme even if it offends against Article 14 of the Constitution is immune from challenge in view of Articles 31-A and 31-C of the Constitution.
Article 31-A of the Constitution was inserted by the Constitution First (Amendment) Act, 1951 and insofar as it is relevant reads as under :-  "31-A Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates etc. - Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 13, no law providing for  (a) the acquisition by the State or any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights; or (b) the taking over of the management of any property by the State for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of the property; or (c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the corporations; or (d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing agents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, derictors or managers, of corporations thereof; or (e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence, shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by Article 14 or Article 19."
Before the Placement Scheme can be said to be immune from attack under Article 31-A of the Constitution it has to be established that it is 'Law' within the meaning of this Article and that it provides for the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in public interest or in order to secure proper management of any of the corporations.
11.
The Placement Scheme undoubtedly has been framed by the Central Government in the exercise of its powers under Section 9 of the 1980 Act.
This Act as is clear from its preamble was enacted with a view to provide for the acquisition and transfer of undertakings of certain banking companies, having regard to their size, resources, coverage and organisation and the Parliament has made a declaration that it was being enacted in conformity with the policy of the State towards securing principles laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Section 9 of the 1980 Act under which the Placement Scheme has been framed may also be reproduced for facility of reference :  "9.
Power of Central Government to make scheme - (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, make a scheme for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely : (a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bank, so however, that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess of (rupees five hundreds crores); (b) the constitution of the Board of Directors by whatever name called, of the corresponding new bank and all such matters in connection therewith or incidental thereto as the Central Government may consider to be necessary or expedient; (c) the reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two or more corporations, the amalgamation of any corresponding new bank with any other corresponding new bank or with another banking institution the transfer of the whole or any part of the undertaking of a (corresponding new bank to any other corresponding new bank or banking institution) or the transfer the whole or any part of the undertaking of any other banking institution to a corresponding new bank; (d) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, constituted under any scheme made under sub-section (1) shall include :-  (a) representatives of the employees, and of depositors, of such bank, and (b) such other persons as may represent the interests of each of the following categories, namely, farmers, workers and artisans, to be elected or nominated in such a manner as may be specified in the scheme.
(4) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reverse Bank, make a scheme to amend or vary any scheme made under sub-section (1).
(5) On and from the date of coming into operation of a scheme made under this section with respect to any of the matters referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) or any matters incidental, consequential and supplemental thereto :-  (a) the scheme shall be binding on the corresponding new bank or corporations o banking institutions and also on the members, if any, the depositors 2and other creditors and employees of each of them and on any other person having any right or liability in relation to any of them including the trustees or other persons, managing or in any other manner connected with, any provident fund or other fund maintained by any of them; (b) the properties and assets of the corresponding new bank, or, as the case may by, of the banking institution shall, by virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand transferred to, and vested in, and the liabilities of the corresponding new bank or, as the case may be, of the banking institution shall, by virtue of, and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand transferred to and become the liabilities of the corporation or corporations brought into existence by reconstitution of the banking institution or the corresponding new bank, as the case may be.
Explanation I - In this section, 'banking institution' means a banking company and includes the State Bank of India or a subsidiary bank.
Explanation II.
- For the purposes of this section the expression  'corresponding new bank' shall include a corresponding new bank within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970.
(6) Every Scheme made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the sessions immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifications in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made, the scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under that Scheme."
12.
The 1980 Act had been enacted by Parliament to take over amongst others erstwhile New Bank of India Limited which after its take over became the transferor bank.
Section 9 gave power to the Central Government to prepare a scheme after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and that scheme may provide for any of the matters enumerated in clause (2) and one of them is the reconstitution of any new corresponding bank into two or more corporations or the amalgamation of any new bank with any other corresponding new bank or with another banking institution.
It was in exercise of this power that the Amalgamation Scheme has been framed amalgamating the transferor bank with the transferee bank and later the Placement Scheme was prepared with a view to determine the placement fitment of the employees of the transferor bank in the transferee bank at the time of merger.
The 1980 Act is not under challenge before us and nor is the Amalgamation Scheme amalgamating the two corporations namely the transferor bank and the transferee bank.
What is challenged is the Placement Scheme.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondent is that Amalgamation Scheme and the Placement Scheme both having been framed under the 1980 Act must be taken to be 'law' for the purpose of Article 31-A of the Constitution and an integral part of the process of amalgamation of the transferor bank with the transferee bank.
It is submitted that when a corporation is amalgamated/merged with another corporation it is not merely the taking over of its buildings or assets but also its staff and, therefore, any law or scheme providing for such amalgamation has necessarily to provide for the placement/fitment of the employees as well which is essentially an integral part of the amalgamation process.
The contention, indeed, is that the whole matter should be viewed in this broader sense and the Placement Scheme being an integral part of the Amalgamation Scheme must also be held to be immune from attack under Article 31-A (1)(c).
On the other hand it is contended on behalf of the petitioners that even if amalgamation of the transferor bank with the transferee bank is held to be immune from challenge under Article 14, the Placement Scheme deals only with matters incidental to the amalgamation of the two banks and has nothing to do with the amalgamation as such.
The argument is that the placement, fitment and criteria for determining the seniority of the employees of the transferor bank with that of the transferee bank at the time of merger in the next higher scale/cadre are mere matters incidental to amalgamation and, therefore, not covered by the provisions of Article 31-A  13.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions advanced before us and are inclined to adopt the narrower view as was canvassed on behalf of the petitioners.
Article 31-A of the Constitution has the effect of depriving the citizens of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution and since it bars judicial review and does not permit the court to examine the validity of any law which falls within its ambit on the touchstone of Article 14 or Article 19, it cannot be given a wide and liberal construction.
What is covered by Article 31-A is a law dealing with the amalgamation of two or more corporations and where any law contains provisions regarding amalgamation and also with regard to matters in connection therewith or incidental thereto, the provisions which directly deal with the amalgamation alone would be covered and protected by Article 31-A whereas the other provisions which are incidental to the amalgamation would not have the protective umbrella of Article 31-A over them.
Even if one were to assume that the Placement Scheme is 'law' within the meaning of Article 31-A, it cannot be immune from challenge on the ground of violating Article 14 because it does not directly deal with the amalgamation of the transfer of bank with the transferor bank.
It only determines the placement/fitment of the employees of the transferor bank and also lays down criteria for determining their seniority in the next higher cadre/scale of pay which are matters incidental to amalgamation.
14.
In Kochuni v. State of Madras and Kerala, AIR 1960 SC 1080 the learned Judges of the Apex Court in their majority judgment while holding that the Act impugned before them was not covered by the provisions of Article 31-A and that the respondents therein could not, therefore, rely upon this Article to deprive the petitioner therein of his fundamental rights accepted the narrower interpretation and observed in para 16 of the judgment as under :-  "Article 31-A deprives citizens of their fundamental rights and such an Article cannot be extended by interpretation to overreach the object implicit in the Article.
The unsoundness of the wider interpretation will be made clear if the Article is construed with reference to the janmam right."
Again in Akadasi v. State of Orissa, AIR 1963 SC 1047 the validity of Orissa Kendu Leave (Control of Trade), Act, 1961 by which the State acquired a monopoly in the trade of Kendu leaves that had put severe restrictions on the fundamental rights of the petitioner therein under Article 19(1)(g) was challenged.
The challenge made by the petitioner to the validity of the Act was met on the ground that under Article 19(6) the State Legislature could create a State monopoly in any trade or business and monopoly thus created could not be successfully challenged either under Article 19(1)(f) or under Article 19(1)(g).
The contention of the respondents that the validity of the Act was protected by Article 19(6) was negatived by their Lordships it being held that a provision which protects legislation violating fundamental rights has not to be given unduly wide and liberal construction and that provisions which are subsidiary or incidental to the main object of the Act are not so protected.
It will be pertinent to quote the observations of their Lordships in this regard hereunder :-  "In dealing with the question about the precise denotation of the clause 'a law relating to', it is necessary to bear in mind that this clause occurs in Article 19(6) which is, in a sense, an exception to the main provision of Art. 19(1)(g).
Laws protected by Article 19(6) are regarded as valid even though they impinge upon the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g).
That is the effect of scheme contained in Article 19(1) read with Cls. (2) to (6) of said Article.
That being so, it would be unreasonable to place upon the relevant clause an unduly wide and liberal construction.
'A law relating to' a State monopoly cannot, in the context, include all the provisions contained in the said law whether they have direct relation with the creation of the monopoly or not.
In our opinion, the said expression should be construed to mean the law relating to the monopoly in its absolutely essential features.
If a law is passed creating a State monopoly, the Court should enquire what are the provisions of the said law which are basically and essentially necessary for creating the State monopoly.
It is only those essential and basic provisions which are protected by the latter part of Article 19(6).
If there are other provisions made by the Act which are subsidiary, incidental or helpful to the operation of the monopoly, they do not fall under the said part and their validity must be judged under the first part of Article 19(6).
In other words, the effect of the amendment made in Article 19(6) is to protect the law relating to the creation of monopoly and that means that it is only the provisions of the law which are integrally and essentially connected with the creation of the monopoly that are protected.
The rest of the provisions which may be incidental do not fall under the later part of Article 19(6) and would inevitably have to satisfy the test of the first part of Article 19(6)."
The aforesaid observations of the Apex Court have been quoted with approval in its subsequent decisions reported as Rashbihari Panda and others v. State of Orissa, 1969(3) SCR.
374; Municipal Committee, Amritsar and others v. State of Punjab, 1969(3) SCR.
447; Vrajlal Manilal and Company and another v. State of Madhya Pradesh and others, 1970(1) SCR.
400;Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, 1973 SCR.
(Suppl) 11; Minerva Ltd and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1980 SC 1789; M/s New Bihar Biri Leaves Co. and others v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1981 SC 679; Prem Nath Rana and others v. State of J & K and others, AIR 1983 SC 920 and Anil Kumar Neotia and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988, SC 1953.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioners also placed reliance on the observations of the Supreme Court in Prag Ice and Oils Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 1296 where the learned Judges held that 'that immunity enjoyed by an Act placed in the Ninth Schedule cannot be extended to an order or notification issued under it.'
Though these observations were made in the context of the Ninth Schedule, they do support the contention of the petitioners that the 1980 Act or the Amalgamation Scheme made thereunder may be protected by Article 31-A but the Placement Scheme is not protected by the provisions of Article 31-A of the Constitution and is, therefore, not immune from challenge.
16.
The learned counsel for the respondents also relied on Article 31-C which saves laws giving effect to certain directive principles of State Policy.
This Article insofar as it is relevant reads as under :  "31-C.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 13, no law giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing (all or any of the principles laid down in Part IV) shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by (Article 14 or Article 19) and no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such policy."
What is urged by the learned counsel is that the 1980 Act under which the Placement Scheme has been framed contains a declaration that it was enacted to give effect to the policy of the State towards the securing of principles laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
According to these clauses of the Article the State is required to direct its policy towards ensuring that ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good and that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
Mr. HL Sibal, Senior Advocate, appearing for the transferee bank took us through the provisions of the 1980 Act and contended that the provisions have in fact been enacted to give effect to the aforesaid policy of the State.
This may be so and with that object in view the Parliament in its wisdom nationalised the erstwhile New Bank of India Limited and nationalisation can be said to be in furtherance of the policy of the State as enumerated in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution.
This argument could be of help only if the validity of the 1980 Act were to be challenged but that is not so.
What is being challenged before us is the Placement Scheme which by no process of reasoning can be said to have been framed to secure the objects of State policy as referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of Articles 39 but deals only with the placement of employees in consequence of the amalgamation of the two banks.
17.
We shall now deal with the question as to whether the Placement Scheme is a 'law' at all within the meaning of Articles 31-A and 31-C. Reference in this connection has been made to the definition of law as given in Article 13 clause (3) and it was strenuously urged that this expression includes any ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, customs or usages having the force of law.
Learned counsel also referred us to the provisions of clause (6) of Section 9 of the 1980 Act and submitted that since both the Amalgamation Scheme as also the Placement Scheme were placed before each House of Parliament and both had been approved by them, it goes to show that nature of the power exercised by the Central Government in framing the two schemes was legislative and, therefore, the schemes must be held to be 'law' within the meaning of Articles 31-A and 31-C. We need not examine this matter in detail as in our opinion the question stands decided in favour of the petitioners and against the respondents by an authoritative decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in KI Shephard and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 686.
In this case the Hindustan Commercial Bank, the Bank of Cochin Limited and the Lakshmi Commercial Bank were amalgamated with the Punjab National Bank, Canara Bank and the State Bank of India respectively.
Separate schemes were drawn up under Section 45 of the 1949 Act which is analogous to Section 9 of the 1980 Act under which the Placement Scheme impugned before us has been framed.
Pursuant to those schemes some employees of the Hindustan Commercial Bank, Cochin Bank and the Lakshmi Commercial Bank, were excluded from the employment after merger and the excluded employees challenged those schemes by filing writ petitions in the Kerala High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
A learned Single Judge of the High Court gave them some relief but on appeal the Division Bench dismissed the writ petitions.
The matter was taken in appeal to the Supreme Court and some of the excluded employees had also filed writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution.
The two main contentions raised on behalf of the excluded employees were (i) that there has been infraction of natural justice inasmuch as they had not been afforded an opportunity of being heard, and (ii) that the action of the banks and Reserve Bank of India in excluding them while taking over the services of others who were similarly situated was hit by Article 14 of the Constitution.
The challenge of the petitioners therein was sought to be met by the banks and the Reserve Bank of India on the ground that the Scheme making process under Section 45 of the 1949 Act was legislative in character and, therefore, outside the purview of the ambit of natural justice.
The learned Judges of the Apex Court referred to their earlier decision in Union of India v. Cynamide India Limited, AIR 1987 SC 1802 wherein it had been held that legislative action, plenary or a subordinate, was not subject to rules of natural justice and examined the issue as to whether the scheme framed by the Reserve Bank of India was legislative in nature.
The contention of the banks and the Reserve Bank of India was negatived and the question was answered with the following observations :-  "Applying these tests it is difficult to accept Mr. Salve's contention that the framing of the scheme under Section 45 involves a legislative process.
There are similar statutory provisions which require placing of material before the two Houses of Parliament yet not involving any legislative activity.
The fact that orders made by the Central Government for removing difficulties as contemplated under Sub-Cl.(10) are also to be placed before the two Houses of Parliament makes it abundantly clear that the placing of the scheme before the two Houses is not a relevant test for making this Scheme framing process legislative.
We accordingly hold that there is no force in the contention of Mr. Salve that the process being legislative rules of natural justice were not applicable."
As already observed, the provisions of Section 45 of the 1949 Act are quite similar and anologous to the provisions of Section 9 of 1980 Act and in our opinion the nature of power exercised by the Reserve Bank of India under Section 45 and by the Central Government under Secion 9 framing schemes is also similar in nature.
Mr. VR Reddy, learned Additional Solicitor General of India appearing on behalf of the first respondent, tried to distinguish the judgment of the Supreme Court in KI Shephard's case (supra) by contending that the scheme framed by the Reserve Bank of India in Shephard's case was totally different from the scheme framed by the Central Government in the case before us.
He submitted that in the former scheme some of the employees were not allowed to continue in their employment after amalgamation whereas such an eventuality is not envisaged in the Placement Scheme.
This may be so, but merely because the two schemes are different, it does not mean that the nature of power exercised by the Reserve Bank of India and the Central Government in framing schemes under the aforesaid statutes is different.
In view of the above discussion, it must be held that the scheme making process under Section 9 of the 1980 Act is not legislative and the Placement Scheme is not law within the meaning of Articles 31-A and 31-C of the Constitution.
In view of this finding Articles 31-A and 31-C are not attracted and, therefore, the Placement Scheme is not immune from attack on the ground that it violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
We shall now examine the Placement Scheme on its own merits and if it is to be upheld it will have to stand the test to reasonable classifiction having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved.
18.
It was submitted on behalf of the writ petitioners that the tranferor bank had been taken over by the Central Government under the 1980 Act whereas the transferee bank was nationalised under the 1970 Act and, therefore, the two could not be amalgamated/merged with each other.
There is no substance in this contention.
The Amalgamation Scheme and the Placement Scheme both have been framed under Section 9 of the 1980 Act.
Clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 9 clearly empowers the Central Government to reconstitute any new corresponding bank into two or more corporations or to amalgamate any corresponding bank with another banking institution.
It has also the power to transfer the whole or any part of the undertaking of the corresponding new bank to any other corresponding new bank or banking institution.
The power is wide enough to amalgamate the corresponding new bank with any other banking institution including the one taken over under the 1970 Act.
19.
It was then contended that by framing the Placement Scheme, the Central Government has really speaking determined the terms and conditions of employment of the employees of the transferor bank after its merger which power, according to the learned counsel, vests only in the Board of Directors of the transferee bank by virtue of Section 19 of the 1970 Act and, therefore, the action of the Central Government in this regard is without jurisdiction.
This contention in our opinion is devoid of any merit.
The transferee bank was taken over by the Central Government under the provisions of the 1970 Act and Section 19 thereof confers on its Board of Directors the power to frame regulations after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
These regulations cannot be inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and in terms of clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 19 thereof, they may provide for the conditions or limitations subject to which it may appoint advisors, officers or other employees and fix their remunerations and other terms and conditions of service.
The transferee bank has its own regulations which govern the terms and conditions of service of its employees.
But in the instant case, on the merger of the two banks it was necessary to provide for the placement/fitment of the employees of the transferor bank with the employees of the transferee bank at the time of merger and it was for that purpose that the placement scheme had to be framed as a consequence of the amalgamation.
It was, thus, for this limited purpose that the Central Government framed the Placement Scheme.
After the employees of the transferor bank have been merged in terms of the Placement Scheme, their terms and conditions of employment will, of course, be governed by the existing regulations of the transferee bank or as they may be amended from time to time.
Therefore, if the Central Government could amalgamate the transferor bank with the transferee bank, it has to provide for the initial placement of its employees and the scheme framed by it cannot be said to be without jurisdiction.
20.
Another argument that was advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners was that the Placement Scheme has altered the service conditions of the employees of the transferor bank in violation of the provisions of Section 9A and 25-FF of the ID Act.
This argument is also without any substance.
The provisions of Section 9A of the ID Act debar the employer from effecting any change in the conditions of service applicable to the workmen without giving notice to the workmen likely to be affected and within 21 days of such notice.
The Placement Scheme is not at all effecting any change in the conditions of service of the employees of the transferor bank, which according to para 52 of the Amalgamation Scheme would continue to be the same.
The Scheme determines only their placement in the transferee bank and their inter se seniority at the time of merger.
In such a situation no question of any notice as contemplated in Section 9A of the ID Act arises.
Again, Section 25-FF of the ID Act has also no applicability to the Placement Scheme.
It only provides for notice and payment of compensation to the employees in case of transfer of an undertaking and even that is not necessary if the services of the workmen remain uninterrupted.
The Placement Scheme does not interrupt the service of the employees of the transferor bank nor does it alter their terms and conditions of employment to their prejudice.
21.
We may now notice the contentions advanced by Mr. Khehar on behalf of some of the petitioners.
He submitts that Section 9 of the 1980 Act under which the Placement Scheme has been framed does not provide any guidelines in the matter of the determination of the terms and conditions of the employees of the transferor bank and this being so the Central Government should have followed the guidelines provided by Parliament in Section 45 of the 1949 Act which, according to the learned counsel, was analogous to and pari materia with the 1980 Act.
What indeed is contended is that the Placement Scheme being in the nature of delegated legislation the Central Government should e have adopted the guidelines provided under Section 45 of the 1949 Act.
We are afraid we cannot accept his contention.
The very premises of the argument is fallacious.
It proceeds on the hypothesis that the 1949 Act and the 1980 Act are analogous and pari materia which is not so.
The purpose of the 1980 Act was to provide including the transferor bank and this was done with a view to own and control the material resources of the community and to ensure that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
It was in fact a step towards the creation of an egalitarian society.
The 1949 Act, on the other hand, is a law which regulates the banking business in the country and its object has nothing to do with that of the 1980 Act.
These two statutes cannot, therefore, be said to be in any way analogous or pari materia and nor was the Central Government required to follow the guidelines as provided in Section 45 of 1949 Act in the matter of framing of the scheme.
22.
This brings us to the last but the main ground of attack by the learned counsel for the petitioners in challenging the Placement Scheme.
23.
It was strenuously argued that prior to the amalgamation of the two banks, the employees of the transferor bank and the transferee bank were governed by identical service conditions covered by the bipartite settlements arrived at under the ID Act between the managements of various nationalised banks and other banking institutions on the one hand and the bank employees unions on the other.
It is also submitted that the officers were governed by the service regulations framed by the respective banks which were by and large identical and that both the banks had been taken over by the Central Government under the analogous and pari materia statutes i.e. 1970 and 1980 Acts and that the employees of the two banks were drawing the same scales of pay.
The source of recruitment to the various posts and service was common and they were controlled by the Central Government as also by the Reserve Bank of India under the same/similar statutory provisions.
The contention is that after the amalgamation the Central Government could not legitimately discriminate between the employees of the transferor bank and the transferee bank by reducing the service of the former to one-half in the cadre in which they were working at the time of amalgamation.
What is submitted is that para 4(a)(iii) of the Placement Scheme in so far as it provides that the years of service rendered by the employees in the transferor bank for the purpose of determining the minimum length of their service for promotion from subordinate cadre to clerical cadre as also from clerical cadre to the officer cadre and also for the purpose of posting to the posts carrying special allowance shall be computed in the ratio of 2 :1 in the transferee bank offends against Articles 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as the employees of the transferor bank who were hitherto before equally and similarly situated as the employees of the transferee bank have now been discriminated without any reasonable hypothesis.
The same argument is advanced for challenging para 4(b)(ii) of the Placement Scheme which deals with officers and reduces in their case as well their service in the transferor bank to one half for the purpose of determining their seniority, fitment or promotion to the next grade or scale.
It is argued that this classification of treating the equals unequally is irrational and unreasonable and has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
24.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that it is incorrect to say that the employees and officers of the transferor bank ipso facto stood integrated into one class on the amalgamation of two banks.
According to this contention they continued to have their separate identity till the process of integration into one class was complete.
This process, as contended, was completed only after the employees exercised their option to join the transferee bank and their placement and fixation of seniority was determined in accordance with the Placement Scheme.
Learned Additional Solicitor General contended that the entire premise on which the argument of discrimination is based is erroneous and that the employees of the transferor bank could claim equality only after they have been integrated with the employees of the transferee bank in terms of the Placement Scheme.
As regards the service of the employees of the transferor bank being reduced to one-half in the cadre in which they were working at the time of amalgamation, the respondents seek to justify the same on the ground that a comparison of the erstwhile New Bank of India and the Punjab National Bank in terms of productivity, volume of business, staff strength, time taken for promotion etc. has revealed that the employees of the Punjab National Bank were having higher productivity per employee and higher level of responsibility, house keeping and higher average business per branch.
As compared to this, the promotional avenues available to them were less.
It is submitted that if on merger the number of years of service was equated between the employees of erstwhile New Bank of India and Punjab National Bank the result would be that employees with longer years of service in Punjab National Bank would become junior to the employees of the transferor bank with lesser period of service in the corresponding grades.
Some illustrative facts and figures have also been furnished in support of this plea.
25.
Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees that the State shall not deny to any person equality before law or equal protection of the laws.
The principle of equality as enshrined in this Article does not mean that every law must have a universal application for all persons and things who may not be similarly situated.
The principle of equality does not take away from the State the power of classifying persons for legitimate purposes.
What the Article forbids is class legislation but it does not prohibit reasonable classification.
The classification must, however, be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those left out and that differentia must have a nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
It is on the touchstone of this test which has been evolved by the Apex Court in its various judgments right from the commencement of the Constitution that we have to judge the validity of clause (4) of the Placement Scheme which has been challenged as discriminatory.
The transferor bank as compared to the transferee bank was comparatively small in size both in regard to its branches as also in terms of deposits.
The Reserve Bank of India which monitors the performance of various public sector banks brought to the notice of the Central Government that the financial position of the transferor bank as disclosed by the annual financial return was extremely unsatisfactory.
It losses including loan losses were estimated at Rs. 3069 crores which exceeded its reserves and paidup capital which amounted to Rs. 24878 crores.
It had eroded its deposits and declared a loss of Rs. 1152 crores for the year 1991-92.
It was also noticed that calibre and quality of officials in the central management cadre of the transferor bank was inadequate.
The supervision and control exercised by its head office over the controlling offices and branches was far from satisfactory.
The internal working was also unsatisfactory.
The funds management was a weak area and that it had been lending much beyond what its resources would permit relying heavily on market borrowings and it was not possible for it to even serve its existing borrowers.
The transferor bank had not been able to bring about improvement in credit management despite repeated advice from various quarters including the Reserve Bank of India.
The appraisal of credit proposals showed several deficiencies and discrepancies and discretionary powers were not being properly exercised by various functionaries including the top executives.
It had a substantial load of sticky advances amounting to Rs. 43866 crores and did not comply with the minimum capital requirements umder the Reserve Bank of India Act.
The Reserve Bank of India was, thus, of the opinion, that it was a fit case for de-scheduling the transferor bank.
Above all, the transferor bank was not in a position to pay its depositors in full as and when their claims accrue nor did it satisfy the requirements of section 22 of the 1949 Act although this provision does not apply to the nationalised banks.
In this background, the Reserve Bank of India was of the view that there was no possibility of the transferor back earning reasonable profits in the near future and emerging a strong viable unit if it was to remain a separate unit.
Financial assistance of substantial magnitude would have to be given to it and even then because of its weak senior management structure and deficiencies in its lower echelons there was no hope that even with such assistance its management would be able to remove the weakness in its working.
The Reserve Bank was, therefore, of the view that the best alternative was to merge it with a stronger nationalised bank.
It recommended to the Central Government for its merger with the Punjab National Bank because the transferor bank operates mainly in northern India where the transferee bank also has sizable presence.
The recommendations of the Reserve Bank were considered by the Central Government and it came to the conclusion that there was no alternative except amalgamation.
Hence, the Amalgamation Scheme was prepared and notified.
As observed earlier, the Central Government found at the time of merger on a comparison of erstwhile New Bank of India and Punjab National Bank that in terms of productivity, volume of business, staff strength, time taken for promotion etc. that the employees of the Punjab National Bank were having higher productivity per employee and higher level of responsibility and higher average business per branch but as compared to this, promotional avenues to its employees were far less.
In these circumstances, the Central Government which could have closed down the transferor bank resulting in the loss of employment to its officers and employees decided to amalgamate it with a stronger bank in gainful employment without causing any undue hardship to the employees and officers of the transferee bank.
A few of the significant details pointing out the comparative promotional avenues in the two banks at the time of merger as given in the written statement and borne out from records produced before us may be stated hereunder :-  "(a) The productivity in terms of business per employee in New Bank of India and Punjab National Bank was Rs. 27 lacs and Rs. 47 lacs respectively.
(b) The volume of business handled by officers/employees of Punjab National Bank was almost double and at certain levels 4 to 5 times, as compared to the officers/employees of New Bank of India as is evident from the position indicated below :-  Scales No. of officers/employees Volume of business per employee(Rs in crores) + PNB NBI PNB NBI 1.
Officers VII 6 4 4692.5 8335 VI 17 8 16562 4168 V 40 24 703.9 1389 IV 288 37 97.8 90.1 III 1363 196 206 170 II 2382 474 11.8 7.0 I 10513 234 27 14 II.
Clerical 30433 5408 .9 .6  III.
Sub-Staff 11780 2849 24 12 Total 56322 lacs 11240 lacs 4668 (Average) 26.87 (c) Business per branch in Punjab National Bank was more than 1-1/2 times that of New Bank of India.
(d) While the total business of the Punjab National Bank was more than 8 times, their staff strength was only 5 times that of New Bank of India which shows that extent of over-staffing in New Bank of India.
(e) The promotions effected by New Bank of India during 1992-93 (before its merger with Punjab National Bank) in Scales III to VII in terms of percentage were remarkably high .
During the same period there were virtually no promotions in Punjab National Bank in Scales IV to VII.
Even promotion to Scale III in terms of the percentage in Punjab National Bank were less than that in New Bank of India.
(f) Promotions of Officers in New Bank of India were faster than that of Punjab National Bank.
For instance, an officer promoted to Scale IV in July, 1982 in Punjab National Bank was promoted to Scale V in April 1989 and subsequently to Scale VI in June, 1993.
In comparison an officer in Scale IV in January 1985 in New Bank of India was promoted to Scale V in January, 1989 and subsequently to Scale VI in January, 1993.
It will be observed therefrom that whereas in Punjab National Bank an officer in Scale IV took 82 months to reach to Scale V, an officer in New Bank of India took only 48 months to reach that stage.
(g) The zone of consideration for promotion of officers in New Bank of India was lesser as compared to the position in Punjab National Bank.
For example, for promotion from Scale IV to V and Scale V to VI while one out of two candidates was selected in New Bank of India, in Punjab National Bank the corresponding rate was one out of three.
(h) As regards promotions in the clerical cadre while in New Bank of India one out of eight clerks was elevated to the position of Spl.
Asstt., in the case of Punjab National Bank, one out of twelve clerks got this position.
In the case of elevation to Cash Officers, while in New Bank of India one out of 39 clerks got this post, in Punjab National Bank of India one out of 232 clerks got this post.
Whereas in New Bank one out of 27 clerks was appointed as Head Cashier (Category-E) in Punjab National Bank there is no such post."
It will be seen that while amalgamating the two banks the Government decided to count the service of the employees of the transferor bank vis-a-vis the employees of the transferee bank in their respective cadre at the time of merger in the ratio of 2 :1 that is, two years of service in the transferor bank was treated as equivalent to one year of service in the transferee bank.
As admitted by the learned Additional Solicitor General, it is not the whole of the service in the transferor bank that has been reduced to one-half but only the service in that particular cadre in which the employee was placed at the time of merger.
The question that now provided in the Placement Scheme can be said to be discriminatory in the background mentioned above.
In our opinion, the answer to this has to be in the negative.
26.
The service of the employees of the transferor bank in the cadre in which they were working has been reduced to one half but that according to the Central Government became necessary to put them at par with the employees of the transferee bank.
The employees of the transferor bank though ealier governed by similar terms and conditions of employment and similarly situated did not remain equal to the employees of the transferee bank at the time of merger.
A perusal of the aforesaid factual position in regard to the volume of business that was being handled by the employees/officers of the two banks and the comparative chances of their promotions in their respective banks would show that the transferor bank was overstaffed, the business transacted by it was proportionately much less and despite being financially weak and unable to stand on its own, the promotions were faster.
The case with the transferee bank was, however, just the opposite.
The business of the transferee bank was more than 8 times that of the transferor bank, strength of the staff proportionately less and chances of promotion were almost nil.
The zone of consideration for promotions of officers in the transferor bank was much more than in the transferee bank though the latter was a more viable banking institution.
It was pointed out that in the transferor bank one out of two candidates was selected from scale IV to V and Scale V to VI whereas one out of three was selected in the transferee bank.
The amalgamation of the two banks was, thus, bound to lead to anomalies and practical difficulties in the matter of placement, fitment and determination of inter se seniority of the employees and officers of the two banks.
In fact the employees and officers of the transferor bank had as compared to the transferee bank got faster promotions before the merger and if the length of service in the cadre/scale in which they were serving was to be computed as it was, their counterparts in the transferee bank would have been the sufferers.
To illustrate, it will not be out of place to mention that an officer promoted to Scale IV in July, 1983 in the transferee bank was promoted to Scale V in April, 1989 and to Scale VI in June, 1993 whereas in the transferor bank, an officer promoted to Scale IV in January 1985 was promoted to Scale V in January, 1989 and subsequently to Scale VI in January, 1993.
In other words, an officer in Scale IV in the transferee bank took 82 months to reach Scale V whereas an officer in the transferor bank took only 48 months to reach that stage.
The Central Government thus found that by and large employees/officers with lesser length of total service in the transferor bank would have become senior to their counterparts in the transferee bank who had longer length of total service.
Having been faced with such a situation and in order to avoid hardship as far as possible, to the employees and officers of both the banks, the Central Government evolved the Placement Scheme to strike a balance between the conflicting interests of the employees and officers of the two banks and decided to reduce to one half the length of service of the employees and officers of the transferor bank only in the cadre/scale of pay in which they were working at the time of merger and all this was done with a view to equate the two as far as possible.
The equation sought about had, of course, to be founded on some rational basis but we cannot expect that the Central Government could have worked it up with that mathematical precision so as to make the equation absolute.
In the very nature of things there are bound to be cases of hardship and some employees/officers might have suffered in the process but they are only exceptions and the whole matter was examined by the Central Government keeping in view the interests of the employees and officers generally.
When viewed from this angle it cannot be said in the instant case that the Central Government by reducing the length of service of the employees/officers of the transferor bank to one-half has acted irrationally or unreasonably or that such an action has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
The petitioners have not placed any material on the record to show that reduction of one-half service has not brought about the equality as claimed by the respondents.
When it came to reducing the service it has been reduced only in the cadre/scale of pay in which an employee/officer of the transferor bank was working at the time of merger.
Again, this reduction is only for the limited purpose of considering such an employee/officer for promotion to the next grade/scale and for the purpose of posting on a post carrying special allowance.
For all other purposes the entire service of the employee will be recognised by the transferee bank.
This was believed by the Central Government to be the best method to equate the employees of the transferor bank with those of the transferee bank.
It was in view of the comparative position of the two banks that the Central Government adopted the ratio of 2 : 1 as stated in para 4 of the Placement Scheme to restore parity amongst the employees of the two banks.
27.
It must not be forgotten that in view of the poor financial position of the transferor bank and its working not inspiring confidence, it was open to the Central Government to have closed it down altogether in which event the services of all its employees and officers would have come to an end.
The Government, however, instead of resorting to this extreme method and having in view its socio-economic obligation chose to merge it with the transferee bank as a consequence whereof the employees and officers continue to retain their service.
If there are any minor aberrations in the Placement Scheme, they have to be put up with in wider public interest and in the interest of the employees and officers generally when the scheme is otherwise not irrational or discriminatory.
May be some other methodology could be adopted to achieve this object but this by itself is no ground for us to hold that the Placement Scheme is discriminatory and unconstitutional.
It is well settled that unless the scheme framed is shown to be irrational or having no nexus with the object sought to be achieved it will have to be upheld and this Court will not substitute its own judgment for that arrived at by the Central Government in its own wisdom and with the expertise at its disposal.
We must in the words of the Apex Court adopt a hands-off policy."
We are fortified in the view that we are taking by the following observations of their Lordships in Tamil Nadu Education Department v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, AIR 1980 SC 379 :  "In Service Jurisprudence integration is a complicated administrative problem where, in doing broad justice to many, some bruise to a few cannot be ruled out.
Some play in the joints, even some wobbling, must be left to Government without fussy forensic monitoring, since the administration has been entrusted by the Constitution to the Executive, not to the Court.
All life, including administrative life, involved experiment, trial and error, but within the leading strings of fundamental rights, and absent unconstitutional excesses, judicial correction is not right, Under Article 32, this court is the constitutional, not the national ombudsman.
We need an ombudsman but the court cannot make-do."
Again, in VT Khanzode and others v. Reserve Bank of India, AIR 1982 SC 917, the observations of the Apex Court while upholding the group system envisaged in the Regulations made for the employees of the Reserve Bank of India are very instructive and may be reproduced hereunder :-  "No scheme governing service matters can be foolproof and some section or the other of employees is bound to feel aggrieved on the score of its expectations being falsified, or remaining to be fulfilled.
Arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and mala fides will of course render any scheme unconstitutional but the fact that the scheme does not satisfy the expectations of every employee is not evidence of these."
In the result, we must hold that the Placement Scheme cannot be declared to be constitutionally invalid and, therefore, inoperative or that it infringes Article 14 in any way.
28.
Insofar as challenge to the impugned notifications on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice is concerned, we find that the grievance made by the petitioner is wholly misconceived.
29.
Petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 3102 of 1994 is representing the employees of the Punjab National Bank.
Conditions of service enjoyed by these employees under the relevant rules and regulations framed by the Punjab National Bank have not been altered to their prejudice.
Their dates of promotion have not been altered and their status has remained unaltered.
What has happened is that on account of amalgamation/merger of the New Bank of India the employees belonging to the erstwhile New Bank of India have been integrated into the service of the Punjab National Bank and have been given placement in the seniority list as per the policy decision contained in the notification dated 8121993 read with notification dated 491993.
If the scheme of amalgamation has affected the existing employees, such effect is incidental to the scheme of amalgamation/merger and the employees of the Punjab National Bank cannot be heard to say that their existing rights have been infringed in any manner.
The decisions of the Supreme Court in Shri H.L.
Trehan and others v. Union of India and others, 1989(1) S.L.R.
7, has no bearing to the facts of this case.
That was a case in which under provisions of the Caltex (Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Refining (India) Ltd. and of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Ltd) Act the shares in the capital of the CORIL India Ltd stood transferred to and vested in the Central Government on 30121976.
The right, title and interest of Caltex (India) Ltd in relation to its Undertakings in India also stood transferred to and vested in the Central Government.
By a notification dated 951978 the Undertaking of CORIL was transferred to and vested in the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd Section 11(2) of the 1977 Act provided that every whole time officer or other employee of CORIL would on the appointed day continue to be an officer or other employee of the CORIL on the same terms and conditions and that the same rates of pension, gratuity and other matters as are admissible to him immediately before that day shall continue to remain unless and until his employment is terminated or until his remuneration and conditions of service are duly altered by the Company.
After the transfer of the CORIL Undertaking to the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd some of the employees of the CORIL filed a petition and challenged the legality of transfer of the Undertaking and various other matters, including the alleged alteration in their conditions of service to their prejudice.
All other contentions urged by the employees of the CORIL failed before the Delhi High Court except their argument that the conditions of service could not have been altered to their prejudice without an opportunity of hearing.
This judgment of the Delhi High Court has been upheld by the Supreme Court by following the earlier decision in KL Shephard and others v. Union of India and others, JT 1987(3) SC 600.
In the present case, the employees of the erstwhile New Bank of India have not complained of the violation of the principles of natural justice.
So far as the employees of the Punjab National Bank are concerned they cannot claim that they have been condemned unheard because of the amalgamation of the New Bank of India with the Punjab National Bank and placement of the employees of the erstwhile New Bank of India in the seniority list over the existing employees of the Punjab National Bank.
All the writ petitions, thus, stand dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.