VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner who is an employee of State Bank of India (in short, the Bank) was dismissed from service for committing some irregularities by respondent No. 2 by his order dated 2661990.
Appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed by the Appellate Authority vide order dated 2261991.
Reviewing Authority dismissed the review petition on 251992.
Petitioner in this petition is questioning the appellate order confirming the original order and also the order passed by the Reviewing Authority.
2.
Petitioner joined service of the bank as Clerk on 1831961.
In due course of time he was promoted to the next higher grade of Officer Grade-I While petitioner was working as such in the branch of the bank in Panjab University, Chandigarh, he was served with suspension order dated 28111985.
In this order, it was communicated to the petitioner that he would be served with statement of charges very shortly, whereafter an enquiry would be held into the charges.
The matter is stated to have been referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) but no action in this regard seems to have been taken.
Respondent No. 3, General Manager (Operations) served charge-sheet along with covering letter dated 1721988 on the petitioner.
Since charges were levelled against the petitioner, petitioner filed reply to the charge- sheet.
Disciplinary Authority i.e. Respondent No. 3, being not satisfied with the reply appointed one RC Sharma as an Enquiry Officer who after holding enquiry in his report dated 1121989 found two of the charges proved, one charge partly proved and three charges not proved.
Disciplinary Authority did not agree with the report of the Enquiry Officer and therefore, decided to hold enquiry de novo in terms of provisions contained in Rule 50(3)(i) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules.
One Sh. RK Bagga, Officer SMGS-IV posted at Chandigarh was appointed as an Enquiry Officer.
Since Sh. Bagga did not proceed with the enquiry, one Sh. JS Yadav was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
Petitioner challenged order dated 1071989 vide which it had been decided to hold de novo enquiry by filing Civil Writ Petition No 11852 of 1989.
A Division Bench of this Court was pleased to quash the order.
It was observed in order dated 521990 that the bank authorities may consider the enquiry report along with its material placed before the Enquiry Officer and pass orders in accordance with law.
Respondent No. 2 vide order dated 2661990 removed the petitioner from service.
Petitioner being not satisfied with the order, submitted appeal dated 181990.
Appeal was rejected on 471991.
Thereafter, petitioner filed review petition on 381991, but that too was rejected by the Reviewing Authority vide order dated 251991.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that order of removal from service is in violation of principles of natural justice inasmuch as the Disciplinary Authority when differed with the finding of the Enquiry Officer did not give notice to the petitioner.
Counsel also contended that appointing Authority did not apply mind independently but was guided by recommendations made by the Disciplinary Authority.
Lastly, counsel contended that punishment of removal from service is grossly disproportionate to the alleged irregularities for which the petitioner has been found guilty.
He thus contended that order of removal from service be set aside and the petitioner be not relegated to the stage of giving notice by the Disciplinary Authority.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the bank has contended that petitioner was not entitled to show-cause notice before the finding could be arrived at by the disciplinary Authority while disagreeing with report of the enquiry officer.
He submitted that procedure indicated in the Service Rules was duly followed.
He further contended that the question as to whether on the basis of proved charges the punishment imposed is proper or not is a matter which cannot be gone into by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
He however contended that punishment was ordered after due consideration and application of mind and the same is fully justified in the facts and circumstances of the case.
4.
The first contention of learned counsel for the petitioner relates to the violation of principles of natural justice and not giving notice to the petitioner by Disciplinary Authority while differing in respect of certain charges which were held not proved and certain other charges which were held partly proved.
Rule 50(3)(ii) provides that ``the Disciplinary Authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the Inquiring Authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.''
Counsel has placed reliance on judgment of Supreme Court in Narayan Misra v. State of Orissa, 1969 S.L.R.
657.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the Enquiring Officer by his finding dated 7.1.1963 acquitted the appellant of the first two charges, but found him guilty of the third charge.
When the matter came up before the Disciplinary authority, the Disciplinary Authority without noticing the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, recorded its reasons and decided that appellant would be discharged from service.
The order was challenged in the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
The Apex Court held that if the Disciplinary Authority intended taking the charges on which he was acquitted into account, it was necessary that the attention of the delinquent was to be drawn to this fact and his explanation, if any, called for.
This having not been done and Disciplinary Authority having used against him the charges of which he was acquitted without warning him that he was going to use them, the order was quashed being against the principles of fair play and natural justice.
This decision was followed in a decision given by Hon'ble Mr. Justice K Ramaswamy when his Lordship of the Supreme Court was a Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in E Rajasekhara Rao v. Food Corporation of India, represented by its Managing Director, New Delhi and others, 1989(7) S.L.R.
688.
In that case, his Lordship was dealing with similar situation regarding finding of Enquiry Officer under Regulation 59(2) of Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulation 1971, which is pari materia to Rule 50(3)(ii) of the Service Rules.
It was held therein that where the Disciplinary Authority differs from the findings of the Enquiry Officer under Regulation 59(2) of FCI (Staff) Regulations, the Disciplinary Authority should record its reasons, communicate the same to the delinquent officer and call for his explanation as to why he should not differ from the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and failure to give that opportunity is violative of principles of natural justice.
The learned Judge held ``It is common knowledge that under the Regulations or any statutory rules, it is always open to the Disciplinary Authority either to conduct the enquiry against the alleged misconduct of the delinquent officer by itself or to delegate that power to the Inquiry Officer appointed by the Disciplinary Authority to conduct the inquiry in terms of the statutory regulations and to submit a report in that regard.
In a case where the Disciplinary Authority himself conducts inquiry the question of disagreement with the findings on record does not arise.
But in a case where the Disciplinary Authority delegates its power to an officer to conduct an inquiry into the alleged misconduct, the Inquiry Officer in effect conducts an inquiry on behalf of the Disciplinary Authority, and in such a case he would be given free power to arrive, after consideration of the entire record, at its own conclusion whether a particular charge has been proved or not.
He will have an opportunity to be in direct interaction with the witnesses and consider their demeanour and the manner in which the evidence was given by the witnesses, and can form an opinion regarding the nature of the evidence.
On consideration of that evidence he can record his reasons whether the charge has been held proved or not.
In a case where an Inquiry Officer finds that the charge is held proved, the question of giving any opportunity to the petitioner in that regard before recording any finding by the Disciplinary Authority does not arise, because the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer were agreed by the Disciplinary Authority who acted on his behalf.
But in a case where the Disciplinary Authority does not agree with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer, though he acted on his behalf as his agent or a deputy, the question then is whether the delinquent officer is entitled to an opportunity of putting on notice of the grounds on which the Disciplinary Authority is proposing to disagree with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer That the charge is held not proved.
I find that, by necessary implication, the delinquent officer is entitled to a notice.
The reasons are obvious.
When there is disagreement with the findings of the Inquiry Officer by the Disciplinary Authority with regard to the particular charge, there is then an element of doubt whether the charge is held proved or not.
In that regard, the delinquent officer is entitled to support not only the reasons given by the Inquiry Officer in support of the findings that the charge is not proved vut also can give additional reasons supporting the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
It could also be angulated from yet another perspective, namely after the findings are recorded, the petitioner would be entitled to know what are the reasons prevailed with the Disciplinary Authority in recording reasons by disagreeing with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer only after passing the final order and that too in the impugned order.
At that stage, he will have only an opportunity to assail its correctness before the appellate authority who is the final authority of fact.
But when the delinquent officer can himself satisfy the disciplinary authority as to the correctness of the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer that the charge is held not proved not only on the grounds recorded by the Inquiry Officer but also additional grounds, why should the delinquent officer be deprived of that opportunity when he is able to satisfy the Disciplinary Authority himself instead of satisfying the appellate authority.
Thus considered, I hold that the principles of natural justice are to be extended into this area of controversy, and by necessary implication, Regulation 59(2) of the Regulations has not excluded the extension of doctrine of principles of natural justice in this area.''
Hon'ble Mr. Justice K Ramaswami again reiterated this very principle in T. Vasudeva Rao v. General Manager/Appellate Authority, Punjab National Bank, New Delhi and others, 1990(5) S.L.R.
447.
In this very context a reference may also be made to decision of the Rajasthan High Court (Jaipur Bench) in Mahendra Dixit v. State of Rajasthan and others, 1993(8) S.L.R.
679 wherein report of the Enquiry Officer and reasons for disagreeing with the Enquiry Officer was not supplied to the delinquent before imposing penalty and therefore, order was quashed being violative of principles of natural justice.
Relying on Rule 50(3)(ii) of the Service Rules, learned counsel for the respondents contended that the only requirement is that Disciplinary Authority should record its reasons for disagreeng with the finding of the Enquiry Officer and that there is no further requirement of issuing notice to the delinquent before imposition of the punishment.
As held in E Rajasekhara Rao's case (supra) in the absence of any provision excluding the giving of notice to the delinquent, the principles of natural justice come into play and it is therefore necessary that notice should be given to the delinquent before passing of the order as and when the Disciplinary Authority differs with the finding of the Enquiry Officer.
A Full Bench of this Court in Harnek Singh and another v. The State of Punjab and others.
AIR 1972 P & H 232, relying upon the judgment of the Apex Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269 held that even an administrative order which involves civil consequences must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the person concerned of the case against him, the evidence in support thereof and after giving such person an opportunity of being heard and of meeting or explaining the evidence.
It was further observed that a decision arrived at without conforming to the above principles would be contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
Again the Full Bench referred to some observations of the Supreme Court in AK Kraipak v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150 : wherein the Supreme Court had observed that the aim of rule of natural justice is to secure justice or to put it negatively to prevent miscarriage of justice.
It was specifically stated that the rules of natural justice can operate only in areas not covered by any law validly made.
In other words they are not to supplant the law of the land but supplement it.
It was specifically held that the opinion held earlier by the Courts to the effect that unless the authority concerned was required by law under which it functioned to act judicially, there was no room for the application of the rule of natural justice no longer holds good.
A learned single Judge of this Court in DC Aggarwal v. State Bank of India and other, 1991(2) SCT 430(P&H) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
578, opined that service rule has to be read that the principle of natural justice has been incorporated therein.
In the light of judgments referred to above, I am one with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Disciplinary Authority was required to give notice to the petitioner when differing with the finding of the Enquiry Officer and in absence thereof, the order cannot be sustained being violative of principles of natural justice.
5.
It was next contented by counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 2 who is Appointing Authority has imposed the extreme penalty of removal from service by taking into consideration the findings of the Disciplinary Authority arrived at the back of the petitioner.
He contended that the Appointing Authority was mainly influenced of the findings recorded by the Disciplinary Authority.
In the written statement it is not denied that the Appointing Authority did take into consideration the findings of the Disciplinary Authority but counsel for the respondents has contended that order has been passed strictly in accordance with Rule 50(3)(iii) which provides that where the Disciplinary Authority is of the opinion that the penalty to be imposed is any of the major penalties specified in clauses (e), (f), (g) and (h) of rule 49 and if it is lower in rank to the Appointing Authority in respect of the category of employees to which the employee belongs, it shall submit to the Appointing Authority the records of the enquiry specified in clause (xxi)(b) of sub-rule(2) together with its recommendations regarding the penalty that may be imposed and the Appointing Authority shall make an order imposing such penalty as it considers in its opinion appropriate.
He thus contended that the order having been passed in terms of the rule, no grievance in this regard can be made.
6.
Undoubtedly, proviso to the rule aforesaid provides that if the Disciplinary Authority is lower in rank to the Appointing Authority in respect of employee concerned, it shall submit to the Appointing Authority the records of the enquiry and also its recommendations regarding the penalty that may be imposed.
But by this, it does not mean that the Appointing Authority in every case has to make an order as proposed or recommended by the Disciplinary Authority.
Rule does not provide that the Appointing Authority is bound to accept the recommendations mae with regard to penalty proposed by the Disciplinary Authority.
Since the proviso to the rule provides that Appointing Authority shall make an order imposing such penalty as it considers in its opinion appropriate the Appointing Authority has to consider the evidence before it.
Though the Appointing Authority may take into consideration the Enquiry Officer's report or the recommendations of the Disciplinary Authority, yet it is not bound to accept the same.
The Authority has to come to its independent finding uninfluenced by any material which may have been gathered in absence or without notice to the delinquent.
Reading of the impugned order reveals that Appointing Authority while imposing the extreme penalty of removal from service has taken into consideration the findings of the Disciplinary Authority even on those charges which were earlier found to have not been proved or partly proved by the Enquiry Officer.
Although in the impugned order, it finds mention that the Appointing Authority is concurring with the reasoning and finding of the Disciplinary Authority on an independent examination of the documents and evidence adduced during the enquiry proceedings, but from this I am not prepared to draw an inference that the Authority remained uninfluenced by the findings recorded by the Disciplinary Authority.
In State Bank of India and others v. DC Aggarwal and another, 1993(1) SCT 225(SC) : AIR 1993 SC 1197 out of thirteen charges framed against the respondent therein the Inquiry Officer found charges I and II only to have been proved and remaining as unproved.
The Enquiry Officer recommended for exonerating the respondent as the charges found to be proved were minor and of procedural nature.
Instead of acting on this recommendation the Bank directed the Enquiry Officer to submit the report through Central Vigilance Commission.
Central Vigilance Commission not only disagreed with the Inquiry Officer but found charges I, II, III, IV, III, XI to XIII to have been proved and advised imposition of a major penalty not less than removal from service.
The Disciplinary Authority agreed on each charge on which Central Vigilance Commission had found against him but disagreed on quantum of punishment.
Before the Apex Court, it was submitted by counsel for the Bank that the Disciplinary Authority having passed detailed order discussing every material on record and the respondent having filed appeal, there was no prejudice caused to him but these submissions did not find favour with the Apex Court.
The Apex Court observed ``The order is vitiated not because of mechanical exercise of power or for non-supply of the inquiry report but for relying and acting on material which was not only irrelevant but could not have been looked into.
Purpose of supplying document is to contest its veracity or give explanation.
Effect of non-supply of the report of Inquiry Officer before imposition of punishment need not be gone into nor it is necessary to consider validity of Rule 5.
But non-supply of CVC recommendation which was prepared behind the back of respondent without his participation and one does not know on what material which was not only sent to the Disciplinary Authority but was examined and relied was certainly violative of procedural safeguard and contrary to fair and just inquiry....'' ``Taking action against the employee on confidential document which is the foundation of order exhibits complete misapprehension about the procedure that is required to be followed by the Disciplinary Authority.
May be that the Disciplinary Authority has recorded its own findings and it may be coincidental that reasoning and basis of returning the finding of guilt are same as in the CVC report but it being a material obtained behind back of the respondent without his knowledge or supplying of any copy to him the High Court in our opinion did not commit an error in quashing the order.''
The case in hand is on a better footing than the one before the Apex Court.
The impugned order does not show that there was an independent examination of evidence and documents before the Appointing Authority decided to impose penalty of removal from service.
The Authority has neither discussed any evidence nor has given any reason for agreeing with the findings of the Disciplinary Authority.
The order seems to have been passed mechanically and only on relying upon the findings recorded by Disciplinary Authority behind the back of the petitioner.
The ratio of the judgment of Apex Court in DC Aggarwal's case (supra) squarely applies to the facts of the present case and therefore, the order deserves to be quashed on this ground.
7.
It was next contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that only two charges proved against the petitioner were the last two charges which did not amount to any misconduct at all.
He contended that under the regulations, punishment of removal from service is a major penalty to be imposed for an act of misconduct but misconduct has not been proved and secondly, the imposition of penalty of reemoval from service in the facts and circumstances of this case is not for sound r eason and grossly disproportionate to the allegations proved by the Enquiry Officer.
Counsel contended that mere borrowing loan from Co-operative Credit Society by the petitioner in order to treat his daughter for kidney transplantation cannot be made basis of the order.
In answer to these submissions, counsel for the respondents contended that quantum of punishmentis within the discretion of the Administrative Authority and beyond the competence of a writ Court to go into the quantum.
There is no dispute with the proposition that ordinarily it is not within the purview of the court to interfere on the footing that punishment is disproportionate but the rule that discretion is to be reasonably exercised, applies to all types of administrative action.
There is no valid reason why finding as to quantum of punishment arrived at by Administrative Authority cannot be interfered with if it is such that no reasonable man would have arrived at.
There is nothing sacrosanct about quantum of punishment when question of judicial review of it arises.
In order to appreciate the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner, it is necessary to find as to the nature of charges proved against the petitioner and also as to whether the bank suffered any loss because of irregularities committed by the petitioner.
The first charge which was partly proved against the petitioner is that he surreptitiously added his name as co-depositor in the opening form and ledger-sheet of savings bank account originally opened in the name of Surjit Singh Lota and Pritam Kaur Lota.
The second charge proved against the petitioner is that he resorted to heavy borrowings from Co-operative Credit Societies with the result that total deductions from his salary exceeded the stipulated ceiling of 25% of his emoluments and the last charge found against him is that without there being sufficient funds in his savings bank account maintained at Madhya Marg, Chandigarh Branch, petitioner discounted the cheque.
The first charge came to be framed against the petitioner because Surjit Singh Lota by his letter dated 16101985 had made a complaint that the petitioner has added his name in the account opening form without his permission, but later by subsequent letter dated 21101985 he informed the bank that there was some misunderstanding which they have s ettled and they were fully satisfied with their accounts including the Savings Bank Account.
The Enquiry Officer on the basis of the evidence found the charge partly proved to the extent that addition of name in the account opening form of Savings Bank Account No. 4049 was not properly authorised as it was not authenticated before resorting to withdrawal.
The act of adding name in the account opening form was found to be only irregular having not been got authenticated by the petitioner as was expected from a staff member.
In defence to the second charge, petitioner had explained before the Enquiry Officer that he resorted to borrowings from various Cooperative Thrift and Credit Societies of which he was a member because his daughter since 1971 (when she was barely 3-1/2 years of age) was a kidney patient and had been under constant treatment of P.G.I.
She had to undergo kidney biopsy thrice.
He resorted to borrowings in order to fulfil his moral and social obligations, such as, meeting medical expenses etc.
The Enquiry Officer although found that the explanation given by the petitioner is sound and convincing but as the deductions from salary were more than stipulated 25% ceiling, the charge was found to be proved.
In answer to the last charge, petitioner had submitted before the Enquiry Officer that two demand drafts for Rs. 500/- each were purchased from Ambala Cantt.
and Karnal branches against his salary for the month of April, 1994.
After purchase he learnt that the salary has been withheld by the bank for the reasons not communicated to him.
When this fact came to his notice, he immediately deposited the amount with interest.
The Enquiry Officer while holding the charge proved, has opined that withholding of salary cannot be held to be reckoned to be relevant to the discounting of cheque and petitioner's argument that no monetary loss has been caused to the bank is also not relevant to purchase and return of demand drafts when it is done by a staff member.
It has not been disputed by learned counsel for the bank that no action in regard to addition of name in the account opening form was taken or threatened to be taken against the bank by Surjit Singh Lota or his wife.
Petitioner resorted to borrowings because his daughter was a kidney patient and thus, no inference can be drawn that the borrowings were without any reason.
Considering that the amount one has to spend for treating a kidney patient, there must have been compelling circumstances which led to borrowings from Co-operative Credit Society.
Otherwise too, the bank has not suffered any monetary loss either when the petitioner borrowed money from Co-operative Society or when he discounted the cheque as the amount of this transaction was deposited with interest.
Thus, in the facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the considered view that the charges proved or partly proved are not such which would warrant penalty of removal from service.
It deserves to be noticed that petitioner was suspended as on 28111985 though at that time he was told that enquiry would start immediately but it started only on 1721988 when a charge-sheet was served on him.
Since 1988 the petitioner has not only faced the ordeal of enquiry but also the agony of punishment.
It would serve no useful purpose if the matter is again left to the Disciplinary Authority for serving notice on the petitioner.
The best course is to close the chapter once for all.
8.
Resultantly, the writ petition succeeds and is accordingly allowed.
Order of the Enquiry Officer dated 2661990 as confirmed by the Appellate Authority by order dated 2261991 and order of the Reviewing Authority dated 251992 shall stand quashed.
Petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
However, he shall not be entitled to any interest of the arrears.
No costs.
Petition allowed.