GS Singhvi, J - Petitioners, who are presently working as Inspectors Grade I, in the Co-operative Department of the Government of Punjab, have questioned the legality of Annexure P.3 issued by the Government of Punjab for merger of the posts of Inspectors Grade II with those of Inspectors Grade I Petitioners have prayed that Annexure P.3 be quashed and respondents be directed not to give effect to the same.
2.
In brief, the case set up by the petitioners is that they are all working as Inspectors Grade I in the Co-operative Department of the Government of Punjab and their service conditions are governed by the Punjab Co-operative Department (State Service) Class III, Rules 1978 (for short `1978 Rules').
These Rules contemplate appointment on the posts of Inspectors Grade I by direct recruitment as well as by promotion/transfer.
Petitioners have stated that they are eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar.
They have further stated that private respondents are holding the posts of Inspectors Grade II (earlier designated as Sub-Inspectors).
The private respondents are eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Inspector Grade I Petitioners have further asserted that Inspectors Grade I are in all respects superior to Inspectors Grade II in as much as the pay scale of Inspectors Grade I is higher than that of Inspectors Grade II.
Inspectors Grade I act as supervisory authority over Inspectors Grade II.
The former initiates the annual confidential reports of the latter.
Notwithstanding this difference in the status and nature of duties of the two posts, the Government of Punjab has issued notification Annexure P 3 dated 971992 for merger of the posts of Inspectors Grade II with Inspectors Grade I  3.
Petitioners have questioned the legality of the notification Annexure P.3 on the ground that it is contrary to 1978 Rules and the provisions of the Constitution.
Another ground of challenge to the impugned petition is that the Government has brought about merger without application of mind, and lastly that their promotion chances would be adversely affected by the impugned notification.
4.
Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 have justified the action of the Government in merging the two cadres on the premise that the action of the Government is in public interest.
By making reference to rule 3 of 1978 Rules, the respondents have pleaded that the rule making authority has vested the Government with the power to create and abolish the posts, and that merger of one cadre with another cannot be made a subject-matter of adjudication by the Court.
Respondents have denied the assertion of the petitioners that Inspectors Grade I are superior to Inspectors Grade II and that future chances of promotion of Inspectors Grade I would be jeopardised by the impugned notification.
Their further assertion is that an indentical question involving challenge to the validity of notification dated 971992 was raised in C.W.P.
No. 9893 of 1992 (Sukhraj Singh Brar etc. v. State of Punjab etc.) which was dismissed by the High Court on 24.7.1992, and therefore that order passed by the High Court should act as res judicata against the petitioners.
Similar replies have been filed by the private respondents.
Some additional documents have been filed by the parties along with their affidavits, reference to which will be made hereinafter.
5.
Shri JS Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioners, argued that the impugned notification is ultra vires to the provisions of 1978 Rules inasmuch as these Rules do not empower the Government to effect of merger of one cadre into another and in the absence of such a statutory power vesting in the Government, by an executive fiat, the Government cannot bring about merger of the cadre of Inspectors Grade II into that of Inspectors Grade I Shri Khehar drew attention of the Court to the difference in the pay scales of the two posts, the sources of recruitment, the nature of duties and submitted that when the Government has itself treated Inspectors Grade II to be subordinate to Inspectors Grade I, it is now not permissible for the Government to treat Inspectors Grade II at par with Inspectors Grade I and thereby diminish the chances of promotion of the existing Inspectors Grade I He argued that under the existing rules Inspectors Grade II are entitled to be promoted as Inspectors Grade I after they have rendered a particular length of service but by the impugned notification all the Inspectors Grade II have been made Inspectors Grade I without fulfilment of minimum requirement of service and without any selection.
Shri Khehar further argued that once a large body of Inspectors Grade II has been brought into the cadre of Inspectors Grade I, the latter may get a March over the existing Inspectors grade I in the matter of promotion as Assistant Registrar.
Shri Khehar invited Court's attention to Balji Singh Bali and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1971 (1) SLR 58, and VK Dhawar and another v. The Food Corporation of India and others, 1985(2) SLR 449.
Shri Khehar lastly argued that the Government had constituted a Committee to examine the question of merger of the two cadres and in its report Annexure P2 that Committee had clearly opined that cadre of Inspectors grade II cannot be merged with that of Inspectors Grade I but ignoring this detailed report of the Committee, the Government has arbitrarily and with a mala fide intention issued the impugned notification.
He also drew attention of the Court to the additional affidavits of the petitioners and submitted that Inspectors Grade I continued to be superior to Inspectors Grade II in the context of their nature of duties, the pay scales and Inspectors Grade I not only initiate the annual confidential reports but also grant leave to the Inspectors Grade II.
They also supervise the work of Inspectors Grade II.
Ms. Tuli and Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the respondents, vehemently argued that once a Division Bench of this Court has turned down a challenge to the legality of the notification dated 971992 by dismissing C.W.P.
No. 9893 of 1992, there is no justification for the Court to once again make an adjudication on the validity of the impugned notification.
They further argued that the Court cannot go into the question relating to equation of posts duties creation of cadres, creation of posts or abolition thereof because it is an executive function which lies with in the sole prerogative of the employer.
Learned Counsel argued that under rule 3 of 1978 Rules the Government has the power to abolish the existing posts and create a new cadre for adjustment of the staff which may be rendered surplus on account of abolition of posts.
Learned counsel submitted that mere hardship to one or two or more employees cannot be a ground for striking down a notification which is otherwise within the competence of the Government.
They further submitted that mere possibility of prejudice to the chances of promotion cannot be a ground for invalidating an action of the Government as unconstitutional.
Learned counsel also pointed out that seniority of existing Inspectors Grade I has been maintained above the Inspectors Grade II and therefore no prejudice would be suffered by the holders of the posts of Inspectors Grade I Ms. Tuli invited Court's attention to the Standing Order No. 2027 and pointed out that annual confidential reports of Inspectors Grade II are required to be initiated by the Assistant Registrar and with effect from 17.4.1989 grant of leave to Inspectors Grade II is also within the competence of Assistant Registrar.
She further pointed out that the post of Assistant Registrar is required to be filled by selection subject to seniority.
Sources of recruitment to the post of Assistant Registrar contemplate promotion as well as direct recruitment and as of late only three posts are lying vacant to be filled by promotion.
6.
In order to appreciate rival contentions, it will be profitable to reproduce Annexure P 3 dated 971992 by which Governor of Punjab has been pleased to order the merger of Inspectors Grade II Inspectors Grade I This notification reads as under :-  ``NOTIFICATION No. 70/11/92-C-II(I)/ July 1992.
The Governor of Punjab is pleased to merge the Inspector Grade II of Co-operation Department with Inspector Grade I of the Department from the date of publication of this notification in the official gazette with the following terms and conditions :-  (1) Two hundred posts of Inspector Grade II are abolished on the general line before their merger.
(2) Inspector Grade II will not claim seniority over and above the seniority of Inspector Grade I working at the time of publication of notification.
(3) Inspector Grade II will not be given the benefit of pay fixation on account of their merger with Inspector Grade I (4) The inter se seniority of Inspector Grade II and Inspector Grade I shall remain intact.
Chandigarh, dated the June, 1992 KS Janjua Secy.
to Govt. Punjab Deptt.
of Co-operation.''
Perusal of the above quoted notification shows that out of the existing posts of Inspectors Grade II the Government decided to abolish 200 posts.
The remaining posts of Inspectors Grade II have been merged with Inspectors Grade I At the same time, it has been made clear that Inspectors Grade II will not claim seniority over and above the Inspectors Grade I, who are working as such on the date of publication of the notification.
Benefit of fixation of pay has also not been given to Inspectors Grade II.
Only their inter se seniority has been kept intact.
With the inter se seniority of Inspectors Grade II, the petitioners can have no grievance.
Similarly, once the government has made clear that Inspectors Grade II will not claim seniority over and above Inspectors Grade I, who are holding the posts on the date of publication of the notification, it is clear that all the Inspectors Grade II will rank junior to Inspectors Grade I It has neither been pleaded nor has it been shown that on account of merger Inspectors Grade II may start getting higher pay in comparison to Inspectors Grade I It is, therefore, clear that conditions of service of Inspectors Grade I, like seniority, pay etc. have not been adversely affected by the impugned notification.
Logical conclusion of placing of Inspectors Grade II below Inspectors Grade I is that erstwhile Inspectors Grade II will not get a march over the petitioners at the time of determination of zone of consideration for promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar.
Of course, there is a remote possibility in future of some erstwhile Inspectors Grade II becoming entitled to be considered for promotion as Assistant Registrar along with existing Inspectors Grade I, who would fall within the zone of consideration for promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar.
Whether any erstwhile Inspector Grade II may steal march over the existing Inspectors Grade I for promotion as Assistant Registrar is something which lies in the realm of speculation and conjectures.
Thus the petitioners have failed to show that as on date the impugned notification will have any adverse effect on any of their service condition.
Rule 3 of 1978 Rules reads as under :-  ``3.
The Service shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix `A' to these Rules : Provided that nothing in these rules shall affect the inherent right of the Government to make additions or reduction in the number of such posts or to create new posts with different designations and scales of pay whether permanently or temporarily.''
This rule can be divided into two parts.
In the first place it refers to the posts which are governed by the various provisions contained in the rules.
Secondly, it recognises the inherent right of the Government to make additions or reduction in the number of posts or to create new posts with different designations and different scales of pay.
The second part of the rule, which is in the form of a proviso, empowers the Government to increase or decrease the number of posts.
To what extent the number of posts can be increased has been left to the discretion of the Government.
No restriction has been imposed on the power of the Government to increase the number of posts or make additions to the number of existing posts.
Similarly, there is no limitation on the exercise of power of the Government to reduce the number of existing posts.
This power can be exercised so as to reduce the number of existing posts to zero.
In a way the power of the Government to reduce the number of posts can be interpreted as meaning a power to abolish the existing posts.
Power to create new posts with different designations and pay scales also implies a power to abolish the existing posts.
The rule making authority has deliberately and designedly conferred wide power on the Government in the matter of creation and abolition of posts as also reduction in the number of posts, or increase in the number of posts.
How many posts are to be created in a particular cadre is a matter which lies within the sole discretion of the Government.
Whether any particular post is required to be kept in the service and whether it is in public interest to create new posts or to abolish the existing posts are all matters which lie within the prerogative of the Government.
It is for the Government to take a decision on each of these issues keeping in view the public interest and the interest of the service.
In my considered view, when the rule making authority has thought it proper to invest the Government with which powers and which in my opinion is necessary for the purpose of maintaining efficiency of the public services, there is no justification for limiting the scope of the authority of the Government by the process of interpretation.
I am further of the view that by exercising its power under rule 3, the Government could have abolished the entire cadre of Inspectors Grade II.
It could have issued separate orders for abolishing the posts and absorption of the employees, who were to be rendered surplus, on other posts.
If that could be done by the issuance of separate orders, it is not possible to hold that the Government has exceeded its jurisdiction by issuing a notification for the merger of the existing cadre of Inspectors Grade II with the cadre of Inspectors Grade I  7.
The statement of the petitioners that posts of Inspectors Grade II carried pay scale lower than that of Inspectors Grade I may be factually correct but that by itself is not sufficient to nullify the exercise of power by the Government.
8.
Argument of Shri Khehar that by virtue of the impugned notification the entire scheme of 1978 Rules has been put to jeopardy is without any substance.
It is true that different sets of qualifications had been prescribed by the rules for the purpose of recruitment to the posts of Inspectors Grade I and Inspectors Grade II and the posts of Inspector Grade II was considered to be an inferior post, the action of the Government cannot be charactrised as arbitrary or unreasonable merely because the posts carrying lower pay scale has been merged with a cadre of posts carrying higher pay scale, because it has not been shown that on account of this merger any adverse impact has been caused on the existing service conditions of Inspectors Grade I Similarly, the mere fact that a particular source of recruitment was prescribed for the posts of Inspectors Grade I and by virtue of merger of Inspectors Grade II the latter will not be required to undergo the rigorous of consideration for promotion by a Selection Committee, in my opinion, is not sufficient to nullify the notification.
It is also not possible to nullify the notification on the ground that now the Inspectors Grade II have come to the cadre of Inspectors Grade I without selection.
9.
Two judgments of this Court, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners are, in my opinion, not of any help to the case of the petitioners.
In Balji Singh Bali's case (supra), petitioners had questioned the action of the Government in covering the posts of Field Public Assistants/Information Assistants into those of Assistant Public Relations Officers even though the former were not part of the service of the Department under Public Relations Department (Class III Non-Gazetted) Service Rules, 1958.
The Court held that the only course open to the Government was to have amended the aforesaid 1958 Rules in order to bring the ex-cadre posts into the cadre.
10.
In VK Dhawan's case (supra), the Court was examining the provisions contained in the Food Corporation Act, 1964, and Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971.
The Court found that appointment to the posts of Assistants Grade I and Grade II could be made by promotion and not by transfer.
The Corporation resorted to the methodology of transfer for appointment to the posts of Assistants Grade I and II and that action directly affected the seniority of the existing employees.
The Court held that it was not permissible for the Corporation to make appointments by transfer from a lower post to a higher post because it directly affected the seniority of the existing incumbents.
A careful reading of that judgment shows that the power, like the one which is available to the Government under rule 3 of 1978 Rules, was not available to the Food Corporation of India under the 1964 Act or Regulations of 1971 and the notification issued by the Corporation for appointment by transfer of a person holding a lower post to a higher post postulated grant of benefit of seniority on the basis of length of service.
This was held by the Court to be unfair and arbitrary and unlawful as well.
However, in this case now only such person is available to the Government but impugned notification does not adversely affect seniority of existing employees.
11.
As against the two judgments, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners, I may take note of few decisions of the apex Court and other High Courts wherein Courts have recognised the power of the employer to create and abolish the posts or even to merge the cadres.
In Reserve Bank of India v. NC Paliwal and others, AIR 1976 SC 2345, their Lordships of the Supreme Court were considering a challenge to the integration of non-clerical with clerical services.
Challenge was made on the ground that non-clerical services and clerical services were wholly different services and integration of the same has resulted in unequals being treated equally.
Second ground of challenge was that till the non-clerical staff could acquire the qualifications of Graduation or both parts of Bankers Examination they were not entitled to be appointed in the clerical cadre and lastly that seniority of the writ petitioners was adversely affected by the integration without any opportunity of hearing.
While rejecting all the three contentions, the Supreme Court observed that it is entirely for the Bank to decide whether to have several different cadres or one integrated cadre of its services.
That is a matter of policy which does not attract the applicability of constitutional provisions regarding equality.
12.
Again, in VT Khanzzode and others v. Reserve Bank of India and another, AIR 1982 SC 917, the Supreme Court observed :-  ``No scheme governing service matters can be fool-proof and some section or the other of employees is bound to feel aggrieved on the score of its expectations being falsified or remaining to the fulfilled.
Arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and mala fides will of course render any scheme unconstitutional but the fact that the scheme does not satisfy the expectations of every employee is not evidence of these.
Vested interests are prove to hold on to their acquisitions.''
In State of Rajasthan and another v. Shantilal etc., JT 1989(3) SC 273, the Supreme Court once again recognised the prerogative of the employer to create new cadres or to merge the existing cadres.
Their Lordships observed :-  ``Even if we assume that prior to coming into force of the Rules there was a combined cadre of Nurses and Compounders, Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution do not forbid the State Government from creating new cadres, bifurcating one cadre into two or more or uniting two or more cadres into one.
The creation of cadres in the service of the State is a matter which has to be left entirely to the State Government.''
In Non-Gazetted Postal Audit Association, Nagpur v. Controller and Auditor General of India and others, 1987(1) SLJ 64, while repelling the challenges regarding equation of posts, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court (Nagpur Bench) observed :-  ``The Courts would not interfere with such a decision unless it is arbitrary or unfair or unreasonable and it is not proper for the Court to go into the propriety or wisdom of the principle of equation of posts adopted by the Government.''
Similar views have been expressed by this Court in Makhan Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1987(2) SLJ 113.
13.
In New Bank of India v. KB Sharma and others, 1990(4) SLR 97, a Division Bench of this Court held that ``a policy cannot be struck down on the ground that it is likely to cause hardship to one ground where integration of two groups has taken place''.
That case involved a challenge to the merger of the posts of officers belonging to different grades.
The Court held that -  ``It was within the competence of the Bank to decide as to what would be the sources of recruitment and unless a particular provision was unreasonable or oppressive the Court will not interfere with the prerogative of the management.''
The above quoted decisions of the Supreme Court and of the High Court clearly show that except in cases of patent illegality, arbitrariness or proved malice the Court will not examine the wisdom or propriety of the decision of the employer regarding creation or abolition of the posts, merger of the cadres, equation of the posts, the sources of recruitment, the qualifications prescribed for particular posts and the like.
A policy decision of the employer will not be negatived merely because it affects the chances of promotion or some other conditions of service of one or more employees or a group of employees.
In so far as this case is concerned, as I have held earlier, the Government is invested with the power to abolish the posts and to create the posts and that implies a power to merge two cadres.
Therefore, the impugned notification does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Moreover, when the impugned notification does not result in any prejudice to the seniority of the petitioners and it does not adversely affect the existing rights of Inspectors Grade I to be promoted as Assistant Registrar, it cannot be struck down on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
14.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that Inspectors Grade I were superior to Inspectors Grade II and, therefore, there could be no merger merits summary rejection because merger of two cadres at times affect the existing staffing pattern and the structure of the service.
Rather it is a necessary concomitant of a decision regarding merger of the two cadres.
Therefore, the mere fact that the petitioners were at one time enjoying superiority over Inspectors Grade II does not mean that for all times to come they must enjoy that superiority.
In so far as writing of annual confidential reports and grant of leaves are concerned, under Standing Order No. 2027 the power to initiate annual confidential reports of Inspectors Grade II vested with Assistant Registrar and even if physically Inspectors Grade I may have been initiating annual confidential reports of Inspectors Grade II, no advantage can be claimed by Inspectors Grade I on that count.
Same is the position regarding grant of leave to Inspectors Grade II because that power vests with the Assistant Registrars.
15.
In addition to what I have held above, it is not possible to ignore the stark fact that a Division Bench of this Court has negatived the challenge made by some of the Inspectors Grade I to the notification dated 971992.
In its well reasoned order, the Division Bench has held that mere indirect affect on the chances of promotion cannot be a ground for striking down the notification.
This view of the Division Bench is consistent with the law laid down by the apex Court.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is held to be without merit and the same is dismissed.
Interim order passed by this Court stands automatically vacated.