GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is MA with B.Ed.
and who was selected for appointment as Headmistress in the school run by respondent No. 3, has filed this writ petition for the issuance of a writ or a direction to quash the order dated 1281987 (Annexure P.4) passed by respondent No. 2, whereby the said respondent has declined to grant approval to the appointment of the petitioner as Headmistress of Kamalia Khalsa High School, Kapurthala.
2.
The facts which have brought on record show that the petitioner joined the service as a Teacher at Kamalia Khalsa High School, Kapurthala on the basis of her appointment vide resolution dated 1141974 of the Managing Committee.
Her appointment was approved by the Managing Committee.
Her appointment was approved by the authorities of the Education Department of the Government of Punjab.
In the year 1986 respondent No. 3, advertised the post of Headmistress for Kamalia Khalsa High School, Kapurthala.
The petitioner was one of the applicants for the same post.
She was interviewed on 14121986 by the Sub- Committee constituted under Rule 7 of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools, Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 (for short, the rules).
The Managing Committee of the School accepted the recommendations of the Sub- Committee and on that basis, appointment letter dated 22121986 (annexure P.3) was issued by the Manager of the Kamalia Khalsa High School, Kapurthala appointing the petitioner as Headmistress in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600.
She was placed on probation for a period of one year.
In terms of the provisions of Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 and the rules framed thereunder, appointment of the petitioner was required to be approved by the authorities of the Education Department of the Government of Punjab.
Therefore, the Managing Committee submitted the case of the petitioner before the District Education Officer, Kapurthala for his approval.
The District Education Officer, Kapurthala, refused to approve the appointment of petitioner as Headmistress on the ground that she is not possessed with the requisite experience.
Communication dated 1281987 (Annexure P-4) containing the refusal of the District Education Officer was conveyed to the President of the School, who, in turn, informed the petitioner about this decision of the District Education Officer vide letter dated 1491987 (Annexure P.5).
3.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the decision taken by the District Education Officer on the ground that the Act of 1979 and the rules framed thereunder do not contemplate the experience as a Master, Mistress as a condition-precedent for appointment as Head Master/Mistress and, therefore, the petitioner who possessed more than 12 years' experience as Teacher on the date of advertisement, was fully qualified for appointment as Headmistress and the District Education Officer has declined approval on wholly extraneous grounds.
4.
In the reply filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been pleaded that the decision taken by the District Education Officer is in accordance with the Government instructions contained in letter dated 16.10.1968 (Annexure R-1) and the letter dated 181972 (Annexure R-2).
According to the respondents, for appointment to the post of Head Master/Headmistress, a candidate is required to possess experience of 8 years on the post of Trained Master/Mistress/Lecturer and as the petitioner did not possess such experience, she was not entitled to be appointed.
Respondents have further pleaded that the advertisement issued by the Managing Committee of the School was not in conformity with the rules of 1981 because it did not indicate the number of posts and the requisite qualifications.
Yet another plea raised by the respondents is that the representative of the District Education Officer was not a member of the Selection Committee and in his absence, the Selection Committee cannot be treated as having been properly constituted.
5.
In its separate reply, respondent No. 3 has pleaded that appointment of the petitioner as Headmistress was subject to confirmation by the Education Department and once the District Education Officer declined to approve the appointment of the petitioner, the Managing Committee was right in not giving appointment to the petitioner as Headmistress.
According to respondent No. 3, the petitioner was working as J.BT Teacher in the grade of Rs. 125-300 and she cannot be treated as possessing the experience as Mistress so as to become entitled to be considered for appointment to the post of Headmistress.
6.
Argument of Mr. Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the petitioner possessed qualifications enumerated in the appendix appended to the Rules of 1981 and, therefore, on the basis of same qualifications which do not find mention in the appendix, petitioner could not have been treated ineligible.
Learned counsel argued that the only reason assigned by the District Education Officer for declining approval to the appointment of the petitioner is extraneous to the scope of the rules and, therefore, the decision taken by respondent No. 2 should be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents have laid emphasis on annexures R-1 and R-2 in support of their argument that for recruitment to the post of Head Master/Mistress, a person should possess requisite experience on the next lower post.
According to the learned counsel appointment of a person not having experience as Trained Master/Mistress/Lecturer would lead to frustration amongst other teachers.
Another argument advanced by the learned counsel is that the very composition of the Selection Committee was contrary to Rule 7 of the Rules, and, therefore, appointment made on the recommendations of a defective Selection Committee should not be allowed to be legalised by an order of the Court.
Learned counsel pointed out that a representative of the District Education Officer was not present in the meeting of the Sub-Committee (Selection Committee) and, therefore, no duly constituted Sub-Committee had made recommendations in favour of the Petitioner.
Learned A.A.G.
Punjab made an additional submission to the effect that the very advertisement was contrary to the Scheme of the Act and the rules and, therefore, the petitioner who was selected on the basis of a defective advertisement, should not be given any relief by this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Before examining the issue as to whether the respondents are justified in relying upon annexures R-1 and R-2 to support their plea that the Petitioner was not qualified to be appointed as Headmistress, I shall dispose of the last two contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
The objection regarding constitution of the Selection Committee or defects in advertisement are not the grounds on which the District Education Officer has declined approval to the appointment of the petitioner.
A perusal of annexure P-4 unmistakably shows that the only ground on which the District Education Officer refused to approve the appointment of the Petitioner is that the Petitioner does not possess the requisite experience as a Mistress.
No other reason has been assigned by the District Education Officer for his disapproval of the appointment of the Petitioner.
Undisputedly, annexure P-4 is a public document and, therefore, its legality can be examined only on the basis of the reasons enumerated in that document.
Respondents cannot be permitted to support the decision of the District Education Officer for reasons which are not contained in annexure P-4.
In Commissioner of Police Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, A.I.R. 1952 Bombay 16, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that legality of a public order can be examined in the light of the reasons given in that order and reasons enumerated in the pleadings of the parties cannot be made basis for sustaining or not sustaining the legality of such public order.
The observations made by the Apex Court in this context are as under : -  "Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a statutory authority cannot be construed in the light of explanations subsequently given by the Officer making the order of what he meant, or of what was in his mind or what he intended to do public orders made by public authorities are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect the actions and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and must be construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order itself."
The same proposition of law has been laid down by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Mohinder Singh Gill v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi, A.I.R.1978 SC 851.
In that case, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "When a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise .
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional ground later brought out" Even otherwise, in my opinion, the objection of learned counsel for the respondents about the so-called defect in the constitution of the Sub- Committee (Selection Committee) is without any substance.
Neither of the respondents have pleaded that the District Education Officer or his representative or any other member of the Selection Committee had not been given notice about the date of selection and on account of that reason the District Education Officer or his representative could not remain present at the time of selection.
In the absence of any such plea, it shall have to be presumed that the members of the Selection Committee were duly notified about the date of Selection/interview.
If the District Education Officer or his representative though it appropriate not to attend the proceedings of the Selection Committee on the appointed dated, composition of the Sub-Committee (Selection Committee) cannot be termed as defective.
Above all, it has to be noted that neither the Act of 1979 nor the rules framed thereunder contemplate any particular forum for the meeting of the Selection Committee.
It is also not the case of the respondents that majority of the members of the Selection Committee were not present at the time of Selection.
In the absence of any statutory provision specifying the corum of the Sub-Committee (Selection Committee) and in the absence of any plea to the effect that the majority of the members of the Selection Committee were absent on the appointed day, the mere fact that one of the members of the Selection Committee did not attend the meeting, will not have the effect of vitiating the proceedings of the Committee.
This proposition of law finds support form the Supreme Court decision in Ishwar Chandra v. Satyanarain Singh and others, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 1812.
8.
In regard to the so called defect in the advertisement, I may only mention that no candidate who fulfilled the conditions of eligibility, has come forward with a plea that he was prevented from making an application for the purpose of Selection to the post of Head Mistess on account of any vagueness in the advertisement.
So far as the Sub-Committee (Selection Committee) and the Managing Committee are concerned, they did not find any defect in the process of selection.
They did not feel handicapped in making selection on the basis of advertisement issued by respondent No3.
Even the District Education Officer did not feel any difficulty in considering the case of the petitioner for approval of her appointment.
Therefore, the so called defect in the advertisement will be deemed to be in consequential and such defect can have no effect on the merit of the Selection of the petitioner or her appointment as Headmistress.
9.
Coming to main issue of controversy, I may preface my consideration with the observation that both the parties are in agreement that recruitment to the post of Headmistress is required to be made under the provisions of the rules.
The post of Headmaster finds mention at Sr. No.2 in the appendix appended to the rules of 1981.
Qualifications prescribed for recruitment to this post are : -  2.
Headmaster Degree of a recognised University with BT, B.Ed., or Senior Basic Training with the following minimum teaching experience :- (I) in the case of MA or MSc.
with M.Ed, six years; (II) in the case of MA or MSc.
with BT, or B.Ed.
seven years ; (III) in the case of BA or B.Sc.
with BT or B.Ed.
eight years ; (IV) in the case of DP Ed. eight years from the date physical Education was introduced compulsory in the schools; and  (V) in the case of BA or B.Sc.
with M.Ed.
seven years.
A look at the above quoted qualifications shows that the only requirement contemplated by the rules is of teaching experience.
There is no reference to the requirement of teaching experience on a particular post.
Therefore, the view taken by the District Education Officer as well as the argument of learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioner was not qualified because she did not possess 8 years teaching experience as Mistress is not supported by the provisions of the rules.
Apparently, the District Education Officer had proceeded on an unfounded assumption that a candidate must possess requisite experience as Mistress.
It also appears to me that the District Education Officer was misled by the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide annexures R-1 and R-2.
No doubt these instructions do contemplate the experience as Mistress for recruitment to the post of Headmistress, but it is to be noted that the instructions contained in annexure R-1 relate to the recruitment under the Punjab Education Rules to Class III posts and annexure R-2 only deals with counting of service as Lecturer to fulfil the condition of 8 years experience.
These two documents cannot be pressed into service by the respondents to support the view taken by the District Education Officer about the eligibility of the petitioner for the simple reason that both these documents were issued much prior to the enactment of the Act of 1979 and the rules framed thereunder.
These instructions were very much in existence when the Legislature of Punjab enacted the Act of 1979 and the Government framed Rules of 1981.
The very fact that neither the Legislature nor the Government have thought it proper to incorporate the condition of teaching experience on the post of Mistress as a condition precedent for eligibility for recruitment as Headmistress is indicative of the fact that the rule-making authority has not considered it appropriate or necessary to prescribe the teaching experience as Mistress for the purpose of appointment on the post of Headmistress.
In my considered view, the expression minimum teaching experience" used in Column II of appendix to the rules of 1981 cannot be read as "minimum teaching experience as mistress".
Ordinarily, this Court cannot by the process of interpretation, add or subject from the language of the statute and in my opinion, there are no compelling reasons for this Court to re-write the rule so as to read the requirement of teaching experience on the post of Mistress as a condition for the purpose of appointment as Headmistress.
10.
In view of the above, it must be held that the decision taken by the District Education Officer vide annexure P-4 is contrary to the statutory provisions contained in the Rules of 1981 and once it is held that the said decision of the District Education Officer is legally unsustainable, right of the petitioner to be appointed as Headmistress, which was put under cloud on account of disapproval by the District Education Officer, will have to be recognised by respondent No. 3.
Logically, the petitioner will have a right to be treated in the service of Kamalia Khalsa High School, Kapurthala.
11.
In the result, the petition is allowed and annexures P-4 and P-5 are declared illegal and hereby quashed.
The District Education Officer is directed to give approval to the appointment of the petitioner as Head Mistress.
The petitioner shall be treated as Headmistress for all purposes but she shall not be entitled to be paid salary as Headmistress till the date of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.