Harphul Singh Brar, J - As agreed between the parties, this Letters Patent Appeal is being disposed of at this stage.
However, along with this appeal, we are deciding another Letters Patent Appeal No. 1005 of 1994 filed by Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2 (with this LPA).
In this Letters Patent Appeal, a prayer has been made by the appellant to set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge, dated May 19, 1994 vide which the Writ Petition filed by him was dismissed.
2.
The factual position, briefly stated, is, thus, VK Jain, petitioner-appellant (hereinafter called the appellant) had challenged through a Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, an order dated September 8, 1993 (annexed as Annexure P-8 with the petition) of the Punjab Government vide which Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2 was promoted as Chief Engineer in preference to the appellant who describes himself as admittedly senior to him.
3.
It is stated in the petition that the appellant has decidedly better record of service than that of Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2 and was admittedly senior to him as Superintending Engineer.
He was promoted as Officiating Superintending Engineer on June 10, 1982 and was prematurely retired from service on September 25, 1989, but the aforesaid order of retirement of the appellant was ultimately set aside by the Supreme Court and he was reinstated as Superintending Engineer by the Punjab Government vide order, dated October 3, 1990.
4.
It is then stated in the petition that by an order dated December 31, 1990 in one departmental enquiry the punishment of censure was imposed upon the appellant.
This punishment of censure was inflicted upon him after 22 years from the date of the incident, although he was not actually, involved in that incident.
It is clear from the record that the censure related to the incident of 1969 and it was due to the inaction on the part of the Government that the enquiry was initiated only in 1989.
This minor punishment of censure in any case related to the incident of 1969 and had absolutely no effect on the appellant's right to be promoted to the post of the Chief Engineer.
5.
It is then stated in the petition that save for this punishment of censure, there was absolutely nothing against the appellant and his confidential record from 1983 onwards is very Good/Outstanding.
Thus, the appellant was fully eligible and was suitable for being considered for promotion right from the date he was reinstated in service, that is, 1990 and at any rate in September, 1993 when respondent No. 2 who is admittedly junior to the appellant, had been promoted vide the impugned order, Annexure P-8.
6.
It is then stated in the petition that factually what happened is that under the fear of contempt proceedings in Civil Miscellaneous No. 6550-CII of 1993 in COCP No. 709 of 1991, the State of Punjab had ordered the promotion of respondent No. 2.
Shri GS Cheema who had actually ordered the promotion of respondent No. 2, was impleaded as respondent in the Contempt Petition on August 27, 1993 when the Contempt Petition had rather been finally decided and filed.
On September 6, 1993 when the case was adjourned, the learned Single Judge observed that the judgment should be complied with and on the very next day, the order of promotion was passed.
Even though the appellant was senior to respondent No. 2 and was fully eligible and qualified for promotion, yet it is only under the threat of contempt proceedings that the appellant was ignored and respondent No. 2 was promoted without considering the case of the appellant.
7.
It is then alleged in the petition that respondent No. 1, that is, the State has, in fact, misunderstood the orders of this Court passed in the contempt proceedings.
There was no specific order of this Court directing respondent No. 1 to promote respondent No. 2 only.
Respondent No. 2 had only to be considered for promotion.
However, completely misunderstanding the orders of this Court under a fear of proceedings of contempt, respondent No. 1 has ordered the promotion of respondent No. 2, by ignoring the appellant who is admittedly senior and has better service record than that of respondent No. 2.
8.
It is then stated in the petition that when the State of Punjab did not consider respondent No. 2 for promotion, he moved Civil Miscellaneous Application in C.W.P.
No. 2247 of 1991 which was disposed of on April 5, 1991 on the statement made by the Additional Advocate-General, Punjab, that he would be considered along with the other three candidates when promotions are made to the post of Chief Engineer.
A copy of that order is annexed as Annexure P-5 with the petition.
Being dissatisfied with the said order Annexure P-5, respondent No. 2 filed a Letters Patent Appeal against the same being LPA No. 309 of 1991.
That Letters Patent Appeal was also dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on May 7, 1991 on the statement of the Additional Advocate-General, Punjab, that the name of respondent No. 2 would be considered when promotions are made to the post of Chief Engineer.
A copy of that order in the LPA is annexed as Annexure P-7 to the Writ Petition.
9.
It is then stated that besides the contempt proceedings mentioned in the Writ Petition, respondent No. 2 had also filed two Writ Petitions in this Court after the year 1991, one of them being C.W.P.
No. 11016 of 1991.
In this petition, respondent No. 2 claimed promotion to the post of Chief Engineer with effect from April 30, 1990 and also prayed that the State be directed not to issue any charge-sheet to him.
In that petition, in the written statement filed by the Government was also appended a charge-sheet under Rule 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, wherein serious allegations of bogus/excessive purchases at high rates and also regarding wasteful manner to connive at embezzlement of Government funds were levelled against respondent No. 2.
In this view of the matter, the said Writ Petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on August 19, 1991.
A copy of that order is attached as Annexure P-10 to the Writ Petition.
10.
After the dismissal of that Writ Petition respondent No. 2 again filed another Civil Writ Petition No. 3021 of 1992 in this Court, wherein once again respondent No. 2 prayed that firstly the charge-sheet issued to him along with the written statement in C.W.P.
No. 11016 of 1991 be quashed, and secondly, it was prayed that during the pendency of the petition no person other than respondent No. 2 be promoted to the post of Chief Engineer.
Again, a Division Bench of this Court did not accede to the request of respondent No. 2 to quash the charge-sheet but rather directed the respondents to complete the enquiry against him within three months from December 19, 1992 and with these observations that Writ Petition was disposed of.
A copy of the order is attached as Annexure P-11.
11.
It is stated in the Writ Petition that despite the fact that respondent No. 2 filed two Writ Petitions claiming promotion to the post of Chief Engineer yet both the Writ Petitions were dismissed and no substantial relief was granted to respondent No. 2.
It is further clarified in the petition that when departmental enquiry was still pending against respondent No. 2, he moved two applications, being CM No. 6550-CII of 1993 and CM No. 6549-CII of 1993 in COCP No. 709 of 1991 which had already been decided on November 15, 1991 and against which the Contempt Petition had also been disposed of.
Vide these two application, firstly respondent No. 2 prayed that Shri GM Cheema be impleaded as respondent in place of Shri Rajinder Singh who had since died, and secondly, prayed for initiation of contempt proceedings against Shri GS Cheema on the ground that the judgment of the learned Single Judge in Contempt Petition had still not been complied with.
The application to implead Shri GS Cheema was allowed and in the other Civil Miscellaneous Application, notice was issued for September 6, 1993 vide order of the learned Single Judge, dated August 27, 1993.
On September 6, 1993, the case was adjourned to September 22, 1993 and it was also observed that it would be desirable if this Court's directions dated November 15, 1993 were complied with.
On September 22, 1993, the learned Single Judge disposed of the petition in view of the fact that the promotion order had since been passed.
12.
A reply has been filed by the Joint Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Public Works (B&R Branch) wherein it has been stated that the post of Chief Engineer is a selection post and no claim could be made on the lea of seniority alone; that at one stage the appellant was reverted to the post of Executive Engineer on August 9, 1980 on account of a departmental enquiry and he was again promoted as Superintending Engineer on June 10, 1982, that the officer was prematurely retired from service on August 25, 1989 on the basis of his overall service record and he was, however, reinstated in compliance of the order of the Supreme Court with effect from October 5, 1990, that the punishment of 'censure' was rightly awarded to the appellant after affording him full opportunity; that the panel for the promotion to the post of Chief Engineer did not recommend the name of the appellant for the post of Chief Engineer; that the time of the appellant was duly considered for the post of Chief Engineer against the 2nd vacancy alone with respondent No. 2 but he was not approved by the competent authority for promotion on account of bad service record, that the allegation levelled by the appellant that the was not fit for promotion is baseless and on the contrary the name of respondent No. 2 was also considered along with the appellant and respondent No. 2 was found fit for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer, that respondent No. 2 has managed to secure favourable orders is baseless, that there was an order of this Court that the State Government should consider the case of promotion to the post of Chief Engineer and in the panel the name of the appellant was also considered; that besides the appellant Shri Kuldip Singh Sidhu who was also senior to the present appellant was also considered but ignored.
13.
In a separate reply filed by Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2, it has been averred that his claim was considered by a panel and it was, thereafter, that the answering respondent was selected and appointed as Chief Engineer; that even after his re-appointment as a consequence of the order of the Supreme Court the claim of the appellant was considered alone in the year 1993; that the effective date of promotion to the post of Chief Engineer was May 8, 1991 whereas the appellant was censured by an order of the Punjab Government on December 31, 1990; that the service record of the appellant for the year 1988-89 and 1992-93 shows that it was adjudged as 'Average'; that the appellant's promotion as Superintending Engineer was subject to the decision of the inquiry pending against him; that in respect of another inquiry the case of stoppage page of two increments pertaming to the appellant is still pending with the Punjab Public Service Commission; that the appellant has highlighted only five reports and not the remaining reports which were average or above average.
14.
A preliminary objection was also raised on behalf of the respondents that the Writ Petition was not maintainable as the promotion of respondent No. 2 had been challenged in the Supreme Court and that aforesaid petition before the Supreme Court was withdrawn without specific permission to withdraw the petition.
The preliminary objection was rejected by the learned Single Judge as Division Bench of this Court at the Motion stage had allowed the petitioner (appellant herein) to withdraw his petition pending in the Supreme Court and since it was withdrawn from the Supreme Court when this petition was at the Motion stage in this Court, and the permission of withdrawal actually granted by the Supreme Court, thus, this petition could not be considered as barred under Order II, rule 2, Code of Civil Procedure.
After going through the pleadings of the parties and hearing the learned counsel on both sides, so far as the punishment of censure awarded to the appellant vde order, dated December 31, 1990 is concerned, the learned Single Judge held that censure could not be circumstanced in ignoring the appellant from promotion to the next rank, as according to the earned Judge, censure was a minor punishment.
The order of promotion of the respondent was upheld as according to the learned Judge, the post of Chief Engineer was a selection post and merits of both the appellant as well as the respondent were considered by the State Government and respondent No. 2 was selected on the basis of merit.
It did not appear to be a patent error requiring interference of the Court, according to the learned Judge.
Resultantly, the petition was dismissed.
Hence, this Letters Patent Appeal.
15.
The learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the judgment of the learned Single Judge mainly on the following grounds :-  i) the learned Single Judge has held that since the appellant had been considered, therefore, this Court would not go into the matter and had dismissed the Writ Petition primarily on that ground.
However, actually the argument raised by the appellant has not been considered by the learned Single Judge at all.
It was the stand of the State that the appellant as also respondent No. 1 had been considered for promotion as per the judgment of this Court in COCP No. 709 of 1991 and that consideration had taken place with effect from May 8, 1991.
However, the argument raised by the appellant before the learned Single Judge was that in view of subsequent decisions of the Division Benches of this Court, the direction in the Contempt Petition no longer remained operative (the decisions of this Court are annexed as Annexures P-10 and P-11 with the Writ Petition) and the Review Order of Annexure P-10 had been attached by the respondent himself as Anneuxre R2/7 with his reply, After the Contempt Petition had been decided on November 15, 1991, a charge-sheet had been served on respondent No. 2.
The charge-sheet was for a major penalty.
However, ultimately punishment of censure was proposed to be inflicted which could not be inflicted due to the fact that respondent No. 2 had approached this Court by way of Writ Petition and the same is pending in this Court.
For these reasons, the two Division Benches of this Court had subsequently held that the consideration for promotion was to take place only after proceedings in the charge-sheet had attained finally and in the light of the order passed in the said proceedings.
However, since respondent No. 2 knew that his record would not justify his promotion if the consideration took place in 1991, he moved two Civil Miscellaneous Applications in 1993 in a Contempt Petition which already stood disposed of and against which Letters Patent Appeal also stood abated.
In the Civil Misc.
Application even the contemner-respondent was changed in a decided Contempt Petition and, thereafter, on September 6, 1993 it was decided by this Court that contempt order be complied with.
On September 7, 1993 itself the promotion order was passed; ii) actually there was no consideration of the appellant at all because the order had been passed under the threat of contempt proceedings and this was clear from the order of promotion itself which is attached as Annexure P-8 with the Writ Petition.
In these circumstances, the appellant has contended that despite the fact that in 1993 his record of service was good and there was nothing adverse against him and be being the senior-most eligible person, should have been promoted.
He was not considered at all and respondent No. 2 against whom disciplinary proceeding were pending, was promoted only under the threat of contempt proceedings, which fact is clear from a reading of the impugned order, Annexure P-8, itself; iii) the consideration for promotion of respondent No. 2 with effect from May 8, 1991 was itself wholly against the orders of the Division Benches of this Court attached as Annexure P-10 and P-11 with the Writ Petition.
This was for the reason that this consideration had taken place only because of the order in the Contempt Petition.
However, the order in the Contempt Petition did not survive after the two orders passed by the Division Benches, referred to above, and more so when the order of contempt was very much before the Division Benches at the time the order, Annexure P-11 was passed.
In the Civil Miscellaneous Application moved in the decided Contempt Petition the fact that there were two orders of the Division Benches, thereafter, was not brought to the notice of the Court.
Therefore, consideration of the appellant and private respondent No. 2 with effect from May 1991, was itself totally against the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court; iv) Even if it is assumed that the consideration was to take place with effect from the year 1991, yet since the consideration actually took place in 1993, the respondents were bound to note the fact that there were no departmental proceedings pending against the appellant as in the meanwhile all departmental proceedings against the appellant stood dropped by respondent No. 1 except for one proceeding where the appellant had been censured and which, even the learned Single Judge has found, could not be used to the prejudice of the appellant.
It has been specifically stated by the respondents in their written statement that even the consideration was actually taking place in 1993 by which all departmental proceedings had already finished against the appellant yet since the promotion was with effect from May 8, 1991 according to the respondents at that stage there were some departmental proceedings pending against the appellant due to which the appellant could not be promoted.
This stand of the respondents is wholly untenable.
The learned Single Judge had not dealt any of these contentions at all.
It has been simply held by the learned Single Judge that according to the respondents, a consideration did take place, therefore, the appellant was to be non-suited on this count alone.
The learned Single Judge in concluding paragraph of the judgment had adverted to the fact against the appellant also some punishment was recommended and the case was referred to the Punjab Public Service Commission and, therefore, it is not that the appellant had an unblemished record.
However, it is respectfully brought to the notice of this Court that as far back as January 21, 1993, the Government which is appellant Appointing Authority, had already written to the Commission that the said charge-sheet had already been filed.
16.
The learned counsel for the appellant has cited State of Uttar Pradesh v. Shri Brahm Datt Sharma and another, AIR 1987 SC 943, for the proposition that when COCP No. 709 of 1991 has been finally decided and even appeal against that has been finally decided, then it could not be survived by filing Civil Miscellaneous Applications in the already decided Contempt Petition and on the basis of those Civil Miscellaneous Applications procuring fresh orders, which has been so done by respondent No. 2 in the year 1993.
17.
The learned counsel for the respondents have argued that the appeal is liable to be dismissed as the learned Single Judge has rightly held that the post of Chief Engineer being a selection post and both the appellant as well as the respondent were considered for the same by the Government, and the respondent was selected for appointment as Chief Engineer.
The learned Counsel further argued that this Court cannot interfere in the selection as it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over decisions of Selection Committee and scruitnise the relative merits of the candidates.
He has cited Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 SC 434 for the said proposition.
18.
In a separate Appeal (LPA No. 1005 of 1994) filed by respondent No. 2 against the same judgment of the learned Single Judge, the learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the finding of the learned Single Judge on the maintainability of the Writ Petition filed by this appellant before this Court and the finding that a minor punishment of censure awarded to the appellant could not be a ground for ignoring him for the selection of the post of Chief Engineer.
19.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have gone through their lengthy pleadings.
We were reluctant to go through the notings on the files wherein the case of respondent No. 2 was considered for promotion as Chief Engineer particularly in view of the authority, viz. Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke's case (supra), cited by the learned counsel for the respondents, but for the purpose of satisfying ourselves, as to whether the impugned order dated September 7, 1993 has been passed on merits or on some other impermissible grounds and considerations against law and particularly under the possible threat of Contempt of Court.
What impelled us to take this step is the very wording of the impugned order itself.
It will be advisable to reproduce the wording of the order which is as under :  "GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS (B&R I BR.)
ORDER OF THE GOVERNOR OF PUNJAB In pursuance of Punjab and Haryana High Court orders dated 15th November, 1991 in Civil Original Contempt Petition No. 709 of 1991 and order dated 9th July, 1993 in Contempt Appeal No. 8 of 1991 - Shri Rajinder Singh, IAS, the then Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Public Works, B&R Branch, Shri KB Rai, Superintending Engineer Public Works Department B&R Branch is promoted as Chief Engineer, Pb.
Public Work Department, B&R Branch, in the pay scale Rs. 5900-6700 with immediate effect.
2.
The above promotion is subject to the pending Court cases regarding their seniority in the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class- I/reservation policy.
GS Cheema, Chandigarh, Dated 7th Sept, 1993.
Secretary, Public Works Depart.
20.
We have gone through the relevant notings on the file, wherein the case of selection-appointment of Shri KB Rai as Chief Engineer was considered.
After going through the relevant record and the noting on the file, it is very difficult, if not impossible for us to reach another conclusion except that the impugned order of promotion, dated September 7, 1993 of Shri KB Rai as Chief Engineer has not been passed on merits but is the creation and result of a threat of contempt proceedings and particularly on the basis of the orders of contempt mentioned in the impugned order of promotion itself and an order, dated August 27, 1993 in which notice was given to the State for September 6, 1993 passed in COCP No. 709 of 1991 which stood finally disposed of on November 15, 1991 and against which the appeal also stood finally decided as abated on July 9, 1993.
21.
Respondent No. 2, Shri KB Rai had filed two Civil Miscellaneous Applications in the year 1993 in the already decided Contempt Petition on (COCP No. 709 of 1991) on November 15, 1991 and was successful in getting impleaded Shri GS Cheema, the new Secretary as a party in the said Contempt Petition and in the other Civil Miscellaneous Application, securing an order from the Court for considering and deciding his case with effect from May 8, 1991 and that also without bring it to the notice of the learned Single Judge about the two Division Bench orders of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11016 of 1991, dated August 19, 1991 and in Civil Writ Petition No. 3021 of 1992, dated December 8, 1992.
These two petitions were filed by Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2 himself and none else.
It would be relevant to reproduce both these orders hereunder :  "i) Civil Writ Petition No. 11016 of 1991 ORDER Present :- Mr. SS Nijjar, Sr. Advocate with Miss Seema Dhillon, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Mr. OP Goel, Addl.
AG Punjab for the respondents.
The learned Additional Advocate General stated at the Bar that the enquiry pending against the petitioner shall be concluded within six months and that the petitioner shall be considered for promotion as Chief Engineer as per rules and regulations.
Under these circumstances no case to interfere is made out on writ jurisdiction side, especially When some enquiry regarding misappropriation of Government money against the petitioner is going on and charge-sheet was issued on 2371991 and the post of Chief Engineer is not a promotional post but a selection post.
Dismissed at this stage.
Sd/- JS Sekhon, Judge.
Sd/- SS Rathor, Judge.
1981991. ii) Civil Writ Petition No. 3021 of 1992 After hearing the counsel for the parties, and considering the material on record and the circumstances of the case and also keeping in view the larger interests of justice, we deem it proper that the enquiry against the petitioner be not stifled and at the same time if the petitioner is found innocent of the charges framed against him, he be not in any manner, prejudiced by this enquiry.
We consequently direct that the enquiry on the impugned charge-sheet be held against the petitioner and it be completed within three months from today.
Counsel for the petitioner has given an undertaking on behalf of the petitioner that the petitioner would in every manner co-operate to ensure that the enquiry is completed within this period.
The petitioner, who is present in Court also endorses this undertaking.
Counsel for respondent on his part is directed to furnish to the counsel for the petitioner a copy of preliminary enquiry report forming the basis of the impugned charge-sheet.
The parties are directed to appear before Enquiry Officer on 151292.
In passing that order, we further direct that if the petitioner is exonerated of the charges framed against him, he shall be considered and given promotion from such date, as he would have been given such promotion, had this enquiry not been initiated against him.
This writ petition is disposed of in these terms.
SS Sodhi, J GC Garg, J 8121992.
22.
It is strange enough to note as to how Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2 could reopen the proceedings by means of a fresh Miscellaneous Application when COCP No. 709 of 1991 was finally decided on November 15, 1991 by a learned Single Judge of this Court.
It was not permissible to reopen the proceedings which already stood terminated by final disposal of the Contempt Petition by means of a Miscellaneous Application.
We get support for this view of onus from a decision of the Apex Court in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Shri Brahm Datt Sharma and another, AIR 1987 SC 943.
The relevant files speak themselves that in the absence of the orders of contempt mentioned in the impugned order itself and the order, dated August 27, 1993 in which notice was given to the State of Punjab through the newly added Secretary, Public Works Department, Shri GS Cheema, through a Miscellaneous Application in an already decided Contempt Petition (COCP No. 709 of 1991) on November 15, 1991 by the learned Single Judge of this Court as already mentioned above, the impugned order of promotion could not have been passed.
Inspection of the files further revealed that the Authority selecting shri KBS Rai as Chief Engineer even misinterpreted the order of the learned Single Judge in the above-referred to Contempt Petition.
Even the learned Single Judge had directed the State to consider respondent No. 2 for selection to the post of Chief Engineer but had not directed them to appoint him any circumstance.
Even otherwise, no direction could be given by the learned Single Judge in a Contempt Petition to consider/appoint respondent No. 2 on particular considerations or from a particular date.
Even if the respondent-State considered it as a direction of the learned Single Judge in the Contempt Petition decided on November 15, 1991, the effect of that order was washed off by the subsequent orders of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11016 of 1991 and Civil Writ Petition No. 3021 of 1992, particularly when these petitions were filed by Shri KB Rai, respondent No. 2 himself.
It is specifically stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 11016 of 1991 as under :-  "Under these circumstances no case to interfere is made out on writ jurisdiction side, especially when some enquiry regarding misappropriation of Government money against the petitioner is going on and charge-sheet was issued on 2371991 and the post of Chief Engineer is not a promotional post but a selection post.
Dismissed at this stage.
Sd/- JS Sekhon, Judge.
Sd/- SS Rathor, Judge.
1981991 23.
Other Writ Petition (CWP No. 3021 of 1992) filed by Shri KB Rai was also dismissed on December 18, 1992, by a Division Bench of this Court.
In this order, the learned Judges did not accede to the request of Shri KB Rai to stop the enquiry going on against him.
The learned Single Judge did not advert to this aspect of the matter at all, though these facts were very much material for the decision of this case.
24.
Viewed from any angle, we are unable to persuade ourselves to sustain the impugned order of promotion of respondent No. 2, dated September 7, 1993.
Consequently, Letters Patent Appeal No. 416 of 1994 is allowed.
The impugned order (Annexure P8) is quashed and the Writ Petition is allowed.
25.
In the circumstances of this case, however, the respondent-State shall be at liberty to make a fresh selection in accordance with law after giving full opprotunity to all the eligible aspirants for the post of Chief Engineer.
Letters Patent Appeal No. 1005 of 1994.
26.
In view of the arguments noted in para 18 earlier, we do not find any force in the Letters Patent Appeal, filed by Shri KB Rai appellant against the same Judgment of the learned Single Judge, dated May 19, 1994, against which we have already allowed the Appeal.
We do not find any infirmity in the judgment of the learned Single Judge while holding that the Writ Petition filed by Shri VK Jain was maintainable and the minor punishment of censure awarded in the year 1990 could not be taken into account while considering his case for promotion.
27.
After discussing the whole matter on the question of maintainability of the petition, the learned Single Judge has held as under :-  "However, the learned counsel for the petitioner hag referred to the proceedings dated 1821994 whereas Division Bench of this Court at the motion stage allowed time to the petitioner to withdraw his petition pending in the Supreme Court and since it was withdrawn from the Supreme Court when the petition was at the motion stage in this Court and the permission of withdrawal actually granted by the Supreme Court (Annexure A) it cannot be considered to be barred under Order 2 rule 2 C.P.C." We are not inclined to interfere with this finding of the learned Single Judge which is based upon sound reasoning.
28.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge that censure in this particualr case could not be taken into consideration while considering the case of Shri VK Jain for promotion can also not be disturbed as it is clearly established on the record that the appellant was censured on the basis of an incident of the year 1969, the charge-sheet being served upon him in the year 1989 and the punishment of censure imposed in the year 1990, that is, after 22 years of the incident.
The learned Single Judge made a right conclusion after considering the factual and legal position of the case in hand.
29.
In view of what has been stated above, Letters Patent Appeal No. 1005 of 1994 filed by Shri KS Rai is, thus, dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.