TS Doabia, J - This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The brief facts out of which this petition arises may be noticed as under :  2.
The petitioner was employed as a Conductor with the Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the 'Corporation').
On 17th February, 1973 the bus he was looking after was checked by the Flying Squad.
It was plying on the Morena - Shivpuri route.
It was found that fourteen and half passengers were travelling without tickets and no fare had been realised from them.
It was further noticed that the petitioner had seven tickets in his hand and these were in the process of being delivered to the passengers.
The services of the petitioner were brought to an end by an order passed on 12th July, 1973.
A copy of this order has been placed on the record as Annexure 'A'.
This reads as under :  "The services of Shri Har Charan Lal, Conductor, S/o Shri Rati Ram Badge No. 1470 is hereby terminated under service Regulation 69 of the M.P.S.R.T.
Corporation w.e.f.
12773 afternoon.
As provided under the said regulation, he will be paid 60 days pay in lieu of 60 days notice."
3.
The petitioner challenged his termination in the Labour Court, Gwalior.
4.
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that misconduct against the petitioner has been established and dismissed the application.
The petitioner then filed an appeal before the Industrial Court which was also dismissed.
The petitioner challenged both these orders in this Court in Misc.
Petition No. 82 of 1978.
That petition was allowed.
The orders of the Labour Court and Industrial Court were set aside.
The Labour Court was directed to decide the case afresh in accordance with law and the observations made by the High Court in the order passed by it on 20th September, 1980.
5.
On remand, the learned Labour Court held that misconduct against the petitioner was not established.
It was further concluded that the order of termination from service was passed by way of victimisation.
The Labour Court directed reinstatement of the petitioner with full backwages.
The Respondent Corporation felt aggrieved against the order passed by the Labour Court and preferred an appeal before the Industrial Court.
The Industrial Court on re- appreciating the facts held that misconduct was proved.
It was held that seven tickets were in the hands of the petitioner which could be misused by him by passing them over to other passengers who might board the bus.
The order of the Labour Court was set aside.
The findings recorded by the Industrial Court are as under :  (1) that, the bus had moved 2-1/2 kms.
from the fare-station Bairad;  (2) that, the passengers had boarded the bus from Bairad and carried upto a place 3 kms.
where they were found to be without tickets;  (3) that, seven tickets could very easily be issued to other passengers; and  (4) that, fare was not actually realised.
On the basis of the above findings, the Industrial Court came to the conclusion that the petitioner was guilty of misconduct.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the findings recorded by the Industrial Court are not in accordance with law and even the conclusions arrived at by it are arrived on the basis of a case which was not pleaded by either party.
7.
His further contention that holding of the enquiry is mandatory and for this purpose he has placed reliance on Rule 12(4).
According to him, no enquiry was held by the employer and therefore, the findings recorded by the Court below have been recorded without looking into the material on record.
It is argued that unless and until enquiry was held, no findings could be recorded either by the Labour Court or the Industrial Court.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court reported as Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress and others, AIR 1991 SC 101 : 1991(1) SCT 675 (SC).
8.
The learned counsel further argued that even if the facts as stated by the Industrial Court are taken to be correct even then no case could be said to be made out against the petitioner.
The bus had hardly moved 2-1/2 kms.
from the fare-station.
This would take 3 to 4 minutes.
According to him, it was physically not possible to issue tickets to all the passengers who boarded the bus from the fore-station within such a short time.
9.
I have examined the matter.
It is pertinent to note that the Labour Court had recorded an order in favour of the petitioner.
The evidence was recorded before the Labour Court.
No doubt the appellate court is within its rights to interfere with the order passed by the authority against whose order, an appeal has been filed yet some guidelines laid down in this regard with regard to the power of the appellate authority may be noticed.
10.
In Sarju Prashad v. Jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh, AIR 1951 SC 120, BK Mukherjee, J has stated the principle with regard to the appreciation of evidence as under :  "In such cases the appellate Court has got to bear in mind that it has not the advantage which the trial Judge had in having the witnesses before him and of observing the manner in which they deposed in Court.
This certainly does not mean that when an appeal lies on facts, the appellate Court is not competent to reverse a finding of fact arrived at by the trial Judge.
The rule is and it is nothing more than a rule of practice - that when there is conflict of oral evidence of the parties on any matter in issue and the decision hinges upon the credibility of the witnesses, then unless there is some special feature about the evidence of a particular witness which has escaped the trial Judge's notice or there is sufficient balance of improbability to displace his opinion as to where the credibility lies, the appellate Court should not interfere with the finding of the trial Judge on a question of fact."
11, The speech of Lord Thankerton in Watt v. Thomas, 1947 Appl.
Cases 484 again brings out the principles on the subject and it is useful to quote the same.
"I do not find it necessary to review the many decisions of this House, for it seems to me that the principle embodied therein is a simple one, and may be stated thus :  (1) Where a question of fact has been tried by a Judge without a jury, and there is no question of misdirection of himself by the Judge, an appellate Court which is disposed to come to a different conclusion on the printed evidence, should not do so unless it is satisfied that any advantage enjoyed by the trial Judge by reason of having seen and heard the witnesses, could not be sufficient to explain or justify the trial Judge's conclusion.
(2) The appellate Court may take the view that without having seen or heard the witnesses, it is not in a position to come to any satisfactory conclusion on the printed evidence.
(3) The appellate Court either because the reasons given by the trial Judge are not satisfactory, or because it unmistakably so appears from the evidence may be satisfied that he has not taken proper advantage of his having seen or heard the witnesses and the matter will then become at large for the appellate Court."
12.
Applying the aforementioned tests, can it be said that the finding recorded by the trial Judge which has been reversed by the appellate Court can be sustained.
It would be useful to notice what the Industrial Court said and commented about the order of remand passed by the High Court.
This reads as under :  "I have heard arguments and gone through the record.
At the outset, I may say that after a very careful reading of the order of the Hon'ble High Court I have not been able to understand it.
Ordinarily a person is victimised if he is made a victim or a scape-goat and is subjected to persecution, prosecution or punishment for no real fault or guilt of his'.
It is, therefore, manifest that if actual fault or guilt meriting the punishment is established such action will be rid of the taint of victimisation.
'It was so observed by the Supreme Court in Messrs. Bharat Iron Works v. BR Patel, 1976(32) F.I.R. 721.
When there was consistent finding of the Labour Court as well as of the Member Judge of Industrial Court that the misconduct of carrying of 14-1/2 passengers was established alongwith the history of several previous punishments, it obviously meant that the respondent was not punished for no fault of his own.
This obviously meant that the punishment of the respondent was not by way of victimisation as per aforesaid Supreme Court view."
(Emphasis supplied)  It appears that the Industrial Court had some preconceived notions and made the above observations which a normal judicial propriety would not permit to be made.
Without commenting any further, I leave the matter here only.
13.
I am also aware of the limitations which are there when description is to be exercised under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
14.
The sum and substance of the misconduct against the petitioner is that on 17th February, 1973 fourteen and half passengers were travelling without tickets and that the petitioner was in the process of issuing seven tickets.
It has further been alleged that the petitioner had not prepared tickets for the remaining passengers.
It is noteworthy that the bus had moved only 2-1/2 kms.
from the fare-station and the time consumed for this could be 3 to 4 minutes.
The petitioner had already prepared seven tickets and before he could issue the same the petitioner was intercepted.
Thus the conclusion that the petitioner had no intention to issue the tickets to the remaining passengers is based on conjectures.
None of the passengers have been examined and none of them have stated that they had parted with money but the tickets had not been issued.
The finding recorded by the Court below that the petitioner could very well have misused these tickets by issuing them to some other passengers is again based on conjectures.
As noticed above, there is no finding on the record that the petitioner had in fact realised the fare and that the same was going to be mis-appropriated by the petitioner.
15.
The Industrial Court has again held that looking to the overall wrong repeated history and the service record of the petitioner no interference could be made with the order of termination of the services of the petitioner.
This observation is made in para 17 of its order and it reads as under :  "Even though two or three of the misconducts recorded in the history sheet were ultimately held to be disproved still looking to the overall long repeated history of taking service calls for no interference."
Again this is a vague statement and in any case there is nothing on the record to indicate that the petitioner was informed that his past record would be taken into consideration in the matter of imposing punishment.
If this fact has not been brought to the notice of the petitioner and past record is taken into consideration then the final order cannot be said to be passed properly.
This view was expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of The State of Mysore v. K Manche Gowda, AIR 1964 SC 506.
16.
As noticed above, the Industrial Court appears to have not relished the order of remand and made certain observations which were not required to be made.
In any case as the Industrial Court has relied upon certain material which was not brought to the notice of the petitioner, there is no option but to quash the same.
17.
The petitioner has died during the pendency of the petition and an application was filed to bring on record his legal heirs.
The same is allowed.
The relief of reinstatement cannot be granted.
The monetary benefits which the petitioner would have been entitled to on account of the order passed by the Labour Court which is being sustained would now go to the legal heirs.