Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition, the precise grievance of the petitioner-Dr. RK Bahl, as canvassed by his counsel is that the petitioner was not a party in writ petition No. 3024 of 1988 filed by Shri KS Gill, decided on March 2, 1990 in which the benefit of military service was given to the petitioner.
2.
The facts, which led to the filing of the present writ petition are that Dr. RK Bahl joined the Punjab Education Department in the year 1961 as Lecturer which was a class-III post at that time.
The petitioner, respondent No. 2 and two other persons were selected and appointed as Principals vide order dated 28.5.1981.
The petitioner was selected as a general category candidate, whereas respondent No. 2 was selected against a post meant for the Ex-servicemen.
The inter se seniority of the petitioner and respondent No. 2 was fixed in accordance with their selection.
In the gradation/seniority list of Punjab Education Service Class-I (College Cadre) Officers, the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 6 while respondent No. 2 at Sr. No. 8.
Copy of the Gradation List/Seniority List is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
3.
After joining as Principal, respondent (sic) of benefit of military service rendered by him from October 10, 1963 to January 10, 1968 (the date on which the Emergency came to an end) towards, pay and seniority in the rank of Principal.
This representation was followed by a reminder dated 6th October, 1983 and another self-contained reminder dated 16th April, 1985, but the same was rejected on 2nd July, 1987 on the ground that the benefit had already been given to him by recruiting him as Principal against a post reserved for ex-servicemen and the seniority could not be assigned to him from a date prior to the date of his appointment.
However, the claim of respondent No. 2 was rejected.
Feeling aggrieved against the order of rejection, respondent No. 2 filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3024 of 1988.
This Court, vide its judgment dated March 2, 1990 while allowing the petition directed the respondent-State to grant the benefit of Military Service rendered by the petitioner towards his pay, increments, seniority and pension etc. under Rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The State of Punjab had preferred LPA No. 964 of 1990 against the said judgment which was also dismissed on 3171990.
4.
The sole plea of the learned counsel for petitioner is that since the petitioner was not a party to the earlier writ petition, the judgment rendered therein cannot adversely affect the right of the petitioner and respondent No. 2 cannot be placed over him in the seniority.
The petitioner had also contended that Rule 5(1) the Demobilized Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Service) Rules, 1968 is ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
5.
The State of Punjab as well as the private respondent have filed their separate written statements.
6.
Respondent No. 2 in his written statement has raised preliminary objections that the judgment rendered in earlier writ petition has attained finality and is binding upon the petitioner.
Therefore, the present writ petition is not maintainable.
In para 2 of the preliminary objection, it is stated that the petitioner has no right to challenge the validity of the judgment as the same has attained finality.
The other plea is that the petitioner has challenged the Demobilized Armed Forces (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968 and the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 which are no longer in existence as these Rules have already been repealed.
As such, the said Rules are not amenable to challenge  7.
The stand taken by the Punjab State is that respondent No. 2 was given the benefit of military service rendered by him towards the pay, increment, seniority and pension etc. under Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
8.
In writ petition No. 3024 of 1988, respondent No. 2 was given the benefit of military service rendered by him from 10th October, 1963 to 10th January, 1968 under the Statutory Rules i.e. by virtue of the provision of Rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
Since in that writ petition, respondent No. 2 had not claimed relief qua any person, it was not incumbent upon him to implead Dr. RK Bahl, the present petitioner, as a party.
9.
Having given thoughtful consideration to the arguments and after perusing the paper-book, this Court hardly finds any merit in the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
10.
It is revealed from the paper-book that respondent No. 2 was given benefit of military service under Rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, whereas in the present writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the vires of Rule 5(1) of the Demobilized Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968.
11.
The proposition of law is well settled that Short Service Commissioned Officers are entitled to weightage in recognition of their past service which is not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Moreover, the petitioner cannot challenge the judgment of this Court by filing the writ petition for the reason that the remedy open to the petitioner was either to file Special Leave Petition or Review Petition.
12.
It is no longer res integra that a judicial order passed by the High Court in or in relation to proceedings pending before it are not amenable to be corrected by writ of certiorari under Article 32(2) or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It was so held by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar v. State of Maharashtra and another, AIR 1967 SC 1.
13.
The Supreme Court in a latest judgment in Ram Janam Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another, Judgment Today 1984(1) SC 187, held that a person who is not impleaded as a party in the writ application before the High Court, but directly affected by the judgment can challenge the correctness of the judgment of the High Court either by filing a Review Petition before the High Court or by filing a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court.
This Court is of the considered view that in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court the remedy open to the petitioner was by way of SLP or the Review Petition.
14.
Even on merit, in the instant case, there is no violation of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution while extending the benefit of military service to the Ex-Army Officers.
The special benefits are extended to the Ex-Army Officers, who were commissioned in Armed Forces when the nation was faced with foreign aggression and the cry of the time was that able-bodied persons should join the Armed Forces to defend the integrity and sovereignty of the country.
Many persons in such situation had joined the Armed Forces and in this back- ground if such persons have been treated as a separate class for extending any benefit in the matter of seniority, none can make any grievance and their classification can be upheld even in the light of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
15.
This Court is at a loss to understand as to how the.
petitioner can resist the claim of the private respondent particularly when the latter is entitled to the benefit under the statutory rules of 1965.
16.
In this view of the matter, it can be safely concluded that respondent No. 2 had only claimed the benefit of military service rendered by him under the statutory Rules which was admissible to all those, who had rendered military service during Emergency from 1111962 to 10.1.968 which was not subject to anybody else's right who was not within that category.
17.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the decisions rendered in Amrik Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(1) SLR 324, Varinder Chawla v. The Chandigarh Administration and others, 1984(1) SLR 452 and SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, AIR 1981 SC 136.
The case law cited by the petitioner's counsel is of no help to the petitioner as in the cases cited (supra) it was held that opportunity of hearing should have been given to the petitioner before passing the impugned order.
18.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
No order as to costs,  Petition dismissed.