Permod Kohli, J - Illegality, propriety and validity of the order of dismissal dated 2782003 (Annexure P-2), order dated 2262004 (Annexure P-5) dismissing the appeal and order dated 2082005 (Annexure P-7) dismissing the revision have been called in question in the present writ petition invoking writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
We may briefly notice the factual background of the present case.
The petitioner is a member of Haryana Police Service.
He was enrolled as a Constable on 2.11.1991 in Haryana Police, District Gurgaon.
During his posting in Police Station, Udyog Vihar, Gurgaon in the year 2002, he was marked absent vide DDR No. 35 dated 1292002 and resumed his duty on 3102002 after 22 days absence from duty.
He again absented from duty on 13102002 as per entry vide DDR No. 13102002 and reported back for duty on 2012003 remaining absent for 100 days.
A regular departmental enquiry was conducted against him by the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon and the enquiry report dated 1162003 (Annexure P-1) was submitted by the Enquiry Officer.
From the enquiry report, it appears that the petitioner absented during enquiry proceedings and was proceeded ex-parte.
On the basis of the enquiry report, petitioner came to be dismissed from service vide order dated 2782003 (Annexure P-2) and appeal preferred by him before the IGP, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon resulted in dismissal vide order dated 2262004 (Annexure P-5) and finally his revision before the Director General of Police, Haryana also came to be rejected vide order dated 2082005 (Annexure P-7).
3.
The petitioner has tried to explain his absence from duty on the ground of illness of his father and his own mental disturbance.
However, the main point on which this petition has been argued is the non-consideration of provisions of Rule 162, particularly Explanation appended thereto, of the Punjab Police Rules.
It has been seriously contended on behalf of the petitioner that dismissal of the petitioner on account of absence from duty does not constitute "gravest act of misconduct" as defined under Rule 162 read with Explanation appended thereto and thus, the impugned order of punishment affirmed in departmental appeal and revision are illegal, invalid and liable to be quashed.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Harish Rathee, Sr. DAG, Haryana, at length.
5.
It is common case of the parties that the dismissal of the petitioner has been ordered in terms of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules which reads as under :  "PPR.
162.
Dismissal : (1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
"Explanation - For the purpose of sub-rule (1), the following shall, inter alia, be regarded as gravest acts of misconduct in respect of a police officer, facing disciplinary action : (i) Indulging in spying or smuggling activities; (ii) disrupting the means of transport or of communication;  (iii) damaging public property;  (iv) causing indiscipline amongst fellow policemen.
(v) Promoting feeling of enmity or hatred between different class of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language;  (vi) Going on strike or mass casual leave or resorting to mass absentions;  (vii) Spreading disaffection against the Government; and  (viii) Causing riots and the life."
Rule 162 (1) provides for dismissal for the gravest act of misconduct or for the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
Under the first part of the rule, gravest act of misconduct entails dismissal whereas under the second part of the rule, cumulative effect of continued misconduct also invite penalty of dismissal.
However, in both the cases, incorrigibility of the delinquent official and complete unfitness for police service has to be established.
There is another rider on the award of punishment incorporated in the rule itself, which, inter alia, requires the punishing authority to take into consideration the length of service of the delinquent and his claim to pension.
Explanation appended to Rule 162 further defines the gravest act of misconduct in respect of a delinquent police official facing disciplinary action.
As many as eight kind of acts have been specified which may individually or in conjunction with each other, constitute gravest act of misconduct inviting the punishment of dismissal envisaged under Rule 162 (i) of the Rule.
6.
Arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner to assail the impugned order of punishment of dismissal from service are in two fold - (1) the disciplinary authority (punishing authority), the appellate authority and revisional authority did not take into consideration the definition of gravest misconduct as defined under Explanation to Rule 162 and (2) the questions of length of service and claim to pension of the petitioner have also been ignored while awarding the punishment.
7.
We have carefully gone through the dismissal order dated 2782003 (Annexure P-2).
The punishing authority has not dealt with the question of definition of gravest misconduct as provided under Explanation to Rule 162, though it has formulated an opinion that the petitioner absented twice from duty and his behaviour depicts that he is not fit to be retained in service and he is incorrigible type of employee.
His length of service and right to pension has not even been taken note of.
The appellate as well as the revisional authorities also rejected the appeal/revision, even without going into these two questions.
It is pertinent to note that the petitioner did raise these questions in the memo of revision.
8.
Mr. Rathee, learned counsel on behalf of the State of Haryana, while interpreting Rule 162 (i), argued before us that in terms of the Rule, dismissal is permissible under two situations - (1) the gravest act of misconduct and (2) cumulative effect of continued misconduct.
He has laid emphasis on the word "or" occurring in the Rule between the first part and the second part.
According to him, both the acts of misconduct are to be read independently and not in conjunction.
In sum and substance, his submission is that an employee may invite dismissal on account of act of gravest misconduct and where there is no gravest misconduct, even a cumulative effect of continued misconduct bring incorrigibility and unfitness to police official which is also sufficient to earn the punishment of dismissal.
9.
However, Mr. Rathee failed to address the Explanation appended to Rule 162.
According to him, Explanation does not in any manner control the rule and should be construed as insignificant where misconduct is proved or for that matter continued acts of misconduct are established.
10.
Explanation to a statute has to be read as a part and parcel of the main Rule/Section/Clause and cannot be construed as an independent or separate provision.
The object and purpose of "Explanation" may be to explain any expression or term used in the principal provision, to expand or restrict its meaning and so on.
11.
There is another principle to understand the dominant purpose of the Explanation.
When the Explanation is appended at the end of Section/Rule containing different clauses, it has to be seen as to which part or clause of Section it applies.
Similarly, where the Explanation is added towards the end of the Section and uses the words for purposes of this Section then it should be deemed to be Explanation for the entire Section/Rule.
It again depends upon the object or the purpose indicated in the Explanation.
Hon'ble Supreme Court has again considered various purposes of Explanation when added to a statutory provision.
In the case of Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax, Kerala v Plantation Corporation of Kerala Ltd, Kottayam, 2001(1) S.C.C.
207, the Apex Court held as under :  "4 .............. That apart, an explanation is intended to either explain the meaning of certain phrases and expressions contained in a statutory provision or depending upon its language it might supply or take away something from the contents of a provision and at times even to, by way of abundant caution, clear any mental cobwebs surrounding the meaning of a statutory provision spun by interpretative process to make the position beyond controversy or doubt."
12.
In the present case, the explanation clearly specifies the purpose as it starts with the words for the purposes of Sub Rule (1) and reference in sub- rule one can only be linked to the expression used therein (gravest misconduct).
The language of the Explanation thus indicates that expression "gravest misconduct" used in sub-rule (1) of Rule 162 has to be confined to the definition and acts as specified from Clauses (i) to (viii) in the Explanation.
Thus acts complained of, if fall within the purview of any of the clauses (i) to (iii) would alone constitute "gravest misconduct".
13.
The next question which falls for consideration is whether the term "gravest misconduct" as defined/specified in the Explanation is relevant for first part of Rule 162 (i) or will it have to be read in conjunction with the entire rule.
No rule has been brought to our notice wherein the expressions "misconduct" or "gravest misconduct" have been defined except the Explanation appended to the aforesaid Rule.
Explanation only defines "gravest misconduct" and not "misconduct".
From the reading of Rule, it also appears that the punishment of dismissal of a delinquent official can be imposed on a delinquent for the gayest act of misconduct or even the cumulative effect of continued misconduct.
However, in both the cases incorrigibility and unfitness for police service has to be proved.
This Rule came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Ram Singh, Ex-Constable, 1992(3) SCT 448 : (1992)4 SCC 54 wherein following observations were made:  "7.
Rule 162(1) consists of two parts.
The first part is referable to gravest acts of misconduct which entails awarding an order of dismissal.
Undoubtedly there is distinction between gravest misconduct and grave misconduct.
Before awarding an order of dismissal it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct, since it impinges upon the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service.
As stated the first part relates to gravest acts of misconduct.
Under General Clauses Act singular includes plural, "act" includes acts.
The contention that there must be plurality of acts of misconduct to award dismissal is fastidious.
The word "acts" would include singular "act" as well.
It is not the repletion of the acts complained of but its quality, insidious effect and gravity of situation that ensures from the offending "act".
The colour of the gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or attending circumstances.
Take for instance, the delinquent who put in 29 years of continuous length of service and had unblemished record; in thirtieth year he commits defalcation of public money or fabricates false records to conceal misappropriation.
He only committed once.
Does it mean that he should not be inflicted with the punishment of dismissal but be allowed to continue in service for that year to enable him to get his full pension.
The answer is obviously no.
Therefore, single act of corruption is sufficient to award an order of dismissal under the rule as gravest act of misconduct."
14.
In the case of Randhir Singh v Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala Cantt.
And another, 2004(4) SCT 462 : 2005(1) SLR 259 (P&H), a Bench of this Court considered the scope of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 and held as under :  "I have perused the order of punishment dated 7121984 (Annexure P-3).
The punishing authority, while inflicting the punishment of dismissal from service on the petitioner, admittedly, did not take into consideration the fact that the petitioner had rendered more than 10 years service entitling him to pensionary benefits.
The punishing authority also did not take into consideration the fact that the petitioner had not committed any act of omission or commission described as "gravest acts of misconduct" by the rule itself, while inflicted the gravest punishment prescribed.
In its aforesaid action, the authorities obviously did not follow Rule 162 in its letter and spirit.
It is mandatory for the punishing authority to take into consideration the length of service of an employee and his claim to pension before inflicting the punishment of dismissal from service under Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules."
This judgment was rendered on the basis of a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in the case of Constable Shiv Charan v. The Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon, District Gurgaon and others, 1998(3) SCT 255 : 1998(3) Recent Services Judgments 151.
15.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Constable Om Parkash v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 170, while considering the scope of Rule 162, particularly, the obligation of the disciplinary authority to take into consideration the length of service and the right to pension, made following observations :  "11.
On notice of motion having been issued written statement was filed by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, inter alia stating that the petitioner was relieved on May 4, 1990 from Police Station Uklana District Hissar on his transfer to Police Lines, Hissar, but he did not report there.
Subsequently, on May 16, 1990, he reported and he was ordered to be transferred to District Sirsa but he did not report there till September 15, 1990.
Thus there was absence for 12 days and 3 hours on the first occasion and 4 months on the second occasion.
He was described as a habitual absentee.
He had not completed 20 years of qualifying service to claim pension.
His length of service was thus not required for taking into consideration.
No reply to the show-cause notice was submitted by the petitioner.
Since he continuously remained absence even during the enquiry, no person hearing was required to be given to him.
Findings of the Enquiry Officer were served upon him on July 23, 1991.
No evidence in defence was produced by him to support his supposed plea of illness.
Before imposing punishment show cause notice was given.
Taking into consideration the constant absence on the occasions mentioned above, a finding was recorded that the delinquent was proving his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for the police.
Keeping in view the ratio of the decisions referred to above, no case for interference is made out in this case."
In addition, judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Harjit Singh and Anr. v. The State of Punjab and Anr., 2008(1) SCT 766 : 2007(4) SLR 645, the Hon'ble Supreme Court while relying upon the earlier Apex Court judgment in the case of State of Punjab v. Ram Singh (supra), observed as under:  "15.
In the aforementioned situation, ordinarily, we would have asked the Disciplinary Authority to consider the matter afresh, but the occurrence has taken place in the year 1984.
Appellants and the said Parminder Singh had worked only for a few years, one of them is dead.
In the aforementioned situation, we are of the opinion that we would be justified to fix the quantum of punishment.
We are of the opinion that in the facts and circumstances of this case and in particular having regard to the passage of time, punishment of compulsory retirement will meet the ends of justice.
If otherwise eligible, the delinquents would be entitled to retiral benefits.
The appeal is allowed to the aforementioned extent."
16.
From the report of the Enquiry Officer dated 1162003, it appears that the petitioner was charged for remaining absent from duty from 1292002 till 3102002 for 22 days and from 13102002 to 2012003 for 100 days.
This is the only charge against him.
The Disciplinary Authority not only considered the report of the Enquiry Officer, but also considered some earlier punishments imposed upon the petitioner relating to consuming alcohol for which he was punished somewhere in the year 2001 and also the absence of the petitioner from enquiry and consequently imposed the punishment of dismissal.
17.
The petitioner's misconduct for remaining absent on two occasions has been established.
Even if the act of the petitioner is not considered as "gravest misconduct" as it does not fall within the purview of Explanation appended to rule 162, it definitely is an act which constitutes misconduct.
There are at least two acts of misconduct.
Cumulative efffect of misconduct also makes a Police Officer incorrigible and unfit for police service.
However, the authorities have not applied their mind and not taken into consideration the length of service of the petitioner and his right to pension while awarding the punishment.
It has been stated by the petitioner in ground (c) of this petition that he has rendered 11 years 9 months service.
No rule has been brought to our notice that the petitioner is not entitled to any pensionary benefits for rendering about 12 years of service.
Giving consideration to the length of service, the right to pension is inherent under Rule 162 itself and thus it cannot be ignored.
The authorities having failed to adhere to the rule while awarding punishment renders the impugned order of punishment illegal and unwarranted.
It is also settled law that when a relevant provision is given go by, it amounts to arbitrary exercise of power and such an order is not sustainable.
In view of the above circumstances and for the above reasons, we set aside the impugned order of punishment dated 2782003 (Annexure P-2), the order dated 2262004 (Annexure P-5) passed by the Appellate Authority and the order dated 2082005 passed by the Revisional Authority and direct the Disciplinary Authority to reconsider the question of punishment to be awarded to the petitioner, keeping in view service rendered by him i.e. 11 years and 9 months and his right to pension and take into consideration these factors and thereafter a fresh order of punishment be passed.
Let fresh order be passed within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
However, the order of reinstatement shall remain in abeyance till fresh consideration is accorded and will depend upon the outcome of the fresh consideration.
.