Jawahar Lal Gupta, J(Oral).
- The petitioners in these three cases have a common grievance.
They have not been considered for admission to the Engineering Courses against the seats reserved for the terrorist/riot victims only on the ground that the requisite certificate had not been issued by the competent authority before the last date for submission of applications.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in CWP 11553 of 1995.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed the 10+2 examination in March, 1995.
He appeared in the common entrance test held on May 28, 1995.
The result was declared on June 22, 1995.
On July 2, 1995, the petitioner submitted his application form by registered post.
Alongwith the application form, he attached a copy of the certificate issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Jagraon in which it was mentioned that Mr. Om Parkash, resident of House No. 194, Housing Board Colony, Ferozepur City had died in the evening of December 26, 1991 in the indiscriminate firing by terrorists in the train near village Sochian.
On August 2, 1995, the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana issued a certificate to the effect that the petitioner is the "dependent son of Shri Om Parkash Wadhwa, who was killed as a result of terrorist action which took place at Sohian, near Jagraon on 26121991 in Ludhiana District."
He also obtained a similar certificate dated July 26, 1995 from the Deputy Commissioner, Ferozepur.
These certificates were produced by the petitioner before the authorities.
He also filed a representation dated August 4, 1995.
Nothing having been done, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It is alleged that the respondents have acted arbitrarily in not considering his claim against one of the reserved seats.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that since the petitioner had failed to furnish the certificate from the competent authority, before the last date for submission of applications, he was not entitled to be considered against one of the reserved seats.
4.
It is not disputed that the petitioner's father was killed by the terrorists.
The correctness of the certificate issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate has not been contested.
The only point urged on behalf of the respondents is that the certificate had not been issued by the competent authority.
The short question that arises for consideration is Could the respondents reject the applications only on the ground that the certificate was not issued by the named authority ?
5.
It is true that when a particular thing is required to be done in a specified way, it should be done in that manner and no other.
However, in the context of the facts of the present case, it is equally clear that the purpose of a certificate is to ensure that only a genuine person is considered for admission against one of the reserved seats.
There is no dispute that the petitioners in all these cases are terrorist/riot victims.
It is also not disputed that a certificate had been issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate in each of these cases.
Later on, the certificates issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate were also endorsed by the respective District Magistrates.
The very purpose for which the certificates were asked for, having been met and the facts as alleged by the petitioners having not been disputed, it would be wholly unjust and unfair to exclude them from consideration.
6.
In CWP No. 10487 of 1995, it has been pointed out by the counsel for the respondents that the Certificate has been issued by the Additional District Magistrate instead of District Magistrate.
It is conceded that the powers exercisable by the two officers are the same.
That being so, it does not make any difference so far as the present case is concerned.
7.
Accordingly, all the three writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claims for admission against the reserved seats on the basis of their merits.
It is conceded that the interviews for admission are taking place.
The petitioners shall be allowed to appear for interview and the respondents shall consider their claims.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Copy of this order be given dasti to the counsel for the parties on payment.