RK Nehru, J - This Regular Second Appeal is directed against the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court dated June 8, 1990 affirming on appeal those of the learned trial Judge dismissing the suit of the plaintiff- appellant for declaration that the order of dismissal from service passed by the respondent was illegal.
2.
Plaintiff-appellant (hereinafter the plaintiff) was working as Assistant Malaria Officer, Narnaul.
He was placed under suspension vide order dated November 3, 1977 as a regular departmental enquiry on certain charges was contemplated against him.
He was charge-sheeted under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1952 vide memo dated January 16, 1978.
The charge memo was accompained with the statement of allegations.
The plaintiff was asked to file reply to the charge memo but despite repreated reminders and various extensions granted to him, he failed to file reply to the charge memo.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed, who conducted the regular enquiry in accordance with rules.
He found the charges levelled against the plaintiff as proved.
On receipt of the Enquiry Officer's report, show cause notice was given to the plaintiff as to why penalty of dismissal from service should not be imposed upon him.
The plaintiff filed reply to the show cause notice.
He was afforded personal hearing by the disciplinary authority.
His explanation was found to be unsatisfactory.
The order of dismissal from service dated August 14, 1986 was passed against him.
The plaintiff challenged the order of suspension, the enqiry report and the order of dismissal from service on the ground that the preliminary enquiry was conducted by Shri RP Dubey, Under Secretary, Health Department, who asked the plaintiff to make a confessional statement and his statement was recorded under undue influence.
The plaintiff retracted from his earlier statement.
The plaintiff was not given proper opportunity to defend himself during the course of regular enquiry and he was not allowed to cross-examine the departmental withnesses.
3.
The allegations made by the plaintiff were denied by the defendant- respondent.
It was alleged that the enquiry was fair and that proper opportunity was afforded to the plaintiff to Cross-examine the witnesses.
The plaintiff was allowed to produce evidence in defence.
On receipt of the enquiry report, show cause notice was given to the plaintiff as to why penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed upon him.
He filed reply thereto and he was given personal hearing by the disciplinary authority.
His explanation was not found satisfactory.
After considering the entire material, the disciplinary authority passed the order of dismissal from service.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 1481986, dismissal of the plaintiff is illegal, null and void as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD 3.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties?
OPD 5.
Whether the suit is bad for non compliance of notice under Section 80 CPC ?
OPD  6.
Relief.
Issue No. 1 was decided againt the plaintiff; issues No. 2 to 5 were decided against the plaintiff as these were not pressed by the Government Pleader.
In view of the findings under issue No. 1, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
5.
The plaintiff challenged the judgment and decree in first appeal.
The first Appellate Court on appraisal of the entire documentary evidence came to the conclusion that the charge memo was served on the plaintiff on January 16, 1978.
The plaintiff was supplied with the list of documents relied upon by the department and the list of witnesses to be produced in the course of enquiry.
The plaintiff admitted vide Ex.P7 that the list of documents and the list of withnesses were supplied to him.
The Enquiry Officer gave full opportunity to the plaintiff to cross-examine the departmental witnesses.
The enquiry report revealed that the plaintiff made every effort to delay the enquiry proceedings on one pretext or the other and the Enquiry Officer gave ample opportunity to the plaintiff to defend himself.
The Enquiry Officer relying upon the material produced before him came to the conclusion that the charge levelled against the plaintiff stood proved.
After so holding, the learned first Appellate Court affirmed the decision of the learned trial Judge on issue No. 1 and dismissed the appeal.
The plaintiff challenged the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court in Regular Second Appeal in this Court.
The appeal was dismissed by the learned Single Judge of this Court on March 5, 1991 observing thus :-  "Heard.
Dismissed."
6.
The plaintiff aggrieved against this judgment challenged the same in the Apex Court.
The appeal was allowed on November 2, 1992 observing thus :-  "That the order dated the 5th March, 1991 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Regular Second Appeal No. 1973 of 1990 be and is hereby setaside and the matter be and is hereby remanded to the aforesaid High Court with the direction that the said High Court do restore to its file Regular Second Appeal No. 1973 of 1990.
Do admit and dispose of the same afresh in accordance with law, if possible within the year 1993 since the appellant if successful would be closed to his date of retirement; 2.
THAT there shall be no order as to costs of this appeal in this Court."
This is how this Regular Second Appeal has come up for hearing.
7.
The plaintiff who appeared in person made an endeavour to assail the finding of the first Appellate Court inter alia urging that there was no material before the Enquiry Officer to hold that the imputation against the plaintiff stood proved.
The confessional statement which was retracted by him was relied upon by the Enquiry Officer and the Enquiry Officer did not give proper opportunity to the plaintiff to cross-examine the witnesses.
The preliminary enquiry report submitted by Shri HP Dubey, Under Secretary, Health Department, was not supplied to him.
The submissions are devoid of any merit.
The first Appellate Court has given a firm finding of fact, that fair and regular enquiry was conducted and full opportunity was given to the plaintiff to defend himself.
He made every endeavour to delay the enquiry proceedings on one pretext or the other.
The Enquiry Officer gave full opportunity to the plaintiff to cross-examine the witnesses.
The disciplinary authority served show cause notice on the plaintiff as to why penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed upon him.
He filed reply thereto.
He was given personal hearing and after considering the entire material, the disciplinary authority passed the following order on 11.8.1986 :-  "Shri Sant Lal Sethi, Assistant Malaria Officer, Narnaul, who placed under suspension vide order Endst No. ECCD/M-1/77/22365-88, dated 3111977 and was served with the charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 vide memo No. ECCD (M-1)P. C/78/1071 dated 16th January, 1978 containing the following charges :- 1.
To make the Inspectors understand about preparation of false report regarding tablets on 5/6-1-1976 by Shri Sant Lal Sethi on the blackboard; 2.
To conspire with Dr. DV Khosla by Shri Sant Lal Sethi regarding the embezzlement of tablets; 3.
To do embezzlement in DDT/Tablets by Shri Sant Lal Sethi.
These charges have further been elaborated in the statement of allegations attached with charge sheet.
With the above charge-sheet, Shri SL Sethi, was required to submit his written statement, if any, within a period of 15 days from the receipt of the memorandum by him.
But he continued to apply for the extension of time on one pretext or the other and never submitted any reply despite the fact that the relevant records were seen by him.
In these circumstances, Sh. CS Rana, Inquiry Officer, Vigilance Department, Haryana was appointed as the Inquiry Officer to hold an enquiry into the charges levelled against Shri Sethi and also against other respondents namely Dr. DV Khosla, H.C.M.S.
- II, Shri Pitamber Singh, Health Inspector, Shri Chaman Lal, Store Keeper and Shri Bhim Sain Chaudhary, Laboratory Technician.
Shri CSRana could not complete the enquiry as he was transferred.
As such, Shri Birbal, Inquiry Officer, Vigilance Department, Haryana was appointed as the Inquiry Officer vide memo No. 11(22) 78-2 RBI, dated 11979.
The Inquiry Officer completed the enquiry and submitted his report to the Government which was carefully considered and agreeing with the report of the Inquiry Officer and holding that the charges levelled against Shri SL Sethi stand proved, the Government issued a show cause notice to Shri SL Sethi vide No. 11/22/78-2 HB- 1, dated 19782 as to why the penalty of dismissal should not be imposed upon him.
Shri Sant Lal Sethi has submitted his reply to the above show cause notice.
His reply has been considered thoroughly and has been found to be unsatisfactory since Shri SL Sethi himself has admitted in the written statement dated 28780, submitted by him in his own defence, that the meeting was held on 5-6/1/1976 and it was utilized for reconciling the discrepancies in the figures of receipts, consumption and balance of Chloroquine Tablets.
This clearly proves that he explained to the Malaria Inspectors on the black board as to how to change the bogus figures of chloroquine tablets.
All this was done in connivance with Dr. DV Khosla.
It has also been proved beyond doubt that Shri Sethi has misappropriated huge quantity of chloroquine tablets, DDT.
and BHC powder.
Shri SL Sethi was also given an opportunity to defend himself in person.
he was, accordingly, heard by the undersigned on 12586.
Even on that day, he could not defend the charges levelled against him.
He simply stated that a copy of the preliminary report submitted by Shri RP Dubey, former Under Secretary, Health-cum-Flying Squad Officer, was not made available to him.
I have seen the record and have found that all the documents relevant to the case have been inspected by Shri SL Sethi.
Even in the report of the Inquiry Officer, it has been mentioned that a large number of documents/files were summoned but at the stage of arguments, his counsel who argued at great length, did not make even a casual mention of the documents so summoned.
In the circumstances, it is abundantly clear that the explanation of Sh. Sethi is totally unsatisfactory and allegations levelled against him stand proved.
I, therefore, dismiss him from service."
8.
The plaintiff urged that preliminary enquiry report was not supplied to him.
The same was not relied upon by the department in the enquiry proceedings.
Apart from this, the plaintiff has not urged that he was prejudiced in the regular enquiry for want of the preliminary enquiry report.
The non-supply of the preliminary enquiry by the department is in consequence for the reason that it was not relied upon by the department in the regular enquiry conducted against the plaintiff.
The plaintiff did not plead that he was prejudiced in his defence for want of preliminary enquiry report.
The report of the departmental enquiry was supplied to the plaintiff along with show cause notice.
It was not the requirement of law that the enquiry report has to be supplied in the light of the pronouncement of the Apex Court in Commandant, Central Industrial Security Force and others v. Bhopal Singh, (1983) 4 Supreme Court Cases 785, where the Apex Court reiterated the Bench decision in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. BKarunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : (Civil Appeal No. 3056 of 1991 with connected cases) decided on October 1, 1993, wherein it was held thus :-  "It will, therefore, have to be held that notwithstanding the decision of the Gujarat High Court in NN Prajapati case end of the Central Administrative Tribunal in Premnath K Sharma case and of the other courts and tribunals, the law was in an unsettled condition till at least November 20, 1990 on which day, Mohd.
Ramzan Khan case was decided.
Since the said decision made the law expressly prospective in operation the law laid down there will apply only to those orders of punishment which are passed by the disciplinary authority after November 20, 1990.
This is so, notwithstanding the ultimate relief which was granted there which, as pointed out earlier, was per incuriam.
No order of punishment passed before that date would be challengeable on the ground that there was a failure to punish the enquiry report to the delinquent employee.
The proceedings pending in courts/tribunals in respect of orders of punishment passed prior to November 20, 1990 will have to be decided according to the law that prevailed prior to the said date and not according to the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan case.
This is so notwithstanding the view taken by different benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal or by the High Courts or by this Court in RK Vashisht case."
9.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in the appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.