N K Kapoor, J - The Panipat Cooperative Sugar Mills Limited, Panipat has filed this writ petition seeking quashing of the award passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Rohtak, dated 241993, vide which respondent No. 2 has been ordered to be reinstated with full back wages.
2.
Before referring to the points urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner seeking quashing of the order, it would be appropriate to refer the salient facts which led to this unsavoury dispute between the management and its workers.
It is on 861984 that the Managing Director vide Annexure P-2 dated 861984 passed an order changing the working hours of the Mill i.e. office will work from 900 am to 500 pm with one hour lunch break from 100 pm to 200 pm on all week days.
It may be noticed that earlier to this order office hours were from 900 am to 1230 pm and from 130 pm to 500 pm with lunch break from 12.30 p.m. to 130 pm on all working days except Saturday.
On Saturday the working time was from 900 am to 100 pm only.
This way working hours were increased from 39 to 41 hours a week which was objected to by the employee and specifically by respondent No. 2 - Jagmohan Lal who brought to the notice of the General Manager that change in the service condition is unwarranted and illegal and otherwise too could only be brought up after validity issuing the notice under Section 9-A of the Industrial Disputes Act (for short 'the Act').
Before this order could be implemented, the same was withdrawn vide order dated 1461984, Annexure P-4 (9.6.1984 Saturday was holiday).
However, since respondent No. 2 refused to abide by the instructions issued vide order dated 861984 and thus had misconducted under the Certified Standing Orders of the Mill; the management issued a charge-sheet for disobedience vide Annexure P-5, pursuance to which respondent No. 2 replied to the same vide Annexure P-6 and P-7 calling upon the General Manager to withdraw the order and in the latter communication specifically stated that unless it is made clear that he is to work only for 6 hours and 30 minutes per day and not 7 hours, he would abstain from the work.
This communication is dated 1161984, Annexure P-7.
The management feeling dissatisfied with the reply given to the charge-sheet ordered for domestic enquiry vide Annexure P-8.
Enquiry Officer came to the conclusion that the workman refused to obey the lawful order of the Managing Director and remained absent without any leave or permission since 1161984 and so the charge levelled against him stands proved.
On the receipt of the report of the Enquiry Officer, the Managing Director after recording that the act of misconduct committed by the respondent and proved against him is prove and the respondent is liable to be dismissed from service; yet taking a lenient view ordered his demotion to the post of Accounts Assistant in Clerical Grade-II.
As regards his absence from duty from 1161984 till the date of his joining, it was to be treated as leave of the kind due and in case he failed to join duty within seven days of this order, it was to be presumed that he was not interested to serve the mill any longer.
This order is dated 16.11.1984, Annexure P-10.
3.
The respondent worker, however, to prove that he had been prevented by the Management from performing his duties made mention of the same vide registered letter detailing therein that the Time Keeper, Despatch Clerk and Security Officer etc. did not let him enter the mill premises and hence there was no course open for him but to intimate the management - General Manager - by this registered communication.
These assertions of the respondent-worker were denied by the Managing Director who once again asked the respondent to join his duty as well as associate with the enquiry which is in progress - Annexure P-13.
4.
Since respondent-worker was not inclined to face inquiry and to join duty on a demoted post, he chose to approach the Industrial Tribunal by filing an application under Section 33-A of the Act praying therein that the order of his demotion is illegal, void ab initio and the same is liable to be set aside with a further direction against the management that he be reinstated to the post he was holding earlier from 861984 with all consequential benefits i.e. wages with interest etc. at the rate of 18% till actual payment is made.
The order of the Tribunal Annexure P-14 is now being challenged by the petitioner.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has assailed the correctness of the order of the Tribunal broadly on three points - (i) that the reference under Section 33-A of the Act was wholly misconceived; (ii) that even as per fact found by the Tribunal the services of the petitioner were not terminated pursuance to the domestic enquiry; and (iii) since it is amply proved on record that the worker wilfully abstained from work since 1161984 awarding of full back wages by the Tribunal is legally unjustifiable and otherwise also run counter to the well laid down norm i.e. 'no work no pay.'
6.
Since the primary objection of the counsel for the petitioner is as to the maintainability of the petition, reference to the provisions of Sections 32 and 33-A of the Act would be appropriate.
These are :-  "33.
Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged under certain circumstances during pendency of proceedings :- (1) During the pendency of any conciliation proceeding before a conciliation officer or a Board of any proceeding before an arbitrator or a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal in respect of an industrial dispute, no employer shall,- (a) in regard to any matter connected with the dispute, alter, to the prejudice of the workmen concerned in such dispute, the conditions of service applicable to them immediately before the commencement of such proceeding; or  (b) for any misconduct connected with the dispute, discharge or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, any workman concerned in such dispute, save with the express permission in writing of the authority before which the proceeding is pending.
(2) During the pendency of any such proceeding in respect of an industrial dispute, the employee may, in accordance with the standing orders applicable to a workman concerned in such dispute or where there are no such standing orders, in accordance with the terms of the contract, whether express or implied, between him and the workman.- (a) alter, in regard to any matter not connected with the dispute, the conditions of service applicable to that workman immediately before the commencement of such proceeding; or (b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, discharge or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise that workman : Provided that no such workman shall be discharged or dismissed, unless he has been paid wages for one month and an application has been made by the employer to the authority before which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken by the employer.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), no employer shall during the pendency of any such proceeding in respect of an industrial dispute, take any action against any protected workman concerned in such dispute - (a) by altering, to the prejudice of such protected workman, the conditions of service applicable to him immediately before the commencement of such proceedings; or  (b) by discharging or punishing, whether by dismissal or otherwise, such protected workman, save with the express permission in writing of the authority before which the proceedings is pending.
xx xx xx xx (4) xx xx xx xx (5) xx xx xx xx "Section 33-A.
Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions of service, etc., changed during pendency of proceedings :- Whereas an employer contravenes the provisions of Section 33 during the pendency of proceedings before a conciliation officer, Board, an arbitration a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, any employee aggrieved by such contravention, may make a complaint in writing, in the prescribed manner :- (a) To such conciliation officer or Board shall take such complaint into account in mediating in, and promoting the settlement of such industrial dispute; and  (b) to such arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal and on receipt of such complaint, the arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall adjudicate upon the complaint as if it were a dispute referred to or pending before it, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and shall submit his or its award to the appropriate Government and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly."
7.
Section 33-A deals with the adjudication as to whether conditions of service etc. changing during the pendency of the proceedings i.e. in case an employer contravenes the provisions of Section 33 during the pendency of the proceedings, any employee aggrieved by such contravention can make a complaint in writing to the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal who would examine the matter and pass an appropriate award.
Admittedly, a dispute between the workman and the management was already pending which related as to whether the workers were entitled to enjoy sick leave for one day without medical certificate from the doctor.
This was reference No. 387 of 1981 decided by the Industrial Tribunal on 561985.
This disputes essentially concerned workmen i.e. irrespective of the person who has initiated or say was party to such a dispute.
All such workers were liable to be effected by its decision.
Counsel for the petitioner, however, has urged that pending dispute had nothing to do with the order passed by the management pursuance to the domestic enquiry and in support of it reference was made to the decision of Rajasthan High Court in case reported as the Pali Electricity Co Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal and another, AIR 1958 Rajasthan, 175, wherein it was held that to give jurisdiction to the Tribunal to entertain a complaint under Section 33-A read with Section 33(1)(a) it has to be shown that the matter which is brought before it on complaint is connected with the dispute which is pending before it.
The counsel thus submitted that there was no similarity between the two disputes and this way the Tribunal erred in law in assuming jurisdiction and passing the impugned award.
8.
The counsel for the respondent read out the relevant provision of Sections 33 and 33-A of the Act and relied upon the decision of the apex Court in case reported as M/s. New India Motors (P) Ltd., New Delhi v. K T Morris, AIR 1960 Supreme Court 875, in support of his contention i.e. it is not the intendment of Section 33(1)(a) of the Act that the workman should be directly or actually concerned in such dispute.
Reference was also made to the definition of 'Industrial dispute' as per Section 2(h) of the Act.
9.
We have examined the respective contentions of the parties in the light of the statutory provisions and the judicial pronouncements of the apex Court and other High Court in this regard.
The facts in M/s. New India Motors (P) Ltd.'s case (supra) were as under.
The respondent joined the service of M/s. New India Motors (P) Ltd. sometime in May, 1954, as Works Manager who was put on probation for a period of three months but he continued to hold the post till February 28, 1955 when he was given the assignment of field service organiser from March, 1955.
It is subsequently on April 18, 1956 pursuance to some complaint received against him, his explanation was sought and finally his services were terminated on June 30, 1956 on the ground that the post of field service organiser has since been abolished.
This gave rise to the respondent's complaint under Section 33-A of the Act.
This petition was objected to by the management whereas the worker justified the same on the ground that under Section 33-A of the Act such a petition is maintainable since another industrial dispute between the company and its employee was pending.
Somewhat identical objection as now raised by the petitioner was examined by the Court.
The apex Court repelled this precise objection of the company and held that there is no merit in the contention of the M/s. New India Motor (P) Ltd. that the respondent was not concerned in the earlier dispute and so his termination could not attract the provisions of Section 33(1)(a) of the Act.
It further held that "prima facie the argument that "workmen concerned in such dispute" should be limited to the workmen directly or actually concerned in such dispute appears plausible, but if we examine the scheme of the Act and the effect of its material and relevant provisions this limited construction of the clause in question cannot be accepted."
The apex Court further held as under :-  "It appears that the construction of the relevant clause had given rise to a divergence of opinion in industrial courts, but it may be stated that on the whole the consensus of opinion appears to be in favour of the construction which we are putting on the said clause.
In Eastern Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd v. Eastern Plywood Manufacturing Workers' Union, 1952 Lab AC 103, the appellate tribunal has referred to the said conflict of views and has held that the narrow construction of the clause is not justified.
The High Courts of Madras and Andhra appear to have taken the same view (vide : Newton Studios Ltd v. T R Ethirajulu, (1958) 1 Lab LJ 63 : (AIR 1957 Mad 737).
On the other hand, in New Jehangir Vakil Mills Ltd, Bhavnagar v. N L Vyas, AIR 1959 Bom 248, the Bombay High Court has adopted the narrow construction; but for reasons which we have already explained we must hold that the Bombay view is not justified on a fair and reasonable construction of the relevant clause."
9.
The Kerala High Court relying upon the decision of the apex Court referred to above has held that when the conditions laid down in Section 33-A apply to a workman who has been punished, he is not to wait for reference of an industrial dispute by the appropriate government under Section 10 of the Act for adjudication of the dispute but can himself prefer his complaint which is to be treated in the same way as a dispute referred under Section 10 of the Act (Dalmia International Ltd v. C Thomar and another, 1975 LAB.
IC 1146.
10.
This way we find no merit in this objection of the learned counsel for the petitioner that reference to the Tribunal was not maintainable.
11.
Whether demotion in service amounts to termination of service ?
According to the petitioner, no order of termination has been passed by the petitioner till date.
Even the order of demotion was passed on the basis of finding of domestic inquiry.
Enquiry Officer held the worker guilty of misconduct.
Highlighting the bona fide of action of the management, the counsel stressed that at no time the management had taken vindictive attitude.
On the contrary, the management time and again had asked the worker to join his duties and associate himself with the pending enquiry which for reasons best known to the worker he chose to disassociate.
Reference was made to the various communications addressed by the General Manager/Managing Director to the worker in this regard.
According to the petitioner, a mere perusal of these letters/communication leave no manner of doubt that the respondent- worker wilfully remained absent.
12.
The counsel for the respondent, however, urged that though the management had ordered demotion but the same was, in fact, intended to operate as termination.
According to the counsel, facts as have come on record amply bear the contention raised by the respondent.
The whole thing has to be examined in right prospective.
In the instant case, there was no legitimate reason for the Managing Director to change the working hours of the Mill and that too without complying with the statutory provisions of Section 9-A of the Act.
Thus, the resentment of the worker through the voice of the respondent being their spokesman was legitimate and perhaps for this reason this illegal and unwarranted order was withdrawn by the management.
But strangely though the order was withdrawn, yet the Managing Director continued with the domestic enquiry which was nothing but an attempt to brow beat a spokesman of workers and ultimately too humiliate by passing an order of demotion.
If the case is examined in the light of the abovementioned salient facts, the order of demotion is nothing but an order of termination and the Tribunal rightly construed it so.
13.
As per 'The New Lexicon Webster's Dictionary of the English Language (Revised and Updated 1987) word 'Termination' means, "a terminating or being terminated; the end of something in space or time; whereas the word 'demotion' means reduction to a lower rank or class.
Both these expression are not synonymous.
These imply different meaning.
14.
The Tribunal while justifying non-joining of the worker has placed much reliance on letter dated 1861984, Annexure P-11, a communication addressed to General Manager, that though he had come to the office but has been prevented to mark presence by the Time Keeper and when a letter duly signed was given to the Despatch Clerk, he too refused to receive the same.
Similarly, Superintendent of the Mill also declined to receive the letter.
Not only this, the Security Officer, expressly told him not to enter the Mill premises.
The Tribunal appears to have read this letter in isolation.
The management vide letter dated 2071984, Annexure P-13, besides denying the averments made in the earlier letter to be false, once again called upon him to join duty with the mill immediately as well as associate himself with the enquiry which is in progress.
Before the Tribunal, all those persons whose names were referred in Annexure P-11 were examined by the management to disprove the assertion of the worker.
Somehow, the Tribunal did not advert to these depositions and relied upon the version as given by the worker vide Annexure P-11.
This way the finding of the Tribunal is vitiated.
In fact, if one peruses the correspondence addressed by the management to the worker and of worker to the management, it leaves no manner of doubt that totally innocuous dispute, if at all we can call it a 'dispute' has been blown out of proportion resulting in enormous loss to the Mill in terms of output and a corresponding loss to the worker to be even without a subsistence allowance during all these years.
But for the short-sightedness of the management or foolhardy attitude of the worker, the present controversy could be easily resolved with a little open-mindedness.
Facts as have come on record and otherwise also highlighted by the respective counsel, we are of the view that the petitioner as well as the respondent are equally at fault.
Admittedly, the respondent was ordered to be demoted which he could challenged by way of appeal.
For reasons best known to the respondent, he did not choose to assail the correctness of the order of demotion.
Not only this, admittedly, he has not joined ever since his absence on 1161984.
Even if it is taken that the order of demotion passed by the concerned authority was legally unsustainable and otherwise unjust in the circumstances of the case, yet the same cannot be equated with the order of termination.
The worker could report for duty as well as challenge this order.
15.
Taking a cumulative view of the matter i.e. the version as given by the workman as well as the management, we are of the view that the decision of the Industrial Tribunal ordering his reinstatement as Assistant Accountant does not call for interference; however the consequential relief granted needs modification.
We are of the view that both the parties can be held equally liable and on this account awarding or non-awarding of back wages assumes significance.
Back wages are normally granted in case the Tribunal holds an order of discharge or dismissal to be illegal.
Admittedly, no order of termination has been passed by the management till date.
The order of demotion based on the enquiry wherein the workman has been held to be guilty of misconduct cannot be equated with the order of termination/dismissal.
Discretion to award back wages vest with the Tribunal but all the same it has to be exercised in a judicial and judicious manner.
It can neither be arbitrary nor fanciful.
All the same, there cannot be a strait-jacket formula for awarding, the relief of back wages.
All the relevant considerations have to be kept in view.
16.
In case reported as India General Navigation and Railway Company Ltd and another v. Their Workmen, 1960(1) L.L.J.
13, the Court after having come to the conclusion that both types of workmen have been equally guilty of participation in the illegal strike but both are not liable to the same kind of punishment.
Mere participation in an illegal strike leading to their dismissal is wholly unjustified.
In this background, the Court while granting back wages observed as under :-  "Regarding the question of back wages to which such workmen would be entitled on their reinstatement, it must be held that the concerned workmen should bear half the loss in such arrears.
Where the blame attaches to both the parties, they should divide the loss equally.
The concerned workmen were directed to be paid half the back wages for the period between the date of cessation of such strike and the date on which the award under appeal became enforceable."
Similarly Steel Tubes Ltd and Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, 1980(1) LLJ 137, the apex Court held as under :-  "Another fact of the relief turns on the demand for full back- wages.
Certainly, the normal rule, on reinstatement, is full back wages since the order of termination in non est (see 1971(1) S.C.R. 563 and (1979) 3 SCR 774).
Even so, the Industrial Court may well slice off a part if the workmen are not wholly blameless or the strike is illegal and unjustified.
To what extent wages for the long interregnum should be paid is, therefore, a variable dependent on a complex of circumstances."
17.
Since we are of the view that the order of demotion could be assailed by the respondent under the service rules governing him,  non-initiating of such like steps is nothing but negligence/carelessness of the respondent for which the management cannot be wholly burdened.
We cannot lose sight of the fact also that for no good reason the respondent abstained from work for such a long period i.e. almost 9 years.
18.
Keeping in view the ratio of the decision of the apex Court referred to above and the facts of the present case, we modify the award of the Tribunal to the extent that the worker would be paid only 1/2 of the wages for the back period only i.e. from 1161984 till passing of the award (if the worker has already joined), else till the time he reports for duty.
The remaining award of the Tribunal is affirmed.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.