A L Bahri, J - Vide this order three writ petitions Nos. 1940, 2239 and 8606 of 1993 are being disposed of as the question involved therein is common.
In the first two writ petitions the petitioners were employed as Junior Engineers in the Municipal Committee in the State of Haryana.
They challenge the cut-off date December 21, 1990 fixed in the notification issued by State of Haryana in the matter of regularisation of ad hoc and temporary employees.
They also challenge orders of termination passed against them.
In the third writ petition the petitioner was employed as Junior Engineer on ad hoc basis in PWD, Public Health Department, in the State of Haryana, and he challenges the order of termination of his services.
2.
In C.W.P.
No. 1940 of 1993 Sunil Kumar is the petitioner.
On August 13, 1990 he was appointed as Junior Engineer on ad hoc basis in the Municipal Committee, Ladwa Vide Annexure P1, letter of appointment.
It contains the following condition :-  "It should be clearly understood that this offer of appointment is purely temporary which can be terminated at any time on joining of a candidate recommended by the SSS Board or on abolition of the post or on account of unsatisfactory work and conduct without any prior notice assigning any reason."
Letter-Annexure P2 was issued to him on April 4, 1991 that his appointment was for a period of 9 months and on expiry thereof he was to be relieved on joining of a candidate recommended by SSS Board or on abolition of the post or on account of unsatisfactory work and conduct without prior notice of assigning any reason.
On December 17, 1992 Haryana State issued instructions-Annexure P.4 inter alia providing as under :-  "(i) In view of the orders of Supreme Court, the ad hoc employees are to be replaced by the recommendees of the SSS Board/HPSC.
The services of all ad hoc employees where candidates by the SSS Board/HPSC have been recommended may be terminated immediately.
(ii) Where no such recommendations have been made by the SSS Board/HPSC the department should review the position of the ad hoc appointees and terminate their services immediately if no longer required.
(iii) In cases where High Court has granted stay on the basis of Piara Singh's case immediate action in terms of letter No. 43/79/92-5 GSI dated 6.11.92 may be taken."
3.
Notification was issued by the State of Haryana on February 28, 1991- Annexure P.5 providing that such Class III posts as were held for a minimum period of 2 years on December 31, 1990 by Class III employees on ad hoc basis should be taken out of the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board and their services will be regularised if they would fulfil the conditions laid down therein.
Their challenge to these instructions is on the basis of the Supreme Court decision in D S Nakara v. Union of India, 1983 (1) SCC 305, that the aforesaid date has been fixed arbitrarily.
The services of the petitioners are required to be regularised.
The order terminating his services as no longer required is illegal as the post still exists and so did the work on the post.
4.
On notice of motion having been issued the respondents have contested the writ petition.
The existence of post is not denied, however, for the work it is the function of the Administration to look after.
Some junior engineers would be posted in general transfers.
The scheme of regularisation framed by the State fixing specific date as above is valid and has been commended by the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case.
Similar pleas have been taken in Man Singh and others v. State of Haryana, 1991(2) SCT 743(P&H) : (CWP No. 2239 of 1993).
5.
In the third case CWP No. 8606 of 1993 Mukesh Sharma v. State of Haryana, the petitioner was appointed on 80 days basis on August 12, 1988.
His name was approved for ad hoc appointment by Subordinate Services Selection Board which was accepted by the State Government.
His services were terminated on July 16, 1993 vide Annexure R.6.
6.
In D S Nakara's case, the Supreme Court in the matter of fixation of arbitrary evidence of granting benefits to the retirees observed as under :-  "We are satisfied that by introducing an arbitrary eligibility criterion; 'being in service and retiring subsequent to the specified date for being eligible for the liberalised pension scheme and thereby dividing a homogeneous class, the classification being not based on any discernible rational principle and having been found wholly unrelated to the objects sought to be achieved by grant of liberalised pension and the eligibility criteria devised being thoroughly arbitrary, we are of the view that the eligibility for liberalised pension scheme of being in service on the specified date and retiring subsequent to that date' in impugned memoranda, Exs.
P1 and P2, violates Article 14 and is unconstitutional and is struck down."
7.
The ratio of the decision aforesaid cannot be applied to the case in hand for the simple reason that when D S Nakara's case was being considered, the question was of giving benefit of liberalised pension scheme to the retirees.
Obviously two classifications of the retirees could not be made for the purposes of granting such benefits by fixing a notional date.
The position in the present case is not that any benefit is being granted to any class of Government employees such as ad hoc employees or temporary employees.
The benefit is in future service i.e. of regularisation of the ad hoc employees otherwise ad hoc employees or temporary employees have no right to the posts.
If the latest judgment of the Supreme Court is read closely (State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others), 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) : 1992(4) S.L.R.
770, it would be noticed that the Supreme Court has recommended the schemes of regularisation framed by the States of Punjab and Haryana.
8.
Referring to the scheme framed fixing dates of enforcement in para 13 of the judgment it was observed as under :-  "These orders are not in the nature of a statute which is applicable to all existing and future situations.
They were issued to meet a given situation facing the Government at a given point of time.
In the circumstances, therefore, there was nothing wrong in prescribing a particular date by which the specified period of service (whether it is one year or two years) ought to have been put in.
Take for example, the orders issued by the Haryana Government.
The first order is dated Ist January, 1980.
It says a person must have completed two years of service as on 31st December, 1979, i.e., the day previous to the issuance of the order.
How could it be said that fixing of such a date is arbitrary and unreasonable ?
Similarly the order dated 3rd January, 1983 fixes 15th September, 1982 is the relevant date.
The notification/order does two things.
Firstly, it excludes class II posts of clerks from the purview of the SSSB in case of those who have completed a minimum of two years of service as on 15th September, 1982, and secondly, it provides for their regularisation subject to certain conditions.
No particular attack was made as to this date in the High Court.
Consequently the Government of Haryana had no opportunity to explaining as to why this particular date was fixed.
Without giving such an opportunity, it cannot be held that the fixation of the said date is arbitrary.
What is more relevant is that the High Court has not held that this particular date is arbitrary.
According to it, fixation of any date whatsoever is arbitrary, because in its opinion the order must say that any and every person who completes the prescribed period of service must be regularised on completion of such period of service.
The next order dated 24th March, 1987 prescribes the date as 31.12.1986 i.e. the end of the previous year.
In the circumstances, we see no basis for holding that fixation of the date can be held to be arbitrary in the facts and circumstances of the case."
9.
With respect to the conditions of regularisation laid down in the schemes in para 14 it was observed that there was no unreasonableness or invalidity in the same.
It was further observed as under :- "We must also say that the further requirement prescribed in the orders viz., that the employees must have possessed the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of his appointment on ad hoc basis is equally a valid condition.
Indeed, no exception is taken to it by the High Court."
10.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that fixation of date of enforcement of the scheme being arbitrary, all ad hoc employees after completion of two years of service would be entitled to regularisation of services cannot be accepted.
Clock cannot be reversed to nullify the effect of the decision of the Apex Court in Piara Singh's case.
In para 17 of the judgment it was observed as under :-  "Now coming to the direction that all those ad hoc temporary employees who have continued for more than a year should be regularised, we find it difficult to sustain it.
The direction has been given without reference to the existence of a vacancy.
The direction in effect means that every ad hoc temporary employee who has been continued for one year should be regularised even though  (a) no vacancy is available for him - which means creation of a vacancy, (b) he was not sponsored by the Employment Exchange nor was he appointed in pursuance of a notification calling for applications-which means he had entered by a back-door  (c) he was not eligible and/or qualified for the post at the time of his appointment (d) his record of service since his appointment is not satisfactory.
These are in addition to some of the problems indicated by us in para 12, which would arise from giving of such blanket orders.
None of the decisions relied upon by the High Court justify such whole-sale, unconditional orders.
Moreover, from the mere continuation of an ad hoc employee for one year, it cannot be presumed that there is need for a regular post.
Such presumption may be justified only when such continuance extends to several years.
Further, there can be no 'rule of thumb' in such matters.
Conditions and circumstances of one unit may not be the same as of the other.
Just because in one case, a direction was given to regularise employees who have put in one year's service as far as possible and subject to fulfilling the qualifications, it cannot be held that in each and every case such a direction must follow irrespective of and without taking into account the other relevant circumstances and considerations."
11.
The petitioners thus cannot claim any right to hold the posts.
They being not entitled to regularisation of their services being appointed on ad hoc basis cannot be permitted to urge that orders of termination of their services being illegal, they can continue in service.
Termination of ad hoc employees at any time is inherent in the nature of service, when they have no right to the post.
The contention that orders of termination is not in accordance with the terms of appointment letter as none of the situations mentioned therein occurred and they can continue in service on such posts is repelled.
Annexure P2 shows that tenure of service was nine months.
Thus his service could be terminated on expiry of such period.
12.
Even if some junior is retained in service while terminating services of the senior it will not make any difference as held by the Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr. v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760(SC) : 1991(1) SLR 606.
It was of observed as under :-  "A temporary Govt. servant has no right to hold the post, his services are liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary Govt. servants.
A temporary Govt. servant can, however, be dismissed from service by way of punishment.
Whenever, the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary Government servant.
If it decides to take punitive action it may hold formal inquiry by framing charges and giving opportunity to the Govt. servant in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Since a temporary Govt. servant is also entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) in the same manner as a permanent Govt. servant, very often the question arises whether, an order of termination is in accordance with the contract of service and relevant rules regulating the temporary employment or it is by way of punishment.
It is now well-settled that the form of the order is not conclusive and it is open to the Court to determined the true nature of the order."
There is nothing brought out that orders terminating the services have been passed by way of punishment.
13.
It is for the State Government to see if there is requirement for the services of a person.
Merely because the post is therefore for such a post some work is there is no ground per se to hold the order terminating the services to be illegal, mala fide or against the terms of the appointment letter.
The court is not to sit over the judgment of the State in this respect.
It is for the employer to see if the services of the employee are required or not.
It is pointed out that one Junior Engineer of another Municipal Committee is being transferred who is to get salary from his parent Municipal Committee and thus there exists work as well as post (Annexure P- in C.W.P.
of 1993).
It is for the State to see if work of two Municipal Committee, can be looked after by one Junior Engineer.
14.
In CWP No. 8606 of 1993, Mukesh Sharma's case, after approval for regularisation was accorded by the Public Service Commission and the State Government for his ad hoc service that it came to the notice of the State that under the Regulation Scheme, the petitioners service could not be regularised as his appointment was not made through Employment Exchange which was the condition of regularisation.
The petitioner cannot take any berefit of such orders.
The matter was considered by the Full Bench of this Court in Sant Ram Bhal v. The State of Haryana and another, 1992(1) SCT 534(P&H) (FB) : 1992(1) RSJ 761.
As earlier the Division Bench in CWP No. 7123 of 1991 had passed the order to the following effect :-  "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we dispose of this petition with the direction (that) the petitioner shall be permitted to continue till regular incumbent arrives."
15.
The Full Bench after referring to the earlier case law including the decision of the Supreme Court in :  (1) Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, 1958 S.C.R. 828,  (2) Jagdish Mitter v. The Union of India, AIR 1964 Supreme Court 449,  (3) State of Punjab v. Shri Sukh Raj Bahadur, 1968(3) SCR 234, and  (4) State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SLR 606,  held a temporary person appointed on ad hoc basis has no right to the post and his services can be terminated in accordance with terms of appointment.
16.
Learned counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 2239 of 1993 relied upon Annexure P.3 order of Division Bench passed in C.P. No. 11464 of 1991 on November 1, 1991, which is similar as was relied upon in Full Bench case (supra) which is of no assistance in view of the Full Bench decision.
17.
Mukesh Sharma was initially appointed on 240 days basis as Piara Singh case aforesaid was pending in the Supreme Court.
He was to continue till decision of Supreme Court (Annexure P2).
His services were terminated vide order dated July 17, 1993 (Annexure P.6).
He does not fulfil the conditions for regularisation of services.
Period of service is given in written statement.
Approval for ad hoc appointment will not help him.
18.
For the reasons recorded above, these writ petitions are dismissed.
Petition dismissed.