Sujata V Manohar, J - Leave granted.
2.
The appellant had passed Maha Vidushi examination conducted by Mahila Gram Vidyapith, Allahabad in 1985.
We are told that this was considered as equivalent to eleventh standard examination.
She was admitted in July 1986 to the first year of the three years' degree course (Arts) of the University of Rajasthan as it was then permissible to join the University degree course after passing the eleventh standered examination.
She failed in the first year examination.
Thereafter she discontinued her studies.
In the year 1993, she applied to the Board of Secondary Education, Ajmer, Rajasthan for permission to appear in the Senior Secondary School Examination (twelfth standard examination) conducted by it.
Her examination form has been rejected.
3.
It is contention of the respondents that the 2nd respondent-Board has never recognised the qualification of Maha Vidushi granted by the Mahila Gram Vidyapith, Prayag, Allahabad for appearance in the Senior Secondary School Certificate Examination conducted by the Board.
In 1986 when the appellant had secured admission to the first year of the degree course of the Rajasthan University, since at that time one could secure admission to degree course on passing the eleventh standard examination, this particular qualification was recognised by the Rajasthan University.
However, shortly thereafter on 2171986, the Rajasthan University derecognised with immediate effect the qualification of Maha Vidushi.
This was in view of the directions received from the University Grants Commission which included the Mahila Gram Vidyapith, Prayag, Allahabad.
4.
Therefore, in 1993 this qualification does not make the appellant eligible for admission to the twelfth standered examination conducted by the 2nd respondent-Board.
She has sought this admission for the first time in 1993.
At no point of time the qualification she possesses was recognised by the 2nd respondent-Board.
The High Court, therefore, had rightly dismissed the appeal.
The present appeals are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.