Ruma Pal, J - This case relates to the date of birth of the petitioner.
The petitioner was appointed as an unskilled worker with the respondent No. 2 with effect from 3rd February 1985.
He was given the appointment on the basis of an application form which is in English.
The application form was required to be filled in by the candidate in his/her own handwriting.
The petitioner's date of birth given in his application form was 21-7-1934 and his age was stated to be 50 years 5 months and 13 days as on 3-1-1985.
The application form has been signed by the petitioner in Hindi.
The petitioner was given an engagement form by the respondent No. 2.
The engagement form also records the date of birth of the petitioner as 21-7-1934.
2.
It is the petitioner's case that in 1986 he received an identity card in which his date of birth was mentioned as 21-7-34.
The petitioner sought for rectification of his date of birth in his service records and submitted a School Transfer Certificate issued by the Headmaster, Naher Prathamick Vidyalaya, Village-Kotwali, PO Barawali, District Saran, Bihar, which showed that the petitioner's date of birth was 31st December, 1946.
According to the petitioner no decision was taken in the matter although the petitioner repeatedly made representations to the respondent No. 2.
3.
The respondent No. 2 on the other hand has stated that in 1986 the respondent No. 2 had written two letters to the Headmaster of the Naher Prathamick Vidyalaya requesting him to confirm the actual date of birth of the petitioner as "per the record of the school" and the date of issuance of the School Transfer Certificate.
The respondents state that although the letters which were sent by registered post were received, no reply was forthcoming.
Accordingly the case of the petitioner for correction of his date of retirement was rejected.
4.
On 21st February, 1992 the petitioner made a representation to the Managing Director of the respondent No. 2 in writing in which he claimed rectification of his service record on the basis of the school certificate submitted to the Personnel Manager of the respondent No. 2.
The petitioner also enclosed a copy of an affidavit dated 8-8-91 as well as a xerox copy of his Ration Card dated 8-8-91 in which his age as on the date of the affidavit was stated as "about 43 years".
No reply was given to this representation.
On 2nd April 1992 the petitioner submitted a second representation asking for rectification of his date of birth from 21-7-34 to 14.11.1947.
5.
By a letter dated 8/13-4-1992 the respondent No. 2 gave notice of retirement to the petitioner.
The age of superannuation of the petitioner was stated to be 27-1-92.
In other words the respondents treated the petitioner as having been born in 1934 and not in 1947 as claimed by him.
6.
This writ application was moved on 18th June, 1992, challenging the notice of superannuation dated 8/13-4-92.
Affidavits have been filed and the matter has been heard at length.
7.
The petitioner has contended :-  (1) The School Transfer Certificate was conclusive evidence of the petitioner's date of birth.
It is submitted that the respondents were bound to act on the basis thereof.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Debi Das Banerjee v. Chairman and Managing Director, Bank of India, 1990 (II) CHN 412, as well as on Umesh Chandra v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1982 SC 1057, in this connection.
(2) The failure to consider the petitioner's representation was in violations of the principles of natural justice.
Reliance has been placed on the decision in Sadananda Sen v. State of West Bengal, 1989 Lab IC 650 and WA Khan v. Union of India, 1989 Lab IC (NOC) 156, in this regard.
(3) The respondents had fixed the date of the petitioner's birth arbitrarily.
The petitioner had not in fact, filled out the application form on the basis of which the petitioner's date of birth was fixed.
The petitioner knows only Hindi.
It was, therefore, open to him to question the date of birth and seeks its rectification in his service records.
The petitioner has referred to the case of Sarjoo Prasad v. General Manager, AIR 1981 SC 1481 and Sisu Ranjan Das v. Commissioner of Police, 1979(2) CLJ 428.
8.
The respondents have, on the other hand, contended :-  1.
The School Leaving Certificate produced by the petitioner was of no probative value at all.
The respondents have referred to the decision in Raja Janaki Nath Roy v. Jyotish Chandra Acharya Chowdhry, AIR 1941 Cal 41; Birad Mal Singhvi v. Anand Purohit, AIR 1988 SC 1796 and Ram Murti v. State of Haryana, AIR 1970 SC 1029 in this connection.
2.
There is no question of any violation of the principles of natural justice.
The respondents had rejected the petitioner's representations after considering them and issued the notice of retirement consequent upon such rejection.
The Court's attention has been drawn to paragraph 11 of the affidavit-in-opposition filed by the respondents in this connection.
3.
It is stated that the petitioner's case was in consistent and could not be relied upon.
Firstly, the petitioner had claimed that he was born in 1947 yet the School Leaving Certificate showed that he was born in 1946.
Secondly, the petitioner had submitted a School Leaving Certificate yet in the application form it had been stated that he had no school education.
Thirdly, the other documents relied upon by the petitioner were discrepant.
The petitioner's wife's name and age and the names of the five children mentioned in the affidavit of the petitioner on the basis of which the Ration Card had been issued to him were discrepant with the nomination form filed by the petitioner under the Payment of Gratuity Rules where the wife's as well as the children's names were totally different.
It is submitted that the respondents therefore, had acted on the basis of the declaration given by the petitioner himself at the time of obtaining his employment and that this could not be described as being arbitrary.
9.
There is a wealth of authority on the subject of the rectification of date of birth.
In the case of State of Orissa v. Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269, probably the root case on the question of the determination of age by the State, the Supreme Court held (at page 1271 of the report) that the State was undoubtedly not precluded, merely because of the acceptance of the date of birth in the service register; from holding an enquiry if there existed sufficient grounds for holding such enquiry and for refixing the date of birth of an employee.
But the decision of the State could be based upon the result of an enquiry in a manner consonant with the basic concept of justice.
10.
Just as the acceptance of the date of birth does not preclude the State from questioning the correctness of the entry, there is no reason why the entry cannot be questioned by the employee as well.
Therefore the right of the employee to raise a dispute with regard to the recording of his age in the service records must be conceded (See State of Assam v. DP Deka, AIR 1971 SC 173; Sadananda Sen v. State of West Bengal, 1989 Lab IC 650; Wakail Ahmed Khan v Union of India, 1989 Lab IC (NOC) 156 (Cal); Sisu Ranjan Das v. Commissioner of Police, 1979 (2) CLJ 428 and Ranjit Kumar Chatterjee v. Union of India, 1983 (II) CHN 1).
11.
This right in the employee raises a corresponding obligation in the State to hold an enquiry (State of Assam v. Daksha Prasad Deka, AIR 1971 SC 173.
However, the right of the employee cannot be exercised in the air.
By merely raising a claim the employee cannot insist on an enquiry.
The right must be founded on sonic evidence.
In other words, an enquiry will not be held by the State as a matter of course (Executive Engineer, Bhadrak (R&B) Division, Orissa v. Rangadhar Mallick, 1992(5) SLR 77 : 1992(3) SCT 518) and in a case where the employee seeks to obtain a rectification of his birth date the initial onus is on him (See State of Assam v. Daksha Prasad Deka, AIR 1971 SC 173; Birad Mal Singhvi v. Anand Purohit, AIR 1988 SC 1796, 1808).
To sum up there are four hurdles to be overcome by the employee to discharge this initial onus :-  (1) If the application for employment is written by him and is accompanied with some evidence in support of the date of birth it will normally bind the employee (See General Manager, Eastern Railway v. Sushil Chandra Deb Roy, 1981(1) CHN 115, 123; Executive Engineer, Bhadrak (R&B) Division, Orissa v. Rangadhar Mallick, 1992(5) SLR 77 : 1992(2) SCT 518).
(2) The employee must produce some evidence in support of his claim.
This need not be conclusive but must be sufficient to put the employer on enquiry (See Umesh Chandra v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1982 SC 1057).
(3) The date of birth claimed must not be such as would render the employee's initial entry into the service irregular (Debidas Banerjee v. CMD, Bank of India, 1990 (II) CHN 412, 422; State of Assam v. DP Deka, AIR 1971 SC 173, 174).
4.
In the absence of specific rules limiting the time for correction, the claim must be raised within a reasonable time from the date of knowledge of the incorrect recording (See Debidas Banerjee v. CMD, Bank of India (Supra); Executive Engineer, Bhadrak v. Rangadhar Mallick(supra).
These decisions have cast some doubt on the earlier decisions in Sadananda Sen v. State of West Bengal (supra) and Wakail Ahmed Khan v Union of India (supra) to the extent that they had held that an application for correction can be made by the employee at any time and at any stage.
Once this initial onus is discharged by the employee, the State's obligation to hold an enquiry arises.
The enquiry if held, is a quasi judicial proceeding (Ranjit Kumar Chatterjee v. Union of India (supra) and the decision may be subject to judicial review (The General Manager, Eastern Railway v. Sushil Chandra Deb Roy, 1981(1) CHN 115.
Merely because disputed questions of fact are involved, does not mean that the Court is debarred from questioning the decision of the authority.
As held in Binapani Dei's case (supra).
"Under Art. 226 of the Constitution the High Court is not precluded from entering upon a decision on questions of fact raised by the petition.
Where an enquiry into complicated questions of fact arises in a petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution before the right of an aggrieved party to obtain relief claimed may be determined, the High Court may in appropriate cases decline to enter upon that enquiry and may refer the party claiming relief to a suit.
But the question is one of discretion and not of jurisdiction of the Court."
(See also Debidas Banerjee v. CMD, Bank of India, 1990 (II) CHN 412, 427).
12.
On the basis of the authorities on the subject the following principles are deducible for demarcating the State's obligation.
It is required :  (1) To give the claimant an opportunity to adduce evidence in support of his claim (State of Assam v. Daksha Prasad Deka, AIR 1971 SC 173, 175).
(2) To give reasons for rejecting the claim (See Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress, AIR 1991 SC 101 : 1991 Lab IC 91, 105 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
675; Ranjit Kumar Chatterjee v. Union of India, 1983 (II) CHN 1, 5; Sadananda Sen v. State of West Bengal, 1988 Lab IC 650).
(3) To refer the matter to a medical bench if the discrepancy is a large one (See Janaki Yadav v. Coal India Ltd, (1990) 1 Cal LT 237, 238; Jiwan Kishore v. Delhi Transport Corpn, AIR 1980 SC 1251 : 1980 Lab IC 745).
13.
Applying these principles to the facts before me it appears that the petitioner has crossed the four hurdles indicated earlier.
14.
The application form on which the respondents rely was patently not filled in by the petitioner but, by a person well vested in English.
The petitioner knows no English.
The application form itself notes that the petitioner knows Hindi only.
The application form also states that the petitioner had no school education.
Although this statement may not be correct in view of the School Leaving Certificate produced by the petitioner, there is no getting away from the fact that the petitioner is not a person literate enough to be sure of his age.
The engagement form relied upon by the respondents shows that it has been prepared by someone other than the petitioner.
15.
That the petitioner did not produce any document at the time of submission of the application form as proof of his date of birth appears to be the admitted case.
The date was therefore, fixed without reference to any corroborative evidence as was the case in Executive Engineer Bhadrak (R & B) Division v. Rangadhar Mallik, 1992(5) SLR 77 : 1992(2) SCT 518.
16.
The petitioner had produced some evidence in support of his claim for rectification, namely the School Leaving Certificate.
It is true that the certificate is contradicted by the note in the application form that he had no school education.
In my opinion that remark was made in the context of the Column in the form which dealt with academic qualifications and required the name of the Examination taken by the candidate to be stated.
It is possible therefore, that the phrase 'no school education' meant that the petitioner had not completed his schooling and had no academic qualification as such.
17.
It appears to me that it would be placing the case too high to describe the School Leaving Certificate as conclusive evidence of the date of the petitioner's birth as contended by him.
In neither of the cases relied upon by the petitioner had the Courts acted merely on the matriculation certificate.
In the case of Debi Das Banerjee (supra) the dispute was whether the petitioner was born in 1930 as recorded in the service records or in 1931.
Apart, from the petitioner's matriculation certificates issued by the Calcutta University (which showed that the petitioner was born in 1931), the Provident Fund authorities had accepted the petitioner's date of birth as 1931 and the Personal Data Cards issued by the respondents had also noted the petitioner's date of birth as 1931.
Furthermore, the authentically of the matriculation certificate was not in dispute.
In the case of Umesh Chandra, there was oral evidence of the School Authorities in support of the School Leaving Transfer Certificate.
The genuineness of the School Leaving Certificate was therefore, beyond dispute.
18.
These cases also suggest that the nature of the institution granting the certificate would be a relevant consideration.
A certificate granted by the Calcutta University could certainly not be ranked at par with a certificate granted by a village school.
It may be noted that in case of Umesh Chandra (supra) the Supreme Court noted (at page 1060 of the report) that the school which had granted the certificate was a public school enjoying a good reputation.
19.
The stand of the respondents that the certificate did not deserve consideration at all is also too extreme, and is not supported by the decisions relied upon by them.
In the case of Raja Janaki Nath Roy (supra) the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court held at page 43 "the School Register has not much evidentiary value".
This is far from saying that it has no evidentiary value at all.
In that case, the Court recognised that if there was evidence to show on what materials the entry in the register about the age was made, the School Register would be of probative value.
The decision in Birad Mal Singhvi, similarly recognised that if the entry in the School Register is supported by the evidence of persons who made the entry or who gave the date of birth it would have evidentiary value (at page 1806 of the report).
In Ram Murti's case (supra) the Supreme Court approved the Trial Court's decision not to place any reliance on an unproved and unexhibited school certificate.
20.
The law therefore appears to lie somewhere in between the two views propounded by the petitioner and the respondents.
The school certificate is some evidence of the date of birth but of little weight unless corroborated by other evidence.
21.
In fact in this instant case the respondents felt the need for an enquiry which was why they wrote to the Headmaster of the Naher Prathamick Vidyalaya on two separate occasions in an attempt to verify the genuineness of the document produced by the petitioner.
The fact that the affidavit of the petitioner for the purposes of his Ration Card is discrepant with the record of the Payment of Gratuity Act is immaterial.
The discrepancies relate to matters which are not germane to the date of birth.
However the affidavit by itself may not be of much probative value as it is not a third party document and the petitioner can certainly not vouch for his own age as being true to his knowledge.
Nevertheless, the School Leaving Certificate remains.
22.
The third hurdle does not apply to the petitioner's case at all.
23.
As far as the fourth condition is concerned, it was not the case of either the petitioner or the respondents that there are any rules relating to the correction of service records.
The petitioner submitted the School Leaving Certificate admittedly within one year of his being given employment.
In fact, the xerox copy of the School Leaving Certificate which has been annexed to the affidavit-in-opposition shows that the Certificate was submitted by the petitioner to the respondents in 1985 itself.
The respondents admitted at the hearing that the endorsement of receipt on the certificate was made by an officer of the respondent No. 2.
The endorsement is dated 11th March, 1985 that is only one month after the petitioner was employed.
The petitioner had therefore, raised his claim at a very early stage.
24.
We then come to the conduct of the respondents.
The respondents have failed to act in accordance with any of the three principles stated above.
25.
If the respondents were dissatisfied with the certificate, the respondents should have given the claimant an opportunity to either produce evidence in support of the certificate or other relevant evidence, such as a medical report, in support of his case.
The fact that the certificate was inadequate to support the petitioner's claim for rectification was never communicated by the respondents to the petitioner.
26.
As stated by the Supreme Court in the case of Daksha Prasad Deka (supra) :  "When an application is made for rectification of age by a public servant concerned, the State should give the applicant proper opportunity to prove his case and should give due consideration to the evidence brought before it."
27.
Secondly, no reasons were given by the respondents for rejecting the petitioner's claim.
The respondents produced the records relating to the petitioner at the hearing.
From the records it appears that the respondents had rejected the petitioner's claim for rectification without stating why the petitioner's case was not acceptable.
Mukherjee, J in the case of Delhi Transport Corporation (supra) has stated :  ".......Reasons must be there, reasons must be perceptible, reasons must be relevant to and the reasons must be of authority independently, fairly and objectively arrived at.
28.
As far as the representations are concerned all that has been said in the affidavit is that the representations were considered and rejected.
The case in the affidavit-in-opposition that the certificate is of no evidentiary value and was therefore rightly rejected (even if allowed to be argued) would not assist the respondents as I have already held that the certificate could not be said to be no evidence.
The decision of the respondents, to reject the petitioner's representations, if it was based on this approach, cannot be sustained.
29.
Having held that the decision to reject the petitioner's case by the respondent No. 2 is bad, the question is what action should the Court direct be taken.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Sushil Chandra Deb Roy has said :-  "When however in respect of an application for alteration of his age made by an employee the prescribed authority either fails to exercise its jurisdiction or commits any other jurisdictional error or acts mala fide, the Civil Court would prohibit the said authority from giving effect to the said order and also by a mandatory order may direct the prescribed authority to decide in accordance with law, the said application of the said employee for correction/alteration of his age."
30.
The question still remains what would be a decision in accordance with law in this case ?
As already noted there are no rules of the respondent No. 2 relating to the question of determination of age of an employee.
The field is untrammelled and the Court is free to determine the mode a mode which would be fair, practical and reliable.
31.
The Supreme Court in the case of Jivan Kishore (supra) recognised that a decision by a Medical Board as a "scientific fixation of age" was appropriate when records are "flagrantly conflicting".
The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Janaki Yadav (supra) went one step further.
In facts and circumstances which are somewhat similar to the facts and circumstances of the instant case, the Division Bench of this Court held that the Court had the power to direct and directed the petitioner's claim to be determined by a Medical Board consisting of an Orthopaedic Surgeon not in employment of the respondent authorities.
There is no reason why this Court should not follow the same procedure.
32.
The writ application is accordingly disposed of by setting aside the decision of the respondent No. 2 rejecting the petitioner's case and quashing the notice of superannuation dated 8/13-4-92, and by directing the respondent No. 2 to constitute a Medical Board for the purpose of determining the age of the petitioner.
The Medical Board must have an Orthopaedic Surgeon not in the employment of the respondent No. 2.
The respondent No. 2 must constitute the Board within a period of 4 weeks from date.
The Medical Board will determine the age of the petitioner after taking into consideration the evidence, if any, produced by the petitioner before the management or which may be produced before such Board as to his correct age and in accordance with the standards laid down by Medical Science and recognised by medical jurisprudence.
The determination need not be exact.
If the Medical Board is of the view that the petitioner is under 50 years of age the petitioner's case of being born in 1946 will be accepted.
If, on the other hand, the Medical Board is of the view that the petitioner is over 50 years of age, the decision of the respondent authorities will stand, and the petitioner's superannuation with effect from 21-7-92, will be binding on the petitioner.
It may be mentioned that this broad determination was suggested by the Court to the parties.
The Court's suggestion was accepted by the petitioner.
33.
If, the petitioner's case is accepted by the Medical Board, the respondents will correct the service record of the petitioner by inserting the date of birth as 31-12-46.
The petitioner will then be treated as still being in service and will be entitled to all benefits and privileges which will accrue to him and he will continue in service till he reaches the age of superannuation on the basis of such amended service record.
The Medical Board will give its opinion within a period of six weeks from the date of this judgment.
34.
There will be no order as to costs.
35.
It is submitted by the respondent No. 2 that pending the decision of the Medical Board in accordance with this order, the petitioner should not be permitted to rejoin his duties although the petitioner may be paid his salary subject to adjustment against pensionary benefits in the event the Medical Board upholds the decision of the respondent authority.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that his client has no objection provided his client receives the salary he was receiving.
36.
Accordingly, the respondent No. 2 is directed to pay the petitioner all amounts on account of salary which may have been payable to him as if the impugned decision had not been passed until the decision of the Medical Board in accordance with the directions already given.
The petitioner will however not discharge any duties and will attend the office of the respondent No. 2 only for the purpose of collecting the amount on account of his salary until the decision of the Medical Board.
All payments made to the petitioner will be made subject to the condition that if the Medical Board upholds the decision of the respondent No. 2, the amounts so paid will be adjusted against the pensionary and other retirement benefits of the petitioner.
37.
Let xerox copy of this judgment be given to the parties upon their undertaking to apply for the certified copy of the judgment and on payment of usual charges.
38.
All parties are to act on the signed copy of the operative part of this judgment on the usual undertaking.
Order accordingly.