RS Mongia, J - The petitioner is an employee of the Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited, Dundahere(Gurgaon) (in short IDPL).
An enquiry was initiated against him, while he was working as Account Executive, for major penalty under Rule 5 of the IDPL Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1978 (hereinafter called the Rules).
The enquiry was conducted by Shri KK Ahuja, Sr.
Personnel Manager, IDPL The Enquiry Officer submitted his report to the Punishment Authority and the Punishing Authority (Director, Finance) vide his order dated 26th May, 1988 (annexure P.3) imposed the punishment of reduction of pay to the lower stage of Rs. 1120/- from the existing stage of Rs. 1160/- in the time scale of his pay for a period of two years.
The petitioner remained unsuccessful before the Appellate Authority, and his appeal against the punishment was rejected.
The present writ petition has been filed, challenging the orders of imposition of punishment and the rejection of appeal.
2. the writ petition was admitted by the Motion Bench on 26th April, 1989, and the following order was passed :-  "Cites JC Mehta, SE PGI v. PGI Chandigarh, 1988(4) S.L.R.
768.
Admitted to DB To be heard along with L.P.A. No. 1150 of 1988."
3.
It may be observed here that this case was somehow not taken up with L.P.A. No. 1150 of 1988. Letters Patent Appeal No. 1150 of 1988 was an appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge in JC Mehra v. PGI Chandigarh, 1988(4) S.L.R.
768. Letters Patent Appeal No. 1150 of 1988 was allowed by the Division Bench of this court and the judgment in JC Mehta's case (supra) was reversed.
The Judgment in L.P.A. no. 1150 of 1988 is now reported as the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh and another v. Shri JC Mehta, 1991(1) S.L.R.
127 : 1991(1) SCT 93.
4.
The primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that before the Punishing Authority could pass an order of punishment, the report of the Enquiry Officer should have been supplied to the petitioner and he should have been given an opportunity to comment upon the enquiry report.
This admittedly having not been done, the order imposing the punishment and so also the rejection of the appeal is violative of the rules of natural justice.
Reliance in this behalf has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, A.I.R. 1991 SC 471 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC).
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) was delivered on 20th November, 1990.
This judgment does support the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The learned counsel submitted that the contrary view expressed by the Division Bench of this Court in L.P.A. No. 1150 of 1988, PGI v. JC Mehta, 1991(1) S.L.R.
127 : 1991(1) SCT 93 (DB), which was delivered on 7th September, 1990, stands overruled by Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case,inasmuch as it has been observed in Mohd.
Raman Khan's case that the judgement of the different High Courts taking the contrary view than expressed in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) must be taken to be no longer laying down good law.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. Jagan Nath Kaushal, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case, it has been observed by the Supreme Court in para 17 that "We have not been shown any decision of a coordinate or a larger bench of this Court taking this view," and that is why, according to the learned counsel, the contrary view taken by various High Court's or even a two-judge Bench of the Supreme Court's was held to be no longer laying down good law.
The learned counsel submitted that a judgement of a three - Judge Bench of the Supreme Court, reported in Kailash Chander Asthana v. State of UP and others, A.I.R. 1988 SC 1338, was not brought to the notice of the judges in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case which has taken contrary view to taht taken in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case, and according to the learned counsel, we should rather follow the view of the Supreme Court in Kailash Chander's case (supra), in preference to that of Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case both being decisions of co-equal Benches.
According to him, the decision of the Letters Patent Bench in JC Mehta's case (supra) was correct in view of the decision in Kailash Chander's case.
He further submitted that in fact the Supreme Court itself had referred the matter for reconsideration in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case in view of the decision in Kailash Chander's case.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case was prospective in application, i.e., on punishment which had been imposed prior to the decision of Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case can be allowed to be challenged on the ground that before the Punishment Authority took the decision, the report of the Enquiry Officer had not been given to the delinquent Officer, resulting in violation of the rules of natural justice.
He particularly relied on the following observations of the Supreme Court in para 17 of Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) :-  "Therefore, the conclusion of the contrary reached by any two - judge Bench in this Court will also no longer be taken to be laying down good law, but this shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground."
(emphasis supplied).
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, cited a Division Bench judgment of this Court, reported in Madan Lal v Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab and others, 1991(5) S.L.R.
430 : 1992(1) SCT 359, to contend that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case, would be applicable to the matters which were sub judice on that day.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that the observations made by the Division Bench in Madan Lal's case (supra), in fact, are contrary to the observations in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case and need reconsideration by a Larger Bench.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the matter involved herein is quite contentious.
Whether this Court should follow the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Kailash Chander's case (supra) or Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (both decisions being of Co-equal Benches) is a debatable point.
A Division Bench of this court in JC Mehta's case (supra) has already taken in view, which had been propounded in Kailash Chander's case (supra).
Further, what is the true purposes and import of the observations of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) that the law laid down therein would have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on that ground, is again very contentious and likely to arise again and again.
We are of the opinion that all these points be authoritatively settled by a Full Bench of this Court, specially in view of the fact that Supreme Court itself has referred the matter for consideration of law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case in the light of the law laid down in Kailash Chander's case.
8.
Let the papers of this case be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice for constituting a full Bench for deciding the case at an early date.
JUDGMENT OF FULL BENCH DATED 17TH DECEMBER, 1992.
9.
RS Mongia, J The petitioner is an employee of the Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited, Dundahera (Gurgaon) (in short IDPL).
A departmental enquiry was initiated against him, while he was working as Account Executive under Rule 5 of the IDPL conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules.
1978 for imposing a major penalty.
The enquiry was Conducted by Senior Personal Manager, IDPL, who submitted his report to the Punishing Authority, i.e., the Director Finance.
the Punishing Authority, vide order dated 26th May, 1988 (Annexure P.3) imposed the punishment of reduction of pay to the lower stage in the time scale for a period of two years.
The petitioner remained unsuccessful before the Appellate Authority.
The present writ petition was filed challenging the orders of imposition of punishment and rejection of appeal.
10.
The Motion Bench admitted the writ petition on 26th April, 1989 by passing the following orders :-  "Cites JC Mehta, SE PGI v. PGI Chandigarh, 1984(4) S.L.R.
768.
Admitted to DB To be heard along with L.P.A. No. 1150 of 1988."
11.
L.P.A. No. 1150 of 1988 was an appeal filed by the PGI against the judgment in JC mehta's case, which was relied upon by the petitioner at the time of admission.
The said Letters Patent Appeal was allowed and the judgment of the learned Single Judge was reversed.
The judgment of the Letters Patent Bench is now reported as 1991 (1) S.L.R.
127.
The present petition somehow was not heard along with the said Letters Patent Appeal.
12.
After the judgment, the writ petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench.
An argument was raised on behalf of the petitioner that the writ petition deserves to be allowed in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, A.I.R. 1991 SC 471, notwithstanding the judgment of the Letters Patent Bench in L.P.A. No. 1150 of 1988 (1991(1) S.L.R.
127).
13.
In Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra), it has been decided that in confirmity with the rules of natural justice, it is incumbent that before final decision is taken by the Punishing Authority, a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer must be supplied to the delinquent official.
Since, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the enquiry report had not been supplied, the order of punishment was vitiated.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted before the Division Bench that the ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) would only apply prospectively and would not effect the orders of punishment passed prior to the date of the judgment.
He relied upon the following observations of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) :-  "There have been several decisions in different High Courts which, following the Forty second Amendment, have taken the view that it is no longer necessary to furnish a copy of the inquiry report to delinquent officers.
Even on some occasions this Court has taken that view.
Since we have reached a different conclusion the judgment in the different High Courts taking the contrary view must be taken to be no longer laying down good law.
We have not been shown any decision of a coordinate or a larger Bench of this Court taking this view.
Therefore, the conclusion to the contrary reached by any two-judge Bench in this court will also no longer be taken to be laying down good law, but this shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground."
14.
The judgment in Mohd.
ramzan's case (supra) was delivered on 29th November, 1990 and since according to the learned counsel for the respondents, the order of punishment in this case was passed prior to that, i.e. 26th May, 1988 the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) would not be applicable.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner cited a Division Bench judgment of this court in Madan lal v. Registrar Cooperative Societies, Punjab and others, 1991(5) S.L.R.
430 : 1992(1) SCT 359 (P&H) (DB), which held that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) would also be applicable to the matters which were sub judice in some courts of law on that date.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the Division Bench judgment in Madan Lal's case (supra) needed reconsideration by a Larger Bench in view of the obswervations of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case.
Referred to above.
The Division Bench hearing the present petition, vide order dated 24th January, 1992, referred the matter to a Larger Bench as to whether Madan Lal's case (supra) laid down correct law or not.
That is how we are seized of the matter.
16.
It has been fairly conceded by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the controversy, which was sought to be settled by the Full Bench, has since been set at rest by the Supreme Court itself.
In Writ Petition No. 145 of 1989, decided on 6th March, 1991 (SP Viswanathan v Union of India and others), the Apex Court observed as under :-  "Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that since a copy of the inquiry report was not supplied to the petitioner the order of termination is vitiated.
He placed reliance on the decision of this court in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, A.I.R. 1991 SC 491 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC).
It is true that this court has held that if inquiry report is not supplied to the delinquent employee before passing the order of punishment the order would be rendered illegal.
But the decision of this court is given a prospective effect, it will not affect the orders passed prior to the date of rendering the judgment (November 20, 1990) as could be clear from para 17 of the judgment."
In S.L.P.
No. 4155 of 1992 decided on 9th September, 1992 the Apex Court, after quoting the above-mentioned para (i.e. para 17) in Mohd.
Ramzan's case regarding its prospective application, observed as under :-  "The judgment in Mohd.
Ramzan's case was delivered by this Court in November 20, 1990 .
The respondent was dismissed from service by the order dated February 2, 1989.
It is, therefore, obvious that the respondent cannot take advantage of the law laid down by this Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case.
The High Court, therefore, fell into patent error in quashing the dismissal order."
Another three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Bhagirath gramin Bank and others v. Brijinder Kumar Srivastava, S.L.P.
No. 7631 of 1992, decided on 23rd October, 1992 again after noticing the above-quoted para from the Judgment of Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra), observed as under :-  "Now the judgment in Mohd.
Ramzan's case was delivered on November 29, 1990, whereas the respondent was dismissed from service before that date on January 15, 1987, if the doctrine of prospective application is invoked, it is obvious that the benefit of the judgment cannot go to the respondent delinquent."
17.
In view of the observations of the Supreme Court, as noticed above, it cannot be but held that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case is to apply prospectively.
With due respect to the learned judges of the Division Bench in Madan Lal,s case (supra), we hold that the same does not lay down correct law.
18.
In view of what had been stated above, the impugned orders in the present case cannot be set aside on the ground that enquiry report had not been supplied to the petitioner before the Punishing Authority passed the impugned order.
19.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that apart from the above point, there are certain other points also in the case, on the basis of which the impugned order cannot be sustained.
Keeping in view the submittion of the learned counsel for the petitioner, we remit the case to the Division Bench (as initially the case was admitted to DB) for deciding any other point that may be raised by the petitioner.
Sd/- RS Mongia, J
Sd/- JS Sekhon, J
Sd/- NK Kapoor, J