VK Bali, J - Smt Santosh Khurana who was pleaded as a party respondent in this litigation earlier vide orders dated 381992 has filed the present application under section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code praying for vacation of ex parte stay that was granted by this court on 841991.
2.
Broadly it is the case of the applicant that she was appointed as principal of MDSD Girls College, Ambala City vide order dated 10.11.1980 The college is affiliated to the Kurukshetra University.
Her appointment to the post of Principal was approved by the University vide order dated 25111980.
The confirmation orders were passed on 1531986 with effect from July, 1982.
It is pleaded that Managing Committee of the petitioner-College procured undated resignation of the applicant on 341970 under duress.
However the said resignation was withdrawn by her vide letter dated 441980 i.e. just on the next day.
The letter of withdrawal of her resignation was addressed to Dr. Manmohan Nath, president of the petitioner-College and the copy of the same was also endorsed to the Vice-Chancellor of Kurukshetra University besides other concerned authorities.
The episode of resignation led to number of cases filed by the applicant.
Reference of which shall be given later but ultimately after considering the matter in some details, the Dean of the Colleges, Kurukshetra University passed orders Annexure p-4 attached with the writ petition vide which it was directed that no papers received from MDSD Girls College, Ambala City be accepted unless the same are signed by Santosh Khurana as principal of the college.
The orders aforesaid were passed on 3051990.
It is this order which became immediate cause for the management of petitioner-College to come to this court.
In the writ that was filed challenging order Annexure p4 applicant Santosh Khurana was admittedly not arrayed as respondent.
Only Kurukshetra University and Dean of Colleges, Kurukshetra University were prayed as respondents.
Notice of motion was issued on 791990 by a Division Bench of this court and the matter came up for hearing on 14.9.1990.
From the interim order dated 14.9.1990, it appears that one Mrs. Maninder Kaur, Advocate, appeared for the respondents and prayed for time for filing the return.
The case was adjourned to 24.10.1990.
Once again on the request made by the counsel appearing for the respondents, the case was adjourned to 2411991.
The matter was thereafter adjourned on few dates and it was ultimately on 2621991 when the counsel for the respondents made yet another request for adjournment the operation of order Annexure p-4 was stayed till further orders.
On 841991, the writ petition was however, admitted and sit was ordered that the stay shall continue.
3.
The applicant first made an application for pleading her as a party respondent which as referred to above was allowed by me on 381992.
In the present application as stated earlier the prayer is for vacation of stay.
Notice of this application was given.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners had prayed for time on 14.8.1992. and it was made clear in the order aforesaid that no further adjournment shall be given.
No reply has been filed in this application and Mr. SP Jain, the learned counsel for the petitioner has chosen to argue the case on the basis of the records which are already available and some other documents, reference of which shall be made later.
4.
The main case projected by the applicant in the application is that resignation was forced upon her.
Be that as it may, it is further contended that Dr. Manmohan Nath, president was not competent authority to accept the resignation and the same had to be accepted by the Governing Body.
On 441989, however, Dr. Manmohan Nath accepted the resignation with immediate effect subject to the approval of the Governing Body.
The acceptance of resignation is in the following terms :-  "With reference to your resignation letter received by me, I hereby accept the same with immediate effect subject to the approval of the Governing Body.
Please hand over the charge to the senior most Lecturer immediately.
For this purpose, an extraordinary meeting of the Governing Body is being convened on 6th of April, 1989 at 4 pm in the college premises.
Please make it convenient to attend the same."
5.
As referred to above the case of the applicant is that the resignation was withdrawn on the very next day when the same was tendered.
In the circumstances aforesaid the contention of learned counsel for the applicant is that the resignation was forced.
However, it is further contended that in any case the resignation was withdrawn before the same could be accepted by the Governing Body which was the only competent authority to accept the same.
With a view to substantiate the plea that the resignation was forced upon the applicant, the learned counsel has shown me some news items published in the Indian Express and Jansata on 6.4.1989.
In so far as the news item that was published in the Indian Express is concerned the same run thus :-  "Chandigarh, April, 5 the executive committee of the Haryana Non- Government College Principals Association at its meeting held at Ambala Cantt today condemned the management of the MDSD College Ambala in procuring the resignation of Mrs. S Khurana under duress after locking her in her office.
The association urged the State Government to intervene immediately to protect the services of Mrs. Khurana and demanded that she be allowed to function as principal.
The association deplored the unethical and coercive methods adopted by the college management according to Mr. TD Ranjan, general secretary of the association".
6.
The learned counsel also contends that the very fact that the applicant was not arrayed as a party-respondent in the petition filed by the Managing Committee of the petitioner-college knowing it fully well that the order under challenge would affect only the applicant is in itself a good ground to vacate the stay.
7.
On the other hand Mr. Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner-college maintains that the applicant had tried her luck by challenging the order accepting her resignation in this court by way of a civil writ petition.
The matter came up before a Division Bench of this court when the following order was passed :  "A multiple number of disputed questions of facts are involved in the writ petition.
The petitioner is relegated to the remedy of the civil suit.
This petition is dismissed, of course, without prejudice to her rights."
8.
It is further contended that the applicant thereafter preferred an appeal to the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh against the order of the Managing Committee by which her resignation was accepted and her appeal was also dismissed on 1881989.
Copy of the order aforesaid has been annexed with the main petition as annexure p-1.
The operative part of the order aforesaid reads as under :  "In view of this clear provision in the rules, I find that there is no force in the arguments of the counsel for the management that the appeal is not maintainable as no penalty has been imposed.
It is also on record that the High Court in the writ petition filed by the appellant had passed the order as under :- (Same order as has been reproduced above).
In view of the above, I hold that the appeal dated 841989 filed by the appellant Smt. Santosh Khurana.
against the acceptance of her resignation is not maintainable and the same is dismissed accordingly."
9.
The learned counsel further contends that the matter does not end there and the applicant thereafter filed a civil suit and, during the pendency of the suit, also moved an application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC asking for injunction directing the petitioner to allow her to continue her duty as principal till the final decision of the case.
The aforesaid matter came up before Sub Judge IIIrd class on 15.6.1990 and her prayer for injunction was declined.
Further, she carried an appeal against the aforesaid orders which is pending before the appellate Court and interim order has not so far been granted by the said Court.
On the aforesaid facts, the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the applicant has lost her cause at all the forums be that High Court, Appellate Tribunal constituted under Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules 1980 or the civil court and she, by no stretch of imagination, can ask for vacation of the stay.
It is further argued that order Annexure p-4 is wholly illegal as the same has been based by the Dean of the colleges who has no jurisdiction in the matter.
The learned counsel, with a view to substantiate his last plea has referred to the provisions contained in sections 10, 11 and 12 of the Act.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length, I am of the considered view that a great injustice has been caused to the applicant.
She had worked on the post of principal for nearly nine years and on one fine evening, She is stated to have submitted her resignation without assigning any reason therein.
Of course, the fact as to whether the resignation was forced upon her or she had voluntarily resigned is subject and it will not be proper at this stage to make any comments.
Suffice however, to say that prima facie it does not appear that it was a case of voluntary resignation.
It may be made clear here that expression of any opinion, in the present case, is only for the purpose of disposing of the present application for vacation of stay, it shall not be binding upon any one who may deal with the matter in question and final finding will be given only after recording evidence of the parties.
In so far as the applicant having lost her case in various courts is concerned, the orders reproduced on the file or otherwise make an interesting reading and really go to show that at no stage at all whatsoever the cause of the applicant has been even prima facie commented upon on merits.
The earlier petition filed by the applicant was dismissed with the observations already reproduced.
When she went to the college Tribunal, her cause was vehemently opponent by the petitioner on the ground that case of resignation would neither be removal not dismissal from service nor the same would come under any of the penalties prescribed under the Rules of 1980 as also on the ground that the High Court had already directed that the matter should be reked up in the civil suit.
When again the petitioner filed second petition in this court, the same was dismissed by a Division Bench of this court on 5.4.1990 in view, of the order passed in the earlier writ petition.
The said order runs thus :  "In view of the order passed by the Division Bench in CWP No. 4876 of 1989, the petition is clearly not entitled to the relief claimed in this case.
Dismissed."
Thereafter when the applicant filed a civil suit, again she was met with a vehement opposition from the petitioner on the ground that the civil court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
Other grounds for opposing the claim of the applicant were also taken.
In paragraph 3 of the order passed by the Sub Judge which has been shown to me in the court, it is mentioned that the petitioner appeared and contested the suit as well as the application on the ground that civil court has no jurisdiction to give the relief sought for in the suit nor the suit is maintainable for the reason that the relation between the plaintiff and management was of master and servant and after she was removed from service, she cannot be deemed to be in service against the will and consent of the employer.
In ultimate analysis, the Civil Court observed that the relief claimed by the applicant could not be granted as the applicant had not challenged the order dated 10.4.1990 relieving her and that the suit filed by her for declaration alone and not for mandatory injunction would not be competent particularly when no amendment had been sought for to contain the prayer of mandatory injunction.
The reading of the order aforesaid would make it abundantly clear that the merits of the case were not commented upon at all.
It shall thus, be seen that before all the forums the applicant has tried her luck but she was met with a technical objection only.
11.
The learned counsel appearing for the applicant has also shown me order Annexure R-5 attached with the written statement.
The Governing Body of the college met in the college campus on 131990 at 12 pm under the Chairmanship of Shri Prem Nath Gupta, President and the following decision was taken :-  "In pursuance of the directive given by the University and in the light of stay order granted by the High Court and also several requests including application dated 20.2.1990 made by Mrs. S Khurana, the Governing Body resolves that Mrs. Santosh Khurana be and is hereby allowed to continue to function as Principal of the college subject to the final decision by the Court which will be binding on both the parties."
The aforesaid order was obviously passed after the resignation was tendered and withdrawn.
The totality of circumstances do not justify the continuance of the stay granted by this court and the interests of justice pre-eminently desire that the same should be vacated.
12.
Before I part with this judgment, I would like to comment that the petitioner-College has opposed the cause of the applicant at every stage on technical grounds and has not permitted her cause to be determined on merits so far.
While filing the present petition in this court as well it did not implead the applicant as a party which is a serious lapse on its part and it appears that it was deliberately done so that the truth may not came to the surface.
The order passed by this Court dated 2621992 vide which operation of Annexure p4 was stayed and order dated 841991 when the stay was ordered to continue are vacated.
The learned counsel for the appellant has also prayed that a further direction be issued that the applicant should be permitted to join her post from which she was thrown unceremoniously.
That, however.
is not the prayer contained in the application and it is left open to her to ask for appropriate relief from appropriate forum wherein she may also press into service the later resolution of the petitioner, reference to which has been given above.