JS Verma, J - Leave granted.
2.
These appeals by special leave are by the State of Assam and arise out of unusual circumstances involving three senior officers of the Government of Assam, namely, the Chief Secretary HN Das, Additional Chief Secretary PC Mishra and Commissioner (Home) CK Das.
At the hearing before us Shri Kapil Sibal, learned counsel for the State of Assam submitted that it was agreed by all concerned that the adverse remarks made by the Tribunal in the impugned order against Shri HN Das should be expunged and, therefore, the State Government does not press these appeals on merits even though its does not accept the correctness of the Tribunal's order.
All the other counsel appearing for the different parties in these appeals supported the submission of Shri Sibal and a common prayer was made to dispose of these appeals in these terms.
3.
Ordinarily, in view of the common stand taken at the hearing of these appeals it may not have been necessary to say anything more.
However, in view of the distressing facts and circumstances which has given rise to these appeals, we consider it necessary to state briefly the relevant facts and express our views which we consider expedient with the hope that it prevents such situations in future at any level of the administration, much less at the highest level.
4.
Shri PC Mishra was posted as the Chairman of the Assam Board of Revenue at the relevant time.
By the orders dated 10101991 and 891992 of the Department of Personnel (A) in the Government of Assam, the displeasure of the Government was conveyed to Shri PC Mishra for his conduct.
Shri PC Mishra filed OA No. 211 of 1992 for quashing the said orders and the OA has been allowed by this impugned order dated 181994 quashing the orders dated 10101991 and 891992 made by the Government of Assam.
While making this order, the Tribunal has made certain adverse remarks against Shri HN Das, who then the Chief Secretary of the State.
These appeals by special leave are by the State Government against the Tribunal's order.
5.
As earlier stated, these appeals are not pressed on merits and, therefore, the State Government's orders conveying displeasure against Shri PC Mishra having been quashed, no grievance survives to Shri PC Mishra.
In the process of quashing the Government orders against Shri PC Mishra, the Tribunal has made certain adverse remarks against Shri HN Das, which, it is common ground, now should be expunged.
On the expunging of the adverse remarks against Shri HN Das, the Tribunal's order in favour of Shri PC Mishra would survive without the adverse remarks against Shri HN Das.
6.
The material facts giving arise to this unfortunate situation are a few.
In November 1990 Shri HN Das was the Chief Secretary of the State and Shri PC Mishra was the only officer in the rank of Additional Chief Secretary of the State.
On 8111990 Shri HN Das, Chief Secretary, submitted a note to the Chief Minister, stating that he wished to proceed on leave immediately, for which he sought approval.
The entire note (at pages 42-43 of the paper book) is as follows :-  "CHIEF MINISTER.
I wish to proceed on leave immediately.
Formal application will be submitted separately.
This may kindly be approved and alternative arrangement ordered.
Sd/- HN Das 8111990, CS Additional Chief Secretary will be incharge of Chief Secretary until further orders.
Sd/- PK Mohanta 8111990.
COMMR.
PERSONNEL Sd/- HN Das 9.11.1990.
CS has not specified the nature of leave or duration.
It would be difficult to issue any orders on the basis of the above.
Please explain this to CS in person.
Sd/- SK Tewari 9.11.1990.
COMMISSIONER PERSONNEL I wish to apply for casual leave for two days on 9.11.1990 and 10111990 and necessary orders may please be issued.
CM has already agreed.
Sd/- HN Das 9.11.1990" Thus it was clarified by Shri HN Das that his request was only for two days casual leave on 9.11.1990 and 10111990.
7.
The Chief Minister on the same day made an order directing the Additional Chief Secretary to be in charge of the office of Chief Secretary until further orders.
On 10111990 the Chief Minister made an order addressed to Shri PC Mishra directing him to take over charge as Chief Secretary until further orders and to issue notifications promoting Shri PC Sharma, Shri S Manoharan, Shri CK Das and Shri AC Changakati, all I.A.S.
Officers, to the super-time scales, for which orders in the relevant file had already been sent to the Personnel Department.
Government Notification dated 11.11.1990, was issued posting Shri PC Mishra as Chief Secretary and he claimed to have taken charge of the office of Chief Secretary at 3 pm on 12111990.
On 12111990, Smt. Sablok, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel, made a complaint to the Chief Secretary Shri HN Das as against Shri PC Mishra.
On the same day Shri HN Das as Chief Secretary sent to Shri PC Mishra the complaint of Smt. Sablok to clarify the position addressing Shri PC Mishra as Additional Chief Secretary.
However, Shri PC Mishra did not make any comment or give clarification to Shri HN Das treating himself to be the Chief Secretary on that day.
An order dated 28111990 was then issued by the State Government notifying the appointment of Shri HN Das as Chief Secretary.
8.
On 10101991 the State Government issued an order conveying its displeasure to Shri PC Mishra for his indecorous and uncalled for behaviour with the junior lady officer.
Shri PC Mishra made his protest against the same.
However, the State Government by its order dated 891992 confirmed its earlier order dated 10101991 conveying the State Government's displeasure at the conduct of Shri PC Mishra.
9.
It is this unseemly incident which led to the controversy about the exact status of Shri PC Mishra on 12111990 because of his claim to have assumed charge of the office of the Chief Secretary on that day and it culminated in the State Government's order conveying its displeasure at the behaviour of Shri PC Mishra.
The OA was the filed in the Tribunal by Shri PC Mishra to quash the State Government's order dated 10.10.1992 and 891992.
10.
It is unnecessary, in view of the stand now taken by the State Government in its appeals before us, to adjudicate on the exact status of Shri PC Mishra on 12111990 and to pronounce on his claim that he was the Chief Secretary on 12111990.
However, it does appear to us that the mode of functioning of the State Government which led to rival claims by Shri PC Mishra and Shri HN Das of holding of office of Chief Secretary on 12111990, leaves much to be desired.
It does appear that the situation resulted from certain ambiguous orders made by the State Government on the request of Shri HN Das on 8111990 to proceed on leave in spite his clarification on 9.11.1990 of going only on two days casual leave.
At any rate some confusion having arisen soon thereafter on 12111990 on the stand taken by Smt. Sablok, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel and Shri HN Das having purported to exercise the authority of Chief Secretary on the same day, it was essential for the State Government to have clarified the position immediately to avoid any escalation of that conflict which in turn jeopardised proper functioning of the State Administration.
Unfortunately, this was not done.
Even later the adverse effect of this omission and its contribution to escalation of the controversy, was not realised when the matter proceeded further.
It is even more unfortunate that some of the seniormost officers of the Indian Administrative Service at the helm of administration in the State, did not realise the implications of their actions which resulted from a clash of egos and percolated to the lower levels of administration.
11.
It is incumbent on each occupant of every high office to be constantly aware that the power invested in the high office he holds is meant to be exercised in public interest and only for public good, and that it is not meant to be used for any personal benefit or merely to elevate the personal status of the current holder of that office.
Constant awareness of the nature of this power and the purpose for which it is meant would prevent situations leading to clash of egos and the resultant fall out detrimental to public interest.
It appears that this lack of perception in all concerned coupled with the failure of the State Government to issue clear orders, precipitated the situation into the unseemly controversy in the present case which must have adversely affected the State Administration.
We do hope this incident serves as a warning for the future.
We are constrained to make these observations since they were necessary in the context and there is increase in the frequency of such occurrences every where.
12.
For the aforesaid reasons, we expunge all the adverse remarks contained in the impugned order of the Tribunal against Shri HN Das, the then Chief Secretary.
The Tribunal's order would now remain with this modification.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly, in these terms.
Ordered accordingly.