S Rajendra Babu, J - Writ Petitioners [32 in all] in these petitions qualified themselves in the CPMT Examination held in June 1998 for admission to medical colleges in the State of UP They were called by the respondents for counseling for the MBBS seats available in Azamgarh Medical College run by the All India Children Care and Educational Development Society, respondent in CA 3237 of 1999.
They deposited the necessary fees and started attending the classes from July 12, 1999 and the 1st Professional examination was held in May 2000 and all of them have cleared their first professional.
When they came to join the 3nd professional course, they found that there were neither lab facilities nor sufficient teachers for teaching and conducting the course and practical classes for the 2nd professional.
However, on the assurances given to them at a parent-management meeting held on 2572000 about providing adequate facilities, they joined the course.
2.
However, at this state, it is pertinent to state that considering the fact that a large number students will be affected, this Court in C.A.
No. 3237/1999, gave the following directions by order dated 452001 :  "Having perused the statements furnished by the College and the Medical Council of India and also the letter of the Director General of the Medical College of the State of UP in regard to compliance of requirements of 1993 Regulations, we are of the opinion that it would be just and appropriate to permit the College to start after making due arrangements, imparting institution to the existing students who have passed 1st year of the MBBS course within two weeks from today.
The College shall be inspected by the Medical Council of India with reference to the deficiencies pointed out as per the standards fixed in 1993 Regulations in the first week of August 2001 after due notice to the applicant-respondent College.
The report whereof shall be submitted in this Court in the 2nd week of August 2001 by the MCI.
Further orders on the I.As.
will be passed on the basis of inspection report of MCI.
However, we make it clear that if the college does not come up to the standards fixed under 1993 Regulations, we will be constrained to consider the question of ordering closure of the College and at that stage appropriate order for the absorption of the students in other colleges of Uttar Pradesh will be passed, if considered necessary.
We also make it clear that this arrangement is without prejudice to the contentions raised by the Medical Council of India in the appeal."
Inasmuch as, by our judgment in C.A.
No. 3237 of 1999 pronounced today, we have set aside the order made by the High Court holding that there is a deemed permission in favour of the respondent therein and in the light of the order made by this Court on 452001 the said institution will have to be closed in the event of non-compliance of the directions issued by this Court, the career of the students is at jeopardy and this aspect cannot be seriously disputed.
Learned counsel appearing for the Medical Council of India submitted that suitable arrangement could be made to accommodate these students in different medical colleges in the State of UP with the cooperation of the Government of UP  4.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and in the interest of justice, we direct the Medical Council of India and the concerned Directorate of Medical Education or any other competent authority in the State of UP, who has the power to transfer the students from one institution to another, on appropriate application being made by the concerned petitioners, shall initiate all the necessary steps to accommodate them in different medical colleges in the State of UP within a period of three months from today.
The writ petitions shall stand disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.