VK Jhanji, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 3602 and 5212 of 1991 as common questions of law and facts are involved therein.
2.
The petitioners are teachers employed in the Education Department in the State of Haryana.
As per admitted stand of the parties, they did not possess the requisite qualification for the post of Masters when they entered into service.
However, during the course of their employment while serving as teachers, they acquired the qualification of BT BEd.
By way of present writ petition, they are seeking from the hon'ble Court a direction to the respondents to award the petitioners Master's Grade from the date of their acquiring BT/B.Ed.
qualification.
In support of this plea, they have relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal and others v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 1621, and a Full Bench decision of this Court in Bhagwan Dutt Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and another, Indian Law Reports 1988(2) (Pb.)
246.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State, Mr. Prem Singh, DAG Haryana, has contended that the petitioners are not entitled to the Master's grade.
His precise submission is that the petitioners merely on acquiring higher qualification would not be entitled to Master's grade.
In support of this, he has placed reliance upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Bachan Lal Lahori and others v. State of Haryana and another (C.W.P.
No. 770 of 1989).
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the subject matter of both the writ petitions is squarely covered by decisions of Supreme Court in Chaman Lal's case (supra) and Full Bench of this Court in Bhagwan Dutt Sharma's case (supra).
In Chaman Lal's case (supra), this very question was considered by the Supreme Court and while allowing the appeals and writ petitions of the teachers, the Supreme Court ruled as under :-  "This order of the Government is now sought to be interpreted and it has been so interpreted by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in the judgment under appeal that those teachers who had acquired the BT and B.Ed.
qualification subsequent to December 1, 1967 (the date on which the 1968 order came into force) and before September 5, 1979 would be entitled to the higher grade but with effect from September 5, 1979 only and that those who acquired the qualification subsequent to September 5, 1979 would not be entitled to the higher grade.
According to the judgment of the High Court under appeal, the 1968 order did away with the principle of the 1957 order that teachers acquiring BT or B.Ed.
qualification should get the higher grade and that a concession was shown in 1979 enabling the teachers who acquired the BT or B.Ed.
qualification between 1968 and 1979 to get the higher scale from 1979.
In our opinion, this is plainly to ignore all the events that took place between 1957 and 1980.
The principle that pay should be linked to qualification was accepted by the Punjab Government in 1957 and when Kirpal Singh Bhatia's case (AIR 1976 SC 2459) was argued in the High Court and in the Supreme Court there was not the slightest whisper that the principle had been departed from in the 1968 order.
In fact the 1968 order expressly stated that the Government had accepted the Kothari Commission's report in regard to scales of pay and as already pointed out by us the main feature of the Kothari Commission's report in regard to pay was the linking of pay to qualification.
This was apparently the reason why no such argument was advanced in Kirpal Singh Bhatia's case.
Even subsequently, when several writ petitions were disposed of by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and when the Government issued consequential orders, it was never suggested that the 1968 order was a retraction from the principle of qualification linked pay.
The 1968 order must be read in the light of 1957 order and the report of Kothari Commission it was accepted.
If so read there can be no doubt that the Government never intended to retract from the principle that teachers acquiring the BT or B.Ed.
qualification would be entitled to the higher grade with effect from the respective dates of their acquiring that qualification.
The 1979 order was indeed superfluous.
There was no need for any special sanction for the grant of Master's grade to unadjusted JBT teachers who had passed BA, B.Ed.
That was already the position which obtained both as a result of the 1957 and 1958 (1968) orders and the several judgments of the Court.
We do not think that the Punjab and Haryana High Court was justified in departing from the rule in the judgment under appeal.
The rule had been well established and consistently acted upon.
Nor was it open to the Government to act upon the principle in some cases and depart from it in other cases.
In the result we allow the appeal and the writ petitions and direct the respondents to give the higher grade admissible to masters to all the teachers who have acquired the BT/BEd.
qualification with effect from the respective dates of their acquiring the qualification.
The appellants and the petitioners are entitled to their costs.
Writ Petitions and appeal allowed."
4.
The State of Haryana despite decision in Chaman Lal's case (supra), raised various objections in granting higher grade, admissible to Masters to the teachers who had acquired the BT/B.Ed.
qualification during the course of their employment.
This matter was again considered by a Full Bench of this Court.
The Full Bench after relying upon Chaman Lal's case (supra) held that the teachers are entitled to Master's play from the date they acquired the BT/B.Ed.
qualification.
5.
The Division Bench Judgement in Bachan Lal Lahori's case (supra), is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In Bachan Lal Lahori's case (supra), the only question which was raised was as to whether the teachers are automatically entitled to the scale of Lecturers on acquiring academic qualification prescribed for the post of Lecturers.
The Division Bench of this Court after taking into consideration the decision of Supreme Court in Gurpal Tuli and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1985(3) S.L.R.
259, and decision in State of Punjab and another v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others, 1975(2) S.L.R.
621, and also considering the government instructions of 1957 and Government circular dated 5th January, 1968, came to the conclusion that the 1968 circular cannot be taken to mean by necessary implication that on acquisition of qualification prescribed for the post of Lecturer, the Teacher/Masters working in the lower scales would automatically become entitled to the scale of Lecturer.
This is was in the back-ground that the post of Lecturers had been created for the first time in 1963-64 and that too in the context of separate categories of schools namely, Higher Secondary Schools.
The said categories of schools were nowhere in existence at the time of 1957 instructions.
However, this is not the position in the present case where the petitioners are claiming benefit on the basis of the Government order dated 23rd July, 1957 vide which, the State Government placed all the teachers into two categories and higher pay scales were allowed to them on the dates they acquired their respective qualifications.
6.
Since we find that the matter is entirely covered by the aforesaid decisions in Chaman Lal's case (supra) and Bhagwan Dutt Sharma's case (supra), the writ petitions are allowed, and the respondents are directed to release to the petitioners pay scales admissible to the Masters, with effect from the date the petitioners acquired the requisite higher qualification.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.