Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Reader in this Court has a two-fold grievance.
He challenges the order dated December 15, 1989 by which he was warned "to be careful in future."
He is also aggrieved by the refusal to grant him two premature increments.
He also claims that the action of the High Court in not giving him two premature increments with effect from March 24, 1990 as have been given to others is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Clerk on May 11, 1966.
He finally rose to the rank of Reader on February 8, 1990.
In the year 1988, as even now, the petitioner was posted in the Liquidation Branch.
On March 2, 1988 a report was submitted by the officials of this Branch that the locks of various Almirahs were found to be open.
A preliminary enquiry conducted by the District & Sessions Judge (Vig.)
Punjab resulted in the issue of a memorandum dated August 24, 1988, by which the petitioner was called upon to explain as to why disciplinary proceedings be not initiated against him.
In reply to this memorandum, the petitioner asked for a copy of the enquiry report on the basis of which his explanation was sought.
The copy was not supplied and finally a notice dated June 15, 1989, was issued to him by which he was called upon to show cause as to why his two increments be not stopped without cumulative effect.
A detailed reply to the notice submitted by the petitioner, which was shown to me from the original record, was considered and he was communicated a cryptic order by which the petitioner was warned to be careful in future.
His appeal for review of the order was also rejected.
Copies of the two orders dated December 15, 1989 and June 18, 1990 have been produced by the petitioner as Annexures P-7 and P-8 with the writ petition.
3.
An administrative decision was taken to grant two premature increments by way of an incentive to "the deserving officers/officials who have absolutely clean record of service."
The petitioner's claim for these two increments was also declined.
Aggrieved by the warning administered through the order dated December 15, 1989 and the action of the High Court in not giving the two increments to the petitioner, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition and challenged these orders on a number of grounds, which shall be presently noticed.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent the factual position is not disputed.
It has been inter alia averred that the preliminary enquiry report "is not normally relied upon during the departmental proceedings (regular enquiry)" and as such it was not considered desirable to supply a copy thereof to the petitioner.
It has been further stated that the "warning to remain careful in future was administered because the guilt of the petitioner as well as of others has been fully established in the preliminary enquiry report."
It is also averred that a Sub-Committee had been constituted for considering the representations of the employees of this Court against grant of increments.
The Sub-Committee had laid down certain guidelines.
It was only on the basis of those guidelines that "all eligible officers/officials had been granted premature increments by Hon'ble the Acting Chief Justice vide order dated 2431990.
One of the pre-requisites for grant of premature increments was that the concerned officer/official has unblemished service record and has earned a certain standard of Annual Confidential Reports.
In granting these increments Hon'ble the Acting Chief Justice also treated warning as a stigma and did not grant premature increments to all such officials who had been warned to be careful in future, or had some punishment to their credit."
On these premises the claim of the petitioner has been contested.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, appearing for the petitioner has contended that the order administering the warning to the petitioner is totally violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as copy of the enquiry report, on the basis of which the petitioner had been held to be guilty, was not supplied to him.
He has also submitted that the order is totally cryptic and laconic as it does not disclose the process of reasoning and is consequently vitiated.
The learned counsel has further submitted that the action of the High Court in not granting the two premature increments to the petitioner as had been granted to various other persons, is also vitiated as the petitioner fulfils the criteria disclosed in the written statement.
The warning administered to the petitioner, the learned counsel submits, is no punishment.
His record of service being consistently good, according to the counsel, there is no ground for refusing to grant the two premature increments to the petitioner.
The action has also been challenged as suffering from the vice of discrimination inasmuch as one Mr. Mohan Dutt Sharma, who had been initially awarded the punishment of 'Censure' which was rater on reduced by a Division Bench on appeal, had been granted the two premature increments.
The learned counsel submits that there is no distinction between the two cases and that the action in refusing the necessary relief to the petitioner was wholly discriminatory.
The claim of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Ajay Mittal, learned counsel for the respondent.
6.
A perusal of the record shows that the memorandum dated August 24, 1988 and the show cause notice dated June 15, 1989 had been issued to the petitioner primarily on the basis of the report submitted by the District & Sessions Judge (Vig.)
Punjab.
A copy of this report was not supplied to the petitioner in spite of his request.
Undeniably the report was the basis of the charge and the ultimate action against the petitioner.
A perusal of the written statement shows that the warning had been administered to the petitioner "because the guilt of the petitioner .... had been fully established in the preliminary enquiry report."
In this situation, I am of the view that the petitioner had not been given a due and reasonable opportunity and the action of the respondent in not furnishing a copy of the preliminary enquiry report to the petitioner was violative of the principles of natural justice.
7.
It is undoubtedly correct that some time a preliminary enquiry is conducted for the purpose of finding as to whether or not a regular enquiry is required to be held in such a situation, the enquiry report by itself may not form the basis of a punitive action.
It may only result in the institution of a regular enquiry.
Since the findings recorded during the preliminary enquiry do not form the basis of any order of punishment, the authority may not consider it necessary to furnish a copy thereof to the officer/official concerned.
It may be adequate to supply a copy of only the evidence recorded during the preliminary enquiry.
However, in case where the whole action is based on the findings recorded in the preliminary enquiry report, it will be unfair and unjust to deny the officer/official an access to the enquiry report.
Unless he is made aware of the evidence and the findings, it will not be possible for him to submit an effective reply to the notice given to him.
Such is the situation even in the present case.
The whole action had been initiated and taken against the petitioner on the basis of the enquiry report.
However, a copy of that report has been withheld for him.
In my view, there was a complete failure of justice.
A reasonable opportunity which deserved to have been afforded to the petitioner was illegally denied.
It has resulted in material miscarriage of justice.
Accordingly, the order dated December 15, 1989, by which a warning was administered to the petitioner is vitiated.
In this situation, the order of June 18, 1990, by which the petitioner's appeal/review was dismissed, as being incompetent, cannot also be sustained.
Accordingly both the orders are quashed.
8.
Even claim of the petitioner with regard to the grant of two premature increments has to be sustained.
If clean record of service is the criteria, I an satisfied that the petitioner amply meets this requirement.
Mr. Ajay Mittal has produced the confidential/personal file of the petitioner.
I do not consider it necessary to reproduce the various reports.
I am informed that the record for the last six years was taken into consideration.
I have examined these reports.
On the basis of these reports the petitioner was fully qualified for the grant of two premature increments.
In fact, even in the reports for the period during which departmental action was initiated and taken against the petitioner he has been graded as 'very good'.
In this situation, it is clear that the petitioner was eminently qualified for the grant of two premature increments.
Further, I am not able to see any distinction between the petitioner's case and that of Mr. Mohan Dutt Sharma.
Mr. Sharma had been awarded the punishment of 'Censure'.
He had filed an appeal, which was heard by a Division Bench of this Court consisting of IS Tiwana and AL Bahri, JJ.
Vide their order dated November 7, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as annexure R.1 with the written statement, they found as under :-  "The appellants have been heard in person.
They have admitted during arguments that fault lay with them in not taking prompt action for preparing the meeting note for being placed before the Sub-committee of the Judges.
However, they have tried to explain that present was first kind of case as far as Audit Branch is concerned and the Branch was not conversant with the action to be taken on receipt of extract of that decision of the Hon'ble Judges held in the meeting.
The appellants were expecting action to be taken by the Confidential Branch as the original matter related to embezzlement of State finds due to negligent functioning of the subordinate Courts including Judicial Officers.
This explanation as such has not impressed us.
The officers of the rank of Superintendent who had worked in different Branches before their appointment as such were expected to know that meeting notes were required to be prepared by the concerned Branches and then forwarded to the Registrar for being placed in the meeting of Sub-committee of the Judges.
Be that as it may since it was first kind of the case of the Audit Branch and the sentence imposed ultimately is going to affect the appellants in a major way that they are going to be debarred the grant of special increments recently awarded to all the members of the establishment of the High Court on account of good record for the last six years, a lenient view in the matter is taken in the matter of sentence, more so when the matter of embezzlement of funds in the Subordinate Courts stands dropped under the decision of the meeting of Judges.
For the reasons recorded above, the three appeals are partly allowed to the extent of the sentence.
The orders of imposing of penalty of censure are set aside and the appellants are directed to be careful in future."
9.
A perusal of the above shows that even Mr. Mohan Dutt Sharma had been "directed to be careful in future."
In this situation, I am not able to see any meaningful distinction between the case of the petitioner and that of Mr. Sharma.
Even on this account the claim made by the petitioner deserves to be sustained.
However, it does not appear to be necessary to examine this matter in detail in view of the fact that I have already quashed the order by which the warning was administered to the petitioner.
10.
Even, according to the respondent, the warning was no punishment.
In view of the fact that the increments had been released to Mr. Mohan Dutt Sharma and that the warning is no punishment, I am of the view that the petitioner deserves to be granted two premature increments in the same manner as these had been granted to various other officers/officials of this court.
11.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders at Annexures P.7 and P.8 are quashed.
It is directed that two premature increments shall be released to the petitioner with effect from the same date from which these have been given to various other officers/officials of this Court.
Consequential relief in the nature of arrears of salary shall also be granted.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.