GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has challenged the General Court Martial proceedings in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The facts :-  The petitioner was granted permanent commission in the Army in December, 1965; that for his various acts of gallantry in the battlefield, he was decorated with Sena Medal award by the President of India; that he attended several important military courses of study, as also obtained a Master's Degree in Defence Studies from Madras University in 1978; that he was selected and promoted to the higher selection grade ranks; that he was promoted to the rank of Selection Grade Full Colonel on May 17, 1986 while he was commanding 6 Armoured Regiment (for short, the Unit) that he had been selected and posted to raise this Unit on February 1, 1984 and commanded this Unit upto October 3, 1986; that having regard to his performance, he was selected and posted as an Instructor at the College of Combat, Mhow; that on account of his posting from the Unit in October, 1986, he was required to hand over the command to his successor, Lt. Col. Kuldeep Singh, who till then was his Second-in-Command and was fully involved in the functioning of the Unit; that Lt. Col. Kuldeep Singh connived with other disgruntled officers of the Unit, who could not make the grade for promotion and carried grudge against the petitioner for his being a hard task master and were jealous of his upcoming and bright career; that Brig.
JC Narang, respondent No. 4, on receipt of certain complaint against the petitioner, held preliminary enquiry on October 2, 1986 and passed orders directing the petitioner to be attached to 44 Armoured Regiment, thus immediately placing him under restrictions and preventing him from proceeding on posting to assume the appointment as Instructor at the College Combat, Mhow; that the allegation against the petitioner was that he had wrongly claimed the grant for modification of Government vehicles unauthorisedly; that the petitioner then brought out to the notice of the authorities that many of the Armoured Units had claimed the said modification grant as was done by the petitioner; that the petitioner explained to respondent No. 4 that each and every paisa of the modification grant claimed and received in the Unit had been accounted for; that investigation was carried out by illegally constituted Court of Inquiry in violation of Para 518 of Regulations for the Army, 1962 (for short, the Army Regulations); that respondent No. 4 after enquiry ordered action against the petitioner; that personal investigation by respondent No. 4 and through Board of Officers and then by Court of Inquiry was followed by recording Summary of Evidence which was ordered under the directions of Col. NS Parihar, who was the Second-in-Command of respondent No. 4; that the ordering of Summary of Evidence was illegal, the same having been ordered by an officer who was not competent to do so; that while preparing for 1985 Car Rally, the petitioner had met with an accident and the injuries sustained by him got aggravated which entailed further hospitalisation on June 21, 1987; that while he was in the Intensive Care Unit of the Command Hospital, Chandigarh, he was handed over the Charge-sheet dated June 19, 1987 containing four charges under section 52(f) of the Army Act and at 1325 hrs on June 21, 1987, he was informed that he was to face General Court Martial on June 22, 1987 in the field area over 500 Kms., away from Chandigarh; that the General Court Martial was accordingly convened by respondent No. 4 Brig.
Narang by a convening order dated June 23, 1987; that the trial commenced on June 24, 1987 and culminated on October 1, 1987; that the General Court Martial found the petitioner guilty of all the charges and he was sentenced to be cashiered from service and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year.
The petitioner has given the details which invalidate the General Court Martial proceedings.
He also assailed the charge-sheet served upon him.
2.
The petition has raised the following contentions in the writ petition :-  (a) Whether Brig.
Narang (respondent No. 4) was competent to convene the Court Martial in respect of the petitioner on account of the fact that he had investigated the charges and was the Commanding Officer and as such was debarred from exercising the powers of convening the Court martial under the provisions of Paragraph 449(b) of the Regulations for the Army ?
(b) Whether the General Court Martial lacked in jurisdiction on account of non-compliance of Rule 25 of the Army Rules ?
(c) Whether non-consideration of the pre-confirmation petition dated 5388 by respondent No. 2 submitted by the petitioner renders the confirmation and the promulgation bad in law and thus vitiates the entire proceedings ?
(d) Whether the charges preferred against the petitioner disclose an offence under Section 52(f) of the Army Act or are such which are innocently worded disclosing no offence at all ?
(e) Whether the denial of opportunity to the petitioner to engage the defence counsel of his choice at the most essential opening stage of the trial and non-provisioning of the defending officers of his choice vitiates the entire proceedings on account of violation of rights guaranteed to the petitioner under Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution and of Rules 95 and 96 of the Army Rules ?
(f) Whether the trial was otherwise barred on the ground of limitation so far as the first charge was concerned which was not dealt with by the Court on the advice of the Judge Advocate at the appropriate stage of the trial, thus, prejudicing the case of the petitioner ?
(g) Whether the Court could sit for a period of 11-1/2 hours continuously before asking the petitioner to defend himself on the charges in violation of the provisions of the Army Rule 81 and Rule 82, and thus rendering the proceedings bad on that count ?
(h) Whether the questions addressed by the Court amounted to cross-examination of the petitioner in violation of Rules 58 and 59 of the Army Rules ?
(i) Whether the prosecutor could make uncalled for, illegal and unwarranted observations without any evidence on record in that regard, and whether the proceedings thus got vitiated on account of Note 14 to Army Rule 58 ?
(j) Whether detailing of the officer as prosecutor, who was asked for by the petitioner as his defending officer amounts to denial of opportunity of natural justice and an effort to cause prejudice to the case of defence ?
(k) Whether having regard to the averments of the charges, the evidence in regard to mode of utilisation of the grant once it was received in the Unit was inadmissible being not relevant, and whether allowing the prosecution to lead such evidence on a specific objection by the defence amounts to leading and reading of inadmissible evidence, thus vitiating the entire proceedings ?
(l) Whether the charges were bad for multiplicity on the ground that the grant received of one claim was split to over two charges, thus making four charges out of two transactions, in view of Note 6 to Rule 30 of the Army Rules ?
(m) Whether the charge-sheet in respect of the petitioner was signed by the appropriate Commanding Officer ?
(n) Whether the denial of free communication to the petitioner between 19687 to 24687 was violative of the petitioner's right to prepare his defence under Rule 34 ?
(o) Whether the biased and prejudiced behavior of the attending Judge Advocate was sufficient to disqualify him from attending the trial and, if so, does it vitiate the trial ?
(p) Whether the finding arrived at by the GCM on 1.10.87 was without application of mind and without consideration of the evidence keeping in mind that the relevant issues at hand were only framed by the Judge Advocate on 1.10.87 ?
(q) Whether the re-examination of prosecution witnesses tendered only for cross-examination violates Rules 134 and vitiates the trial ?
3.
Written Statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 to 6 by Lt. Col. MS Karpe, Officer Commanding, 6(I) Armoured Brigade Provost Unit.
It was stated therein that during the handling/taking over between the petitioner and Lt. Col. Kuldeep Singh certain major financial irregularities were brought to the notice of Brig.
JC Narang, VSM, Cdr 6(I) Armed Bde, who after satisfying himself that there was a prima facie case established against the petitioner beyond reasonable doubt recommended his attachment to Army Headquarters in terms of Army Instructions 30/86 in the interest of discipline and to prevent undue pressure being brought upon the witnesses as also tampering with the evidence; that it was neither in the interest of service nor of the petitioner whose character or conduct as an officer and gentleman has been impugned to remain in command of troops; that he was asked to stay with 44 Armoured Regiment till orders from the Army Headquarters regarding his attachment were issued; that Army Headquarters vide their Signal No. 382837/MS6A, dated December 18, 1986 and letter No. C/00853/AG/DV5, dated December 31, 1986, ordered the petitioner's attachment to Headquarters 6(I) Armed Bde; that a court of inquiry was ordered to investigate the irregularities and to afford an opportunity to the petitioner to put up his defence; that the petitioner had himself admitted that his Unit was authorised to claim funds to modify only one vehicle whereas the petitioner claimed for 65 vehicles and thereby tried to defraud the Government to the tune of Rs. 76,842; that the petitioner's contention that he had preferred the claims for 65 vehicles instead of one vehicle since it was done by the other armoured regiments is of no consequence; that the petitioner was tried by a General Court Martial on four charges under Section 52(F) of the Army Act for committing the offence as is mentioned in clause (f) of Section 52 of the Army Act with intent to defraud and was found guilty of all the charges and was sentenced to be cashiered from the service and ordered to undergo one years' rigorous imprisonment; that respondent No. 4 had made an endorsement on the handing/taking over certificate between the petitioner and Lt. Col. Kuldeep Singh that Commanding Officer 5 Mech was to carry out an investigation with regard to the matters referred therein, that no inquiry was carried out personally by respondent No. 4; that initially the board of officers presided over by Commanding Officer 5 Mech had established a prima facie case and thereafter a court of inquiry was ordered and that since Commanding Officer 5 Mech, the presiding officer, and other members of the Board of Officers were of equivalent rank and senior to the petitioner due to their Indian Commissioned number, there was no violation of Para 518 of the Army Regulations; that where the accused person is himself a Commanding Officer he is required to be attached to another unit/formation headquarters so that disciplinary process against the delinquent officer can be started; that charges against the petitioner were investigated by a court of inquiry and later by Col. NS Parihar, Deputy Commander, who was the Commanding Officer of the petitioner, carried out the preliminary investigations in terms of Army Rule 25 read with Army Rule 22 and ordered the Summary of Evidence; that the petitioner was attached to Hq 6(I) Armed Bde, vide Army Headquarters letter No. C/00853/AG/DV5 dated December 31, 1986; that the Deputy Commander of any Brigade acts as Officer Commanding for all officers forming part of the Brigade headquarters and exercises disciplinary powers over them; that there was no illegality in ordering the Summary of Evidence; that based on the evidence on record, the petitioner was arraigned on four charges before a General Court Martial and he was found guilty of all the charges and was sentenced to be cashiered from service and to undergo one years' rigorous imprisonment; that the petitioner has tried to mislead the court; that the petitioner knowingly proceeded on 10 days casual leave on extreme compassionate grounds to attend his ailing wife being aware of the fact that one of the charges will get time barred vide Army Act's section 122, on June 25, 1987 if not arraigned by that time and he clandestinely reported to and got admitted in Command Hospital, Chandigarh before the expiry of the said casual leave on a false pretext and manipulated four weeks' sick leave with instructions to report back on June 19, 1987 to the same hospital; that the petitioner went underground and when the Command Hospital authorities came to know his designs, they cancelled his sick leave and informed him on his leave address to rejoin the hospital forthwith; that they also informed all the Military Hospitals in the country about it; that on June 14, 1987, the petitioner reported to the Army Hospital, Delhi Cantt.
and was transferred to Command Hospital, Chandigarh and later to 184 Military Hospital, from where he was discharged in Medical Category SHAPE-1 on June 21, 1987; that the petitioner was handed over all the documents as required vide Army Rule 33 on June 20, 1987; that the names of the members who were to constitute the court were also given to the petitioner on June 20, 1987; that since the petitioner had submitted that one of the members detailed by the convening officer would be a defence witness, the name of the said members was detailed as a waiting member and a waiting member was detailed as a member and this was done to accommodate the petitioner's request; that the trial commenced on June 24, 1987 and concluded on October 1, 1987; that the petitioner had raised the issues mentioned in Para 8 at the trial too, which were duly deliberated and thereafter verdict was pronounced.
It was denied that the General Court Martial proceedings were not conducted in accordance with the statutory rules.
It is further averred that Brig.
JC Narang (VSM), respondent No. 4, being empowered by a warrant of the Chief of Army Staff was competent in terms of Section 109 of the Army Act to convene the General Court Martial in respect of the petitioner; that respondent No. 4 was not associated with the investigations and thus the provisions of para 449 of the Army Regulations were not attracted; that the petitioner had deliberately chosen Lt. Col. SA Khan as defending officer, who had taken down the summary of evidence in his case; that since the choice of the petitioner was highly unreasonable, he was asked to give another name, but he did not do so despite repeated reminders; that ultimately the concerning officer made available the services of Maj. SC Dixit, who was doing Doctorate in Law from Bombay University at that time and was legally qualified and also had a tenure with the Judge Advocate General's department; that the petitioner in order to create further problems gave his choice of Lt. Col. MS Chahal on June 21, 1987 since the latter was serving in a different Command and his move had to be ordered by the Army Headquarters; that in the interest of justice, Army Headquarters was moved to make available the services of Lt. Col. MS Chahal to the petitioner; that when the said officer arrived in the station, the petitioner allowed him to proceed on leave for as much time as he wished and gave in writing to this effect and that he also tried his best not to use the services of Maj. SC Dixit at later stages to create a ground to file a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court and that the convening officer left no stone unturned to see that the petitioner was properly represented at the trial.
4.
The petitioner has raised questions of facts in this petition.
In order to satisfy myself that the proceedings before the General Court Martial were in accordance with the Army Act, 1950 and the Rules made thereunder, I summoned the original record.
The record was produced at the time of hearing of the petition.
Perusal of the record reveals that the petitioner had substantially reiterated the same points as were raised by him in the post-confirmation petition submitted by him to the Central Government, Ministry of Defence.
New Delhi, under sub-section (2) of Section 164 of the Army Act, 1950.
The post-confirmation petition was examined in minutest details by Lt. Gen. YS Tomar.
The post-confirmation petition along with the report of Lt. Gen. YS Tomar was submitted to the Chief of Army Staff, Army Headquarters, New Delhi, who is the prescribed authority for disposing of the post-confirmation petitions.
The Chief of Army Staff approved the note submitted by Lt. Gen. YS Tomar.
Wild and uncalled for insinuations have been made in the writ petition that the General Court Martial proceedings were irregular.
This Court in its extraordinary jurisdiction is not inclined to examine disputed questions of facts.
Counsel for the petitioner stated at the Bar that the officers conducting the General Court Maritial proceedings did not allow opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses, to lead his defence and to permit the defence counsel to make proper submissions on his behalf.
A senior officer of the Army, who appeared before me at the time of hearing, pointed out that the petitioner was represented by a counsel, including the counsel who represents him in this writ petition, in the General Court Martial proceedings.
Innumerable adjournments were granted to the petitioner despite objections by the prosecution.
The presiding officer of the General Court Martial gave ample opportunity to the petition to lead his defence and cross-examine the prosecution witnesses.
The prosecution witnesses from outstations, who were duly summoned and were in attendance, were not examined at the request of the petitioner although the prosecution objected to the adjournment.
The prosecution also showed its helplessness to procure attendance of those witnesses.
The presiding officer of the General Court Martial rejected the prayer of the prosecution and accommodated the petitioner in order to afford him ample opportunity to defend himself.
It is in these circumstances that I have thought it proper to reproduce the draft note prepared by Lt. Gen. YS Tomar dated November 18, 1988.
It reads as under :-  "1.
Reference enclosure 25A 2.
The case under consideration is a post-confirmation petition dated 18 July, 88 submitted by IC-16714X Ex Maj. Deol Rabinder Singh, SM of 6 Armed Regt.
attached to HQ 6(I) Armed Bde to the Central Govt. under Army Act Section 164 (2) against the findings and sentence of GCM held from 24 Jun.
to 01 Oct, 87.
The petitioner was sentenced 'to be cashiered and to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year on four counts for offences as mentioned in clause (f) of Army Act, Sec. 52 with intent to defraud.
The petitioner has prayed for setting aside the findings and sentence of the Court.
Background of the case  3.
6 Armed Regt.
was raised on 01 Feb, 84 and the accused was its Commanding Officer (CO).
The Regt.
was authorised only one 1x1 ton 4x4 FFR as a Signal specialist vehicle, which was not held by it.
The Regt.
was authorised one installation kit amounting to Rs. 95000 for conversion of one GS Vehicle for FFR (Signal Specialist Vehicle) role.
4.
Instead of claiming the cost of one installation kit, the accused preferred claims in respect all the 65 'B' vehicles held by the Regt.
The amount of Rs. 77,750.00 was received from CDA Western Command but neither any vehicle was modified nor the stores for the same were received in the unit.
On the directions of the accused, fake documents to meet the audit requirement were prepared by Technical Adjutant Maj BB Singh (PW-12).
5.
In the last week of Sept, 86, during the handing/taking over of the Regt.
between the accused Lt. Col. Kuldip Singh, a lot of financial irregularities involving the accused had surfaced.
Based on the investigations, the accused was tried by GCM on four charges under Army Act, Sec. 52(f) and on being found guilty of all the charges, he was sentenced 'to be cashiered' and 'to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year'.
Points raised and Comments  6.
(a) Point.
The findings and sentence of the GCM have been confirmed without taking into consideration his pre-confirmation petition.
Thus, the confirmation and promulgation are liable to be set aside.
(b) Comment.
The pre-confirmation petition was duly considered by the COAS and finding no substance in the petition, it was rejected by him.
Thus, the contention of the petitioner lacks substance.
7.
(a) Point.
The petitioner was reduced to the rank of Major from the rank of Colonel even before his trial commenced.
Further in spite of his unblemished record of service and exemplary character, he was awarded very harsh punishment.
(b) Comment.
Pursuant to the attachment of the petitioner under AI30/86, he had to relinquish his acting ranks of Lt. Col, and Col.
Thus, no injustice has been done to him.
Considering the gravity of the offences committed by him, the punishment awarded to him is just and fair.
Therefore, the petitioner's contention lacks substance.
8.
(a) Point.
The innocent acts of countersigning the contingent bills by the petitioner have been made to look scaring by adding words 'intent to defraud' and thus brought those innocent acts under the purview of Army Act Sec. 52(f).
Thus, no offence is conveyed by any of the four charges laid down in the charge-sheet and are liable to be set aside being bad in law.
(b) Comment.
The particulars of the charges averred against the petitioner have no ambiguity and fully support the statement of the offences.
Thus, the petitioner's contention is devoid of merit.
9.
(a) Point.
The petitioner did not know that the unit was not entitled to claim modification grant for all the vehicles of the Regiment.
Therefore, he is not guilty of the charges.
(b) Comment.
There is ample oral/documentary evidence on record to prove that the petitioner knew that his unit was not entitled to claim modification grant for all vehicles of the Regiment.
Thus, the contention of the petitioner merits no consideration.
10.
(a) Point.
The delegation of powers of the Commanding Officer under AO 251/72 by Cdr.
6(I) Armed Bde to Col. NS Parihar is illegal.
(b) Comment.
The delegation of powers of Commanding Officer to the Dy.
Cdr.
Col. NS Parihar under AO 251/72 is legally in order.
Thus, the petitioner's point lacks substance.
11.
(a) Point.
Brig Narang had carried out the investigations of the case and exercised the power of the Commanding Officer and also issued orders for his attachment.
Therefore, under the provisions of Para 449 of the Regulations for the Army, 1962, he (Brig Narang) was barred to convene a GCM of the petitioner.
(b) Comment.
Brig Narang was the formation Commander or the superior authority and not the Commanding Officer of the petitioner before his attachment to 6(I0 Armed Bde.
He (Brig Narang) did not carry out any investigation as his (petitioner) CO and thus was not barred to convene a GCM of the petitioner.
12.
(a) Point.
The Judge Advocate did not act impartially as required by Army Rule 105.
He had addressed questions for the purpose of cross-examining him which is in contravention to the provisions of Army Rule 58(2).
(b) Comment.
It is on record in the proceedings that Judge Advocate had explained the provisions of Army Rule 58(2) to the petitioner.
The scrutiny of the proceedings does not indicate any prejudice on the part of court or Judge Advocate.
Thus, the petitioner's contention is baseless.
13.
(a) Point.
He had objected to all the charges and sought the permission of the court to lead evidence in support of his objection.
But the court disallowed to objections without assigning any reasons.
(b) Comment.
Perusal of the GCM proceedings reveals that the court had duly considered to objections of the petitioner to all the charges alongwith reply of the prosecutor and advice of the Judge Advocate and decided to disallow the objections.
While disallowing an objection, the Court is not required to spell out the reasons for doing the same.
14.
(a) Point.
The charges suffer from the infirmity of multiplicity.
A single transaction has been made subject-matter of two charges.
(b) Comment.
Persual of charges reveals that all the charges have been framed correctly and do not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Thus, the petitioner's contention lacks substance.
Comments of JAG's Dept.
15.
The post confirmation petition has been examined by the JAG's Dept.
and their comments are placed at Flag 'B'.
The JAG's Dept.
has advised rejection of the post-confirmation petition.
Recommendations of the Intermediary Commanders.
16.
Cdr 6(I) Armed Bde, GOC 10 Corps and GOC-in-C Western Command have recommended rejection of the post-confirmation petition as it lacks substance.
Writ Petition.
17.
The petitioner has filed a writ petition against the findings and sentence of GCM in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh.
The High Court has directed that the post-confirmation petition submitted by the petitioner be disposed of by 7 Dec, 88.
Examination  18.
The case has been examined.
Persual of the GCM proceedings reveals that there is sufficient reliable and cogent evidence on record to prove the culpability of the petitioner on all the charges.
The petitioner was afforded due opportunity to defend his case.
There was neither any illegality in the conduct of the trial nor any injustice caused to him (Petitioner).
19.
The findings of the GCM are duly supported by the evidence on record and considering the gravity of the offence committed by the petitioner and the dictates of para 467 (c) of the Regulations for the Army 1962 revised edition, the punishment awarded by the Court is just and fair.
There are no extenuating circumstances warranting any interference with the punishment awarded by the Court.
Recommendations  20.
In view of the above I agree with the recommendations of the GOC-in-C Western Command and recommend that the post-confirmation petition submitted by Ex. Maj Deol Rabinder Singh be referred to the Ministry of Defence recommending its rejection as it lacks substance.
21.
Submitted for your approval please.
In the draft note, the factual allegations made by the petitioner were found to be baseless.
5.
Even otherwise, all the legal submissions reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment stand concluded against the petitioner by the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Major GS Sodhi v. Union, (1991)2 SCC 382 : 1991(2) SCT 537, wherein it was observed by their Lordships as under :-  "Before we part with these two cases, we must point out that most of the main submissions were only about certain alleged lapses in constituting court of inquiry, recording of summary of evidence, issuance of the charge-sheets, convening order and that all these orders not being signed by a duly authorised officer and about confirmation and promulgation of the court-martial findings and sentence and discrimination in awarding of sentence.
Assuming for arguments' sake that there is some substance in all these submissions, yet having given our earnest consideration, we unable to see as to how they would affect the trial as such in which both the petitioners duly participated.
However, in view of the detailed submissions made on these aspects we have considered the same to the extent necessary.
The main submission as we noticed is about the violation of Rules 22 to 25 dealing with the court of inquiry and recording of summary of evidence.
At the risk of repetition we must say that there is no violation of these rules and at any rate no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner in his defence.
However, as already noted the petitioners who were officers did not exercise their options under rule 25.
Therefore, the question of violation of Rules 22 to 24 in the manner alleged by them does not arise."
On the question whether this Court can interfere in the court-martial proceedings, the apex Court observed thus :-  "We find that in the court-martial which is important, the petitioners have duly participated.
It must also be borne in mind that the army authorities are entrusted with certain powers and duties under the Act which also enjoined on them certain important responsibility particularly in the matter of holding the enquiries and trials.
The Parliament in its wisdom in exercise of its powers under Article 33 has enacted this law and the officers are to be guided by factors like exigencies of service, maintenance of discipline in the army, speedier trial, the nature of the offence and the person against whom the offence is committed.
Normally having regard to the high office they hold there should not be any scope to apprehend deliberate lapse or intentional omission on their part."
On the question of sentence, the apex Court observed as under :-  "The next submission is that there is discrimination in award of punishment.
It is submitted that Maj. SC Mehra tried in a similar offence was awarded 'severe reprimand' and in the case of Maj. Gen Verma only loss of six months seniority was awarded.
We see no merit in the submission.
It is for the general court-martial to divide as to what sentence should be awarded in the given circumstances of the case.
We are unable to hold that the sentence awarded is wholly disproportionate.
6.
In the present case, the petitioner did not plead or prove that any prejudice was caused to him by causing infraction of any of the rules by the General Court Martial.
On facts, the allegations have been found to be incorrect by the Chief of Army Staff and there is no material to conclude that the finding of the Chief of Army Staff is not based upon any material.
7.
In the light of comments of Lt. Gen. YS Tomar, I am not inclined to examine the correctness of factual allegations made in this petition regarding the General Court Martial proceedings.
Even otherwise, as found by the Chief of Army Staff, the allegations lack substance.
8.
Before I part with the judgment, I must record my appreciation for Maj. SK Aggarwal, In-charge, Legal Cell, Chandimandir for the effective assistance rendered at the time of hearing of the writ petition.
I will appreciate if the departmental representative is deputed in every case to assist the Court.
Their assistance enables the Court to collect the complete factual data through them.
Sometimes for want of factual information, effective order is not passed.
9.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is devoid of any merit and is dismissed with costs.
Counsel's fee is assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition dismissed.