Ashok Bhan, J - Sports Department of Haryana vide advertisement published in Dainik Tribune dated 26.2.1989, invited applications for the posts of Senior Coaches and Junior Coaches in different games.
In this case petitioner has challenged the selection of Senior Coaches and Junior Coaches in game of Kabaddi and has prayed for his selection after quashing the previous selections.
2.
Facts are being adverted to, however, regarding the qualifications for the posts of Coach and Junior Coach of Kabaddi and its selection only.
The necessary qualifications as well as the preferential qualifications for the posts of Coach and Junior Coach in Kabaddi, as given in the advertisement are reproduced below :-  " Kabaddi Coach - (1) XX  XX  Pay Scales: XX Qualifications : Essential :  1.
Diploma in NIS 2.
(i) BA, (ii) Diploma in NIS in Grade 'A' or (iii) Matric and Member of the National Level winners team.
(iv) Matric and Member of the Indian Team participating in recognized International Tournament i.e.
Athletics, World Cup Hockey, World Cup Football, Asian Games etc. or played athletics in individual game or might have represented the country in the Asian games.
3.
Matric/Higher Secondary with Hindi.
4.
Willing to serve in rural area.
Preferential :  1.
BP Ed. 2.
Winner-Up National Level.
Member of the Runners-Up team or got individual award.
3.
Must have participated in any recognised International Tournament/competition.
4.
Experience in Coaching.
Reservations :  XX XXX Category-II  Junior Coach in Athletics-(7) XX XX Kabaddi  XX XX Pay Scales :  Qualifications :  1.
Diploma in NIS.
2.
Matric.
3.
Hindi upto Matric/Higher Secondary 4.
Willing to serve in rural areas.
Preferential :  1.
Should have distinction as player in National/International games.
2.
Experience as Coach.
Reservations  XX XX Petitioner as alleged by him possessed all the requisite qualifications for the post of Coach/Junior Coach and applied for the post of Coach as well as Junior Coach.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 8 also applied for the said posts.
Interview for the post of Coach/Junior Coach was held on 2441989 by a committee consisting of Director of Sports, Joint Director of Sports and Chief Coach Kho Kho Kabaddi.
Petitioner was not selected and instead respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were selected.
Petitioner being aggrieved against the said selection has filed the present writ petition inter alia on the ground that the selection made by the respondents is illegal, unjust and mala fide as ineligible and less meritorious candidates than the petitioner had been selected.
It was argued that respondent No. 3 and 4 were ineligible and respondent Nos. 5 to 8 are less meritorious as compared to the petitioner.
It was argued that authorities had fixed no criteria for selecting the candidates and the selection was made on the basis of interview alone and 100% marks were kept for interview without fixing any guidelines which is against law.
3.
As against this, the submission of learned counsel for the respondents is that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were not ineligible as alleged; that respondents 5 to 8 were in no way less meritorious than the petitioner; that selection of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 had been made on merits and on the basis of a definite criteria laid down and only 20% marks were kept for interview.
It was submitted that the selection was not arbitrary as alleged.
Respondents were directed to produce the record.
Respondents were directed to produce the record.
Respondents produced the criteria which was fixed by the authorities for assessing the merits of individual candidates based on the educational qualifications and their achievements in sports.
On the basis of this criteria 80% marks were to be awarded to the candidates for determining inter se merit and 20% marks were kept reserved for interview.
Original record of interview was also placed before this Court.
The criteria which was fixed by the authorities is reproduced below :-  "1.
Educational Qualifications = 10  Coaches  BA Ist Division = 8 BA IInd Division = 6 BA IIIrd Division = 4 Matric to BA Part II = 3 Additional Marks for post of Graduate degrees = 1 i.e. MA/MPED/DPED/BPED/BED.
Junior Coaches  Matric Ist Division = 7 Matric 2nd Division = 6 Matric 3rd Division = 5 Additional marks for BA/DPED/BPED/BED.
= 2 Additional marks for MA/MPED = 3 2.
NIS Diploma = 10  Merit or Distinction = 10 1st Division = 9 2nd Division = 6 3rd Division = 3 3.
Sports Achievements = 10  i.
International standing i.e. Olympic, World Cup = 10 ii.
Asian Games/Common Wealth = 9 iii.
Bilateral & Tripartite International Meets = 8 iv.
National Position holder = 7 v. National/All India Inter-varsity participation = 6 vi.
State winner = 5 vii.
Inter-varsity participation = 4 viii.
Others = 3 4.
Experience = 10  8 years & above = 8 6 years to 8 years = 7 4 years to 6 years = 6 2 years to 4 years = 5 Less than two years but not less than six months = 4  Additional marks for training International/National teams/All India Inter-varsity teams etc. = 2  5.
Interview Marks = 10  Total Marks = 10."
4.
I do not find any substance in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were ineligible.
Jai Singh - respondent was selected for the post of Coach whereas Shakuntla respondent No. 3 was selected for the post of Junior Coach.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 3 Smt. Shakuntla was ineligible to be selected for the post of Junior Coach because her diploma in NIS was invalid.
It was contended that she had taken admission in NIS diploma in July, 1984 claiming that she was a Graduate whereas factually she was not graduate on the relevant date; that she had created a vague and fake certificate showing that she had passed BA Since the admission to NIS was on the basis of being a graduate, she being not a graduate could not be given admission in NIS and, therefore, did not hold a valid diploma.
The arguments fallacious.
This court is not to hold an investigation as to how respondent No. 3 got admission in NIS and got diploma.
Respondent No. 3 had produced a certificate of having passed diploma in NIS and the authorities after taking the same into consideration interviewed her and selected her.
The grounds mentioned in the writ petition for holding respondent No. 3 ineligible cannot be gone into by this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution.
Petitioner in his writ petition has not mentioned any ground of ineligibility of respondent No. 4.
Counsel appearing for the petitioner was also unable to show that respondent No. 4 was ineligible to hold the post of Coach.
His only submission was that respondents 3 to 8 were less meritorious than the petitioner.
I have examined the original record with the help of both the counsel.
I have gone through the original merit list which was prepared by the Selection Committee while interviewing the candidates.
Marks have been given in accordance with the criteria laid down, referred to in the earlier part of the judgment, for educational qualifications, performance in NIS, sports achievements and coaching experience to all the candidates.
20% marks were reserved for interview.
Selection Committee after interviewing the candidates and assessing their individual capabilities awarded the marks given on the basis of criteria laid down were added to the marks given at time of interview and the candidates obtaining highest marks were selected.
Confronted with this selection, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that respondents gate-crashed into the range of selection because they were awarded unduly high marks at viva voce examination.
I do not find any force in this submission either.
It has been laid down by various Courts including the apex Court that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decision of the Selection Committee and to scrutinise the relative merits of the candidates.
It is for the duly constituted selection committee having the proper expertise to decide as to which candidate should be selected for a particular post.
It is not for this Court to substitute its own opinion.
Marks have been awarded to the candidates for their educational qualifications, performance in NIS sports achievements and coaching experience in accordance with the criteria laid down for the purpose of selection.
Candidates have not been interviewed by this Court and indeed they could not have been, and it would be improper and unjust on the part of this Court to substitute its opinion in place of assessment made by the Members of Selection Committee of the relative merits of the various candidates at the time of interview.
Supreme Court in a recent judgment reported as Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 Supreme Court 434, held as under :-  "It is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The Court has no such expertise.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc.
It is not disputed that in the instant case the University had constituted the Committee in due compliance with the relevant Statutes.
The Committee consisted of experts and it selected the candidates after going through all the relevant materials before it.
Therefore, setting aside the selection on the ground of the so-called comparative merits of the candidates, as assessed by the Court while sitting in appeal over selection so made would not be permissible."
5.
The next argument of learned counsel for the petitioner was that allocation of 20% marks for the interview was not in accordance with law as oral interview could not be relied upon as an impartial and objective test for selection of candidates.
He further argued that allocation of more than 122% marks for interview was arbitrary and unreasonable in nature and consequently, the selection made on its basis would be arbitrary and, therefore, deserves to be quashed.
;In support of his submission, he has relied upon a Supreme Court judgment in Ashok Kumar Yadav and others etc. v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 454 according to which the allocation of marks exceeding 122% for viva vova was arbitrary.
I do not find any substance in this submission of learned counsel for the petitioner either.
No such rule has been laid down by the Supreme Court that in case of each and every selection where the competitive examination consists of allocation of marks on production of credentials followed by a viva voce test shall not exceed 122% of the total marks taken into account for the purpose of selection.
The rule of 122% marks for interview is applicable only to a selection which consists of a written examination followed by viva voce test and not where there was no written examination as in the present case.
Even in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra) Supreme Court has held that there may be postings and appointments where the only proper method for selection may be by way of viva voce test.
Very rigid rules can not be laid down by the Court in these matters.
The following passage from this judgment was relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents for the proposition and the same is reproduced below :-  "23.
This Court speaking through Chinnapa Reddy, J pointed out in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, that the object of any process of selection for entry into public service is to secure the best and the most suitable person for the job, avoiding patronage and favouritism.
Selection based on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
So open competitive examination has come to be accepted almost universally as the gateway to public services.
But the question is how should the competitive examination be devised.
The competitive examination may be based exclusively on written examination or it may be based exclusively on oral interview or it may be a mixture of both.
It is entirely for the Government to decide what kind of competitive examination would be appropriate in a given case.
To quote the words of Chinnappa Reddy, J: In the very nature of things it would not be within the province or even the competence of the Court and the Court would not venture into such exclusive thickets to discover ways out, when the matters are more appropriately left to the wisdom of the experts.
It is not for the Court to lay down whether interview test should be held at all or how many marks must be minimal so as to avoid charges or arbitrariness, but not necessarily always.
There may be posts and appointments where the only proper method of selection may be by a viva voce test.
Even in the case of admission to higher degree course, it may sometimes be necessary to allow a fairly high percentage of marks for the viva voce test.
That is why rigid rules cannot be laid down in these matters by Courts.
The expert bodies are generally the judges.
The Government aided by experts in the field may appropriately decide to have a written examination followed by a viva voce test.
25....There cannot be any hard and fast rule regarding the precise weight to be given to the viva voce test as against the written examination.
It must vary from service to service, according to the requirement of the service, the minimum qualification prescribed, the age group from which the selection is to be made, the body to which the task of holding the viva voce test is proposed to be entrusted and a host of other factors.
It is essentially a matter for determination by experts.
The Court does not possess the necessary equipment and it would not be right for the Court to pronounce upon it, unless to use the words of Chinnappa Reddy, J in Lila Dhar's case exaggerated weight has been given with proven or obvious oblique motive."
6.
The matter as to what percentage of marks can be allocated for oral interview was considered by Full Bench of this Court in Joginder Singh v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1986 Punjab and Haryana 339.
Their Lordships constituting the Full Bench repelled the challenge made on the ground that providing 285% marks for viva voce was excessive.
Similarly in Sunita Kumar v. State of Punjab and others, 1987(4) SLR 347, this Court upheld the provision of 45% marks for viva voce test.
Applying the same yardstick as was laid down in Joginder Singh's and Sunita Kumar's cases (supra), it cannot be held that provision of 20% marks for viva voce test in selection where there was no written test was on the higher side.
It cannot be held to be excessively high which can result into arbitrariness in the process of selection.
In this case, selection was being made for the post of Coach and Junior Coach.
Various qualities like endurance, physical fitness, mental alertness and qualities of leadership etc. have to be taken into consideration while selecting Coaches and Junior Coaches.
Reservation of 20% marks to be awarded by the Selection Committee, under the circumstances, cannot be held to be excessive.
The contention of the learned counsel fails being without any merit.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition fails and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.