Darshan Kumar, FC - This is an appeal under Rule 15 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970, read with Appendix 'C' of the Punjab Naib-Tehsildar (Class-III) Service Rules, 1984 (hereinafter after referred to as the Naib-Tehsildari Rules), which has been filed against the order dated 2851993 of Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, whereby he has reverted the appellants from the post of Naib-Tehsildar to that of Kanungo.
Facts of the case are as under :-  Paramjit Singh, appellant No. 1, was appointed Kanungo vide order dated 13111986 of Collector, District Patiala.
He was promoted Naib-Tehsildar vide order dated 18.11.1992 of Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, in his own pay scale of Kanungo till he completed five years of service.
Harbhajan Singh, appellant No. 2 was appointed Kanungo vide order dated 531987 of Collector, District Patiala.
He was promoted Naib-Tehsildar vide order dated 28121992 of Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, in his own pay scale of Kanungo till he completed five years of service.
Jasbir Singh, appellant No. 3, was appointed Kanungo vide order dated 2551987 of Collector, District Patiala.
He was promoted Naib-Tehsildar vide order dated 18.11.1992 of Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, in his own pay scale of Kanungo till he completed five years of service.
Jawala Singh, appellant No. 4, belongs to Scheduled Castes.
He was promoted as Kanungo vide order dated 15.9.1988 of Collector, District Ludhiana.
He was promoted Naib-Tehsildar vide order dated 18.11.1992 of Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, in his own pay scale of Kanungo till he completed five years of service.
2.
On 5111992, Surinder Kumar Ziledar, respondent No. 2, submitted an application to Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, stating that he had come to know from a reliable source that some posts of NTs were lying vacant under his (Commissioner's) control and no suitable candidate was available for appointment by promotion for the time being and as he fulfilled all the conditions as provided under the Rules, he may be appointed Naib-Tehsildar by transfer from Irrigation Department.
On this the Commissioner observed as under :-  "In case it is necessary we may consider his name this time.
Otherwise keep this application pending.
Sd/-  Commissioner  5111992".
The service record of Surinder Kumar alone was requisitioned by Commissioner's office from Irrigation Department and on receipt of the record his application was put up to the Commissioner who, vide his order dated 24.12.1992, appointed Surinder Kumar as Naib-Tehsildar by transfer.
The order was issued vide Endst.
No. 12421-26/EA dated 28121992.
Similarly, Harnek Singh Ziledar, respondent No. 3, submitted an application to the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, through Chief Engineer/K.A.D.
Irrigation Deptt., Punjab, for appointment to the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
On receipt of this application, service record of Harnek Singh alone was requisitioned from the Superintending Engineer, IB Circle, Patiala.
After receiving his service record the office put up the case to the Commissioner who approved the appointment of Harnek Singh to the post of Naib-Tehsildar by transfer vide his order dated 2621993.
The order of appointment was issued the same day i.e. on 2621993.
3.
Thereafter, vide order dated 2851993 the Commissioner reverted the appellants from the post of Naib-Tehsildar to that of Kanungo on the ground that Sarup Chand, Kishori Lal and Mohan Singh, Naib-Tehsildars, had reported for duty after availing earned leave, that Sukhdev Singh, an 'A' Class NT, had also reported for posting on completion of his training, and that there was no vacant post of NT in Patiala Division.
Before these orders could be implemented, the appellants filed an appeal in this court on 161993 praying for staying the operation of the order dated 2851993 of the Commissioner.
After hearing the appellants through their counsel the following order was passed on 161993 :  "Heard.
Admitted.
Summon the record and the respondent for 2071993.
Operation of the impugned order of reversion of the appellants is stayed till further orders.
Resultantly, the appellants are allowed to continue as Naib-Tehsildars.
Dasti."
Record of the case was summoned and comments of the Commissioner were called.
The record and the comments have been received.
4.
On 6101993, the learned Counsel for the appellants submitted an application for impleading Surinder Kumar and Harnek Singh, Ziledars, as respondents.
After hearing arguments on behalf of the appellants and the Senior State Counsel, who appeared on behalf of the State (Commissioner), the application dated 6101993 was allowed and the Ziledars were impleaded as respondents No. 2 and 3.
Thereafter, notice was issued to them and they submitted their reply on 20.10.1993 through their counsel.
After receiving the record of the case and comments of the Commissioner, final arguments on the appeal have been heard on 411994.
5.
I have heard arguments of counsel for the parties.
The learned Counsel for the appellants has assailed the Commissioner's impugned order of 2851993 on the following grounds :-  (i) that the appellants are not liable to reversion, to that post of Kanungo.
They have completed five years of service as Kanungo and have passed the departmental examination of Naib-Tehsildars prior to their promotion as Naib-Tehsildar.
(ii) that appointment of Naib-Tehsildars is governed under rule 7 of the Naib-Tehsildari Rules.
The candidates mentioned in the first proviso to rule 7 are to be appointed Naib-Tehsildar subject to the conditions mentioned therein.
The candidates mentioned in the second proviso to rule 7, in which are covered respondents No. 2 and 3, are to be appointed only if the candidates mentioned in the main rule and in the first proviso are not available for appointment;  In the present case the Commissioner has invoked the second proviso to rule 7 ibid just to induct respondents No. 2 and 3 as Naib-Tehsildars even though duly qualified candidates, such as the petitioners, were available for promotion to the post of Naib-Tehsildars.
Otherwise too, the Commissioner has inducted respondents No. 2 and 3 on the post of Naib-Tehsildars without applying any rational criteria.
They have been inducted by "pick and choose" method without inviting applications from the other eligible persons, i.e. Assistant Consolidation Officers (A.C.Os) in the Department of Revenue and Rehabilitation, and other ziledars in the Irrigation Department.
(iii) that appellant No. 1, consequent upon his representation to the Revenue Department, has been declared senior to Subhash Chander and Jagdish Rai, Naib-Tehsildars, but despite that the order of reversion has been passed against him without reverting Subhash Chander and Jagdish Rai;  (iv) that Jawala Singh, appellant No. 4, belongs to Scheduled Castes.
As per policy instruction of the Punjab Government he could not be reverted except with the approval of the Government in the Welfare Department.
As no such approval has been obtained for reverting him from the post of Naib-Tehsildar, the impugned order is legally unsustainable; and  (v) that the impugned order is bad in law as the petitioners have been reverted to the post of Kanungo without notice to them and without hearing them.
With these averments he has prayed that the appeal be accepted, the impugned order of reverting the appellants be set aside, the appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3 be quashed to make way for the appellants, and the juniormost NTs be reverted to accommodate the senior NTs who have reported for duty after availing the leave and to accommodate Shri Sukhdev Singh, an 'A' class Naib-Tehsildar, who has reported for duty after completing his training.
The learned Senior State Counsel has not rebutted any of the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants.
He has, however, argued that the case of appellant No. 1 is different from that of appellants No. 2 and 3.
He has stated that under rule 8 of the Punjab Kanungo Service (State Service) Class- III Rule 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the Kanungo Rules), read with Appendix 'D' of these Rules, when a person is directly recruited for appointment to the post of Kanungo he is required to undergo practical training for a period of two years and only thereafter he is appointed to the service as Kanungo.
In this regard he has clarified that Harbhajan Singh appellant No. 2, shall be deemed to have been appointed to the service w.e.f.
531989 and Jasbir Singh, appellant No. 2, w.e.f.
2551989.
He has, however, not denied that a person appointed direct as Kanungo gets pay and allowances from the date of his recruitment to the service.
Further, the learned Senior State Counsel has not been able to clarify as to how the period of training has to be treated whether the period of training should be excluded from the length of continuous service referred to in Rule 11 of the Kanungo Rules rendered by a Kanungo or whether it has to be counted as part of the continuous service rendered by a Kanungo.
With regard to the position stated on behalf of Jawala Singh, appellant No. 4, he has admitted that being a member of Scheduled Castes his reversion was not justified.
The learned Counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has, however, opposed the appeal and replied to the points raised on behalf of the appellants, in seriatim, as under :-  (i) The appellants have not completed five years of service as Kanungo.
Their service is to be counted from the date of completing two years of training.
It is, however, correct that the appellants have passed the departmental examination of NTs prior to their promotion as Naib-Tehsildars.
It is also correct that respondents No. 2 and 3 are yet to pass the departmental examination but they are permitted to pass the departmental examination within 2-1/2 years from the date of their induction in the service.
(ii) The position is not denied.
It is, however, the discretion of the appointing authority under the service rules to make the recruitment to the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 have been rightly appointed by the Commissioner and they cannot be reverted unless they fail to pass the departmental examination of NTs within 2-1/2 years of their induction in the service as Naib-Tehsildars.
(iii) The averment made on behalf of the appellants does not affect respondents No. 2 and 3 as it relates to inter se seniority of appellant No. 1 and two other persons who are not a party in the present appeal.
(iv) The position stated in respect of Jawala Singh is not denied.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 have no objection if Jawala Singh is allowed to continue as Naib-Tehslidar.
(v) The appellants have not been promoted as NTs on regular basis.
They have been promoted as NTs in their own scales of Kanungo till completion of five years' minimum service as Kanungo.
As they did not fulfil the necessary condition of experience for appointment to the post of Naib-Tehsildar there was no need to issue any notice to them or to hear them before passing the impugned Order.
With these averments he has requested that the appeal be dismissed in so far as it relates to the contention of appellants No. 1 to 3.
With regard to respondents No. 2 and 3 he has concluded that they have been appointed by transfer on the satisfaction of the Commissioner, who is the competent authority in this case, and as no prayer has been made by the appellants for their reversion, no such order can be passed while deciding this appeal.
6.
I have taken into consideration the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties and perused the record of the case.
Comments on the appeal, received from the Commissioner, have also been perused.
The fact in issue in this appeal will require a finding on the following two points :-  (a) Whether the appellants, who have been promoted to the post of NT in their own pay scale of Kanungo, could be reverted in the circumstances of the case;  (b) Whether respondents No. 2 and 3 have been correctly inducted as NTs by transfer from the post of Ziledar under the provisions of the Punjab Naib-Tehsildari Rules, 1984.
If so, whether they could continue as NTs or, if not, whether they have to make way for the senior NTs who have resumed duty as NT after availing earned leave.
To examine this fact in issue it is relevant to keep in mind the mode of appointment and also the dates on which the appellants and respondents No. 2 and 3 have been appointed Naib-Tehsildars.
These details are given in the 1st and 2nd paragraphs of this order.
The appellants were promoted NTs in their own pay scale of Kanungo till the completion of five years of service as Kanungo.
Their promotion as NT was unconditional although they were to draw their own scale of Kanungo till the completion of five years of service.
On the other hand, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were appointed NTs by transfer vide Commissioner's orders dated 28.12.92 and 26293, respectively.
It has been admitted during the arguments before me that respondents No. 2 and 3 have not passed the departmental examination of NTs even though in their letters of appointment it has been mentioned by the Commissioners that they fulfill the conditions laid down in the proviso to Rule 7 of the Naib-Tehsildari Rules.
Nevertheless, under Rule 15 of the Naib-Tehsildari Rules, it is mandatory for the inductees like respondents No. 2 and 3 to qualify the departmental examination within 2-1/2 years from the date of their appointment, but even this condition has been omitted in their letter of appointment.
In this regard the letters of their appointment are apparently defective.
7.
It has been argued on behalf of respondents No. 2 and 3 that appellants cannot be deemed to have been promoted as NTs on regular basis as they had not completed five years of minimum service as Kanungo and were as such liable to reversion without notice or hearing before passing the impugned order of reversion.
On the other hand, it has been argued on behalf of the appellants that appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3 cannot be held at all to be on regular basis as they have been inducted without following any rational criteria, and also because they have yet to pass the departmental examination of Naib-Tehsildars.
However, from the facts of the case it is evident that promotion of appellants as NTs, even though in their own pay scale of Kanungo, is unconditional whereas respondents No. 2 and 3 have yet to pass the departmental examination of Naib-Tehsildars.
They cannot be held to have been appointed as NTs on regular basis and that being the position they cannot take precedence over the appellants in their capacity as Naib-Tehsildars.
Even though it has been argued that their induction as NTs by transfer from the post of Ziledar is in violation of the Naib-Tehsildari Rules, besides being in violation of the principles of natural justice, that is a separate issue which will be discussed later in this order.
It is, however, a fact that they (respondents No. 2 and 3) shall have to be deemed junior to the appellants as NTs and shall have to make way for the senior NTs who have reported for duty after availing earned leave and also for an 'A' Class Naib-Tehsildar, Sh. Sukhdev Singh, who has reported for posting after completing his training.
Under the Naib-Tehsildari Rules, the appellants belong to a service whose members are eligible for appointment as NTs as a matter of right whereas respondents No. 2 and 3 belong to a category of officials who are eligible for appointment as NTs in the exceptional circumstances and that too if the appointment has been made by following the provisions of relevant service rules and principles of natural justice.
In this respect the impugned order of the Commissioner of reverting the appellants to the post of NTs is not sustainable and is hence liable to be set aside.
8.
Now I come to the point, whether the appellants shall be deemed to have been promoted on regular basis and whether the induction of respondents No. 2 and 3 on the post of NTs is in accordance with the Naib-Tehsildari Rules.
The learned counsel for the appellants has argued that his clients have completed five years' service as Kanungo and have passed the departmental examination on NTs prior to their promotion as NTs and are as such not liable to reversion from the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
According to the learned counsel, the service rendered by the appellants as Kanungos has to be counted from the date of their appointment as Kanungos and the date of their recruitment shall have to be treated as the date of their appointment.
The learned Senior State Counsel is of the view that appellants will be deemed to have been appointed as Kanungos after completing two years' training for the post of Kanungo.
He has, however, not been able to clarify as to how the period of training should be excluded from the length of continuous service rendered by a Kanungo or whether it should be counted as part of the continuous service.
In this respect the learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has endorsed the view taken by the Senior State Counsel and has stated further that the service rendered by a direct Kanungo during the training period cannot be counted as part of the length of his continuous service.
As stated earlier in para 7 of this order the appellants have passed the department examination of Naib-Tehsildars and their promotion as NTs, even though in their own pay of Kanungos, is unconditional and they are not liable to reversion.
The only stipulation imposed in their promotion orders is to the effect that they have been promoted as NTs in their own pay of Kanungo.
That means there is no bar to their continuing as NTs although they would draw the pay of NTs only on completing five years of service after their appointment as Kanungos.
Therefore, no dispute can be raised at this date about their continuing as NTs and hence their was no justification for reverting them to the posts of Kanungos.
So far as Jawala Singh appellant No. 4, is concerned the learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has admitted, and rightly so, that he has no objection if Jawala Singh is allowed to continue as Naib-Tehsildar.
Otherwise too, his reversion from the post of NT is in contravention of the policy instructions issued by the State Government (in the Social Welfare Department).
Also, on his promotion as Kanungo from Patwari be has completed his five years' service on 14993.
9.
Then, I come to the issue of induction of respondents No. 2 and 3 on the post of Naib-Tehsildar by transfer.
The learned counsel for the appellants has vehemently argued, as per point (ii) of para 5 of this order, that they have been inducted on the post of NTs without applying any rational criteria.
It has been further alleged that they have been inducted just by "pick and choose" method without inviting applications from the other eligible persons, i.e. A.C.Os in the Department of Revenue and Rehabilitation and other Ziledars in the Irrigation Department.
The learned Senior State Counsel has not rebutted this argument advanced on behalf of the appellants.
Even the learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has not been able to rebut this argument although he has tried to justify their appointment on the ground that the Commissioner, as appointing authority, had the discretion to induct them as Naib-Tehsildars.
I do not agree with the contention of the learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3.
It is a settled principle of justice that even the discretion, particularly in the case of appointment to the posts of public responsibility (the post of NT falls undoubtedly in this category of posts) has to be exercised in a rational manner on the basis of some objective and transparent criteria.
It may be recalled that modified service rules for recruitment of NTs, i.e. Naib-Tehsildari Rules, have come into force since 1984.
Under these rules, 50% post of Naib-Tehsildars have to be filled up by direct appointment, and 50% by promotion from amongst the officials working in the Division under the control of the Department of Revenue & Rehabilitation (Revenue Organisation) who have passed the departmental examination specified in the regulations.
Under these rules no quota has been prescribed for Ziledars of the Department of Irrigation.
In other words the Ziledars are not eligible, in the normal course, for appointment as Naib-Tehsildars.
However, under second proviso to Rule 7 of the Naib-Tehsildari Rules governing the recruited of NTs, a Ziledar in the Department of Irrigation is eligible to be appointment as NT, by transfer only if no suitable candidate is available for appointment by promotion to the Service.
Even in that eventuality an A.C.O.
working in the Department of Revenue & Rehabilitation is equally eligible alongwith a Ziledar for appointment by transfer.
Therefore, for invoking this exceptional proviso for inducting a Ziledar as Naib-Tehsildar the competent authority has to come to a conclusion on the basis of available facts that no suitable candidate is available for appointment by promotion to the service.
In the present case the appellants had already been adjudged as suitable candidates and were promoted by the Commissioner as Naib-Tehsildars, though in their own pay scale of Kanungo.
Apart from this, the appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3 as NTs by transfer suffers from the following irregularities/lacunae :-  (a) There was no regular post of NT when they (respondents No. 2 and 3) were appointed as such.
They were appointed just against leave vacancies.
To invoke this exceptional provision for induction to the post of NT against a leave vacancy was not at all justified :  (b) Even if it was decided, though erroneously, to fill up the leave vacancies the Commissioner has not recorded any reasons as to why A.C.Os of the Department of Revenue and Rehabilitation were not considered by him for appointment.
In fact the duties being performed by the A.C.Os are vary much similar to those of NTs and on account of their very relevant experience in a sister branch of the Revenue Department they could have been a better choice for being appointed as Naib-Tehsildars by transfer.
(c) Even if it was deemed fit, and that too erroneously, to appoint a Ziledar as Naib-Tehsildar by transfer there was no justification for the Commissioner to throw to winds all principles of natural justice by considering the individual application of respondents No. 2 on one occasion and then of respondent No. 3 on another occasion.
On each occasion the Commissioner called only one person's service record from the Irrigation Department and declared him suitable for the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
The appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3 as NTs, in this manner is highly arbitrary, subjective and in utter violation of principles of natural justice and administrative probity.
Even if it was decided, and that too again erroneously, to induct some Ziledars against the posts of NTs, the Commissioner ought to have invited applications atleast from the controlling officers of Ziledars in the Patiala Division by issuing a regular circular.
In that case all eligible Ziledars could get a chance to apply and try their luck and the Commissioner could have found better and more meritorious candidates than respondents No. 2 and 3.
All confidential reports of respondents No. 2 and 3 are just 'Average' or 'Good' and neither of them has earned any report better than 'Good'.
(d) Under Rule 8 of the Naib-Tehsildari Rule it is obligatory for each Commissioner of a Division to maintain registers of NT candidates Registers 'A', 'B', 'C' and 'D' in which shall be entered the names of the candidates from the categories mentioned in clause (ii) of Rule 7.
As respondents No. 2 and 3 are covered only under second proviso to Rule 7, and not under clause (ii) of the Rule, the Commissioner has not passed any order as to the Register in which their names shall be entered.
10.
The learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has urged at the time of arguments that the appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3 cannot be quashed as no specific prayer has been made to this effect.
I find this plea totally untenable.
The learned counsel for the appellants has impleaded respondents No. 2 and 3 as respondents in this appeal and has vehemently objected to the manner of their induction as Naib-Tehsildars and has prayed at the time of arguments for quashing their appointment as Naib-Tehsildars.
The learned Senior State Counsel has also not defended the appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3 which has been made in gross violation of Naib-Tehsildari Rules.
The learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has further taken the plea that the copies of their appointment as NTs were endorsed to the Revenue Department and no objection has been raised by Government against their appointment.
This plea is also untenable.
While it is correct that a copy of appointment order of respondents No. 2 as well of respondent No. 3 was received in the Revenue Department, but in the meantime this appeal was filed in this court.
It was not considered desirable to deal the same case simultaneously on the administrative side and in the court.
It was preferred to deal the case in the court in view of the fact that legal issues involved in such cases are resolved in a better manner after hearing arguments of the counsel for the parties and I am making this order after considering the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties.
11.
In view of the detailed discussion in paras 6 to 10 of this order I come to the conclusion that the appellants are not liable to reversion from the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
It is also held that respondents No. 2 and 3 have been appointed Naib-Tehsildars by transfer in a highly arbitrary manner without following the relevant service rules and without following the principles of natural justice and as such their appointment is not legally sustainable.
Accordingly, I accept the appeal, set aside the impugned order and quash the appointment of respondents No. 2 and 3.
A copy of this order be sent to the Revenue Department (in RE-I Branch and Consolidation Branch) for information and record.
12.
As I remained busy on administrative side on 2511994 and 1521994, I could not pronounce the order on those dates and the order has, therefore, been pronounced today.