PK Mallick, AM - In this application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, the applicant has prayed for the quashing of the impugned order of suspension dated 1891989 (Annexure A7).
2.
The applicant was appointed as an ad hoc LDC vide Annexure A-1 dated 781978 and joined at Calcutta on 9.8.78.
He was appointed on regular basis as LDC with effect from 1311986 after passing the Staff Selection Examination and was placed on probation for two years vide Annexure A4 dated 17.11.1986.
He was transferred to Asansol on 30.4.1986.
3.
According to the applicant, on the night of 31.8.1989, he was informed that his wife, who was in advanced stage of pregnancy, had become seriously ill and had been admitted in the hospital.
Since his presence at the hospital was essential, there being no responsible male member in the village home of the applicant, he applied for earned leave on 191989 and was sanctioned earned leave from 4.9.1989 to 8.9.89 with permission to prefix holidays of 2 and 3.9.1989.
He rushed to his village home by availing of night train from Asansol on 1989.
His wife, who had been admitted in the Maternity and Child Welfare Centre, Joynagar-Majilpur on 30889, was released on 291989 without delivery.
In view of the unabated illness and complications of his wife as also the illness of his mother, the applicant was advised by the physician to stay on and arrange proper medical treatment of his wife and mother.
Under the circumstances, he had no alternative but to send an application dated 791989 by registered post with acknowledgement receipt to respondent 3 for extension of leave for a further period of 30 days upto 8101989.
The applicant's wife was again admitted in the hospital on 22989 and was discharged on 24989, after giving birth to a male child.
In view of her delicate condition of health, she was directed to take complete bed rest of six weeks.
The discharge certificate of the applicant's wife dated 24989 stating about the birth of a male baby at 2350 hrs on 22989 is at Annexure A5.
The application submitted by the applicant on 791989 praying for extension of his earned leave for a further period of 30 days is at Annexure A6.
4.
The applicant has stated that while he was busy attending to his ailing wife at his village home, he received the impugned order of suspension dated 18989 all of a sudden, placing him under suspension with immediate effect.
The impugned order is reproduced below :  "No. CII(17)II/I Dated Calcutta 1891989.
ORDER Whereas a disciplinary proceeding against Shri SK Naskar, Lower Division Clerk in the office of the Controller of Explosive, Asansol is contemplated.
And whereas a case against the said Shri SK Nasker in respect of a criminal offence is under investigation/inquiry/trial.
Now, therefore, the undersigned in exercise of powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of Rule 10 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, hereby places the said Shri SK Naskar, Lower Division Clerk under suspension with immediate effect."
5.
The present application was filed on 4101989.
While admitting the application on 61201989, this Tribunal had directed the applicant to report in the office of respondent 3 on the expiry of the leave granted upto 8101989 (9th and 10th October, 1989 were holidays).
There was some controversy regarding his reporting to respondent 3.
After hearing both the parties, this Tribunal had directed the respondents on 20101989 to allow the applicant to report in the office of respondent 3 on 23101989 (FN) and to treat the period from October 11 to 22101989 as leave as due.
The applicant reported in the office of respondent 3 on 23101989.
6.
We have heard Mr. AN Bose, counsel leading Mr. DG Mukherjee, counsel for the applicant and Mr. CR Bag, Addl.
SC for the respondents.
7.
After summarising the facts of this case, Mr. Bose has drawn our attention to rule 10(1) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 regarding suspension which is reproduced below :  "10(1).
The appointing authority or any authority to which it is subordinate or the disciplinary authority or any other authority empowered in that behalf by the President, by general or special order, may place a Government servant under suspension :- (a) where, a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending; or (aa) where, in the opinion, of the authority aforesaid, he has engaged himself in activities prejudicial to the interest of the security of the State; or (b) where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation, inquiry or trial......" He has argued that it is clear from the aforesaid rule that the order of suspension can be passed either for '(a)' or '(aa)' or '(b)' above and not for '(a)' and '(aa)' and '(b)', which would make it a rolled up order and therefore not sustainable, being violative of Rule 10(1) above.
He has submitted that a plain regarding of the impugned order (of para 4 above) would clearly show that it talks of a contemplated disciplinary proceeding and also investigation/enquiry/trial in respect of a criminal case against the applicant, that it cannot be all these together as these are separate and distinct and that the order is undoubtedly a rolled up order showing non-application of mind on the part of the disciplinary authority.
8.
In support of his contention, he has cited the following judgments :  1) P.N.
Mukherjee v. State of West Bengal, 70 CWN 503.
2) KN Das v. Addl.
D.M., 86 CWN 364.
3) KK Jindal v. GM, Northern Railway, ATR 1986(1) CAT 304.
In PN Mukherjee's case, the Collector had signed a printed form that reproduced all the alternative purposes for which the relevant statute under the West Bengal Land (Requisition and Acquisition) Rules, 1948 enabled an order to be made.
He did not consider it necessary to determine which of these alternative was applicable to the case before him.
The Calcutta High Court held that from a reading of the impugned order in its entirely, nobody can ascertain whether the requisition was being ordered for the purpose of drainage, irrigation, road construction or transport and that it was clear that the Collector did not apply his mind, while issuing the impugned order.
It also found that the order did not give sufficient particulars so as to identify the land to which the order related.
The impugned order was accordingly held to be invalid and quashed, with liberty to the respondents to proceed afresh in accordance with law.
9.
Mr. Bose has submitted that the principle laid down in this judgment is fully applicable in the present case in which there has been a mechanical reproduction of the rule, displaying complete non-application of mind by the disciplinary authority, thereby making the impugned order bad on the face of it.
He has indicated that no trial has commenced so far and has asserted that 'or' in the rule has been changed to 'and' to prosecute and harass the applicant.
10.
In KN Das (supra), the Collector had delivered a notice issued under Section 3(1) of the West Bengal Land (Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1948 intimating the purposes of the requisition to be for maintaining supplies and services essential to the life of the community, viz. for providing proper facilities for transport/communication/irrigation/drainage for acquisition for stock yard offices and godowns (PWD) Road department at Suri, in the district of Birbhum.
It was found that all the purposes were kept and maintained in the order of requisition and were not scored through.
The Calcutta High Court held that the absence of such striking out the inherent purposes or the purposes not required or unnecessary and the issuance of a rolled up requisition order would establish a case of non-application of mind of the authorities concerned apart from vagueness.
It held the requisition in respect of the land covering the tank concerned to be bad, void and irregular, apart from being without jurisdiction, unauthorized and mala fide.
It further held that the order of requisition in respect of the other lands suffered from the necessary infirmities of non-application of mind as the order in question was a rolled up one and the irrelevant purposes have not been scored through or struck off.
The rule was made absolute with liberty to the respondents to proceed in the matter of requisitioning the land in accordance with the law, if so advised.
11.
KK Jindal's case, the applicant had challenged his transfer from Hazrat Nizamuddin station to Bhatinda.
The transfer order was set aside by the Principal Bench of this Tribunal which found that the transfer order was for reasons other than administrative and that the basis of the order was the suspicion regarding the conduct of the applicant.
In the judgment, the Principal Bench observed as under :  "7.
Lord Denning Master of Rolls in Laker Airways Ltd v. Department of Trade, 1977(2) W.L.R.
237 declared :- "Seeing that the prerogative is a discretionary power to be exercised for the public good, it follows that its exercise can be examined by the courts just as any other discretionary power which is vested in the executive."
8.
In General Assembly of Free Church etc. v Overtoun, 1904 A.C. 515 at 695 the House of Lords said : "I take it to be clear that there is a condition implied in this as well as in other instruments which create powers, namely, that the power shall be used bona fide for the purposes for which they are conferred."
Mr. Bose has submitted that it follows from this judgment that power of suspension must be used in a bona fide manner in accordance with the rules and norms, which was not done in the instant case, which issuing the impugned order.
12.
Mr. Bose has next drawn our attention to paras 4(g) and 4(k) of the reply of the respondents.
Para 4(g) is reproduced below :  "The 'False Certificate' in respect of his wife has been designedly procured by the applicant with the ulterior motive of using the same as evidence in the present proceeding which has been bolstered up on absolutely false and concocted allegations."
Mr. Bose has submitted that it would appear from the verification signed by respondent 2 on behalf of all the respondents that the statements made in paras 4 to 19 of the reply are true to his knowledge derived from the record.
He has asserted that the statement made at para 4(g) above can neither be true to the knowledge of respondent 2 nor derived from record as it talks of 'false pain certificate' in respect of applicant's wife, which cannot be true in view of the discharge certificate vide Annexure A-5.
He has characterised the allegation at para 4(g), which has been verified as true to knowledge or derived from record by respondent 2, as mala fide and vindicative, as also an attempt to penalise the applicant.
13.
In para 4(k) of the reply the respondents have stated that the applicant was placed under suspension with effect from 1891989 in view of pendency of a police investigation against him in respect of a criminal offence lodged against him under Section 468 and 471 of IPC and also in view of the fact that a charge-sheet was contemplated to be issued on the applicant for his various acts of misconduct.
It has been asserted that the order of suspension had been ordered bona fide in public interest after due deliberation, that the Asansol office had got a bad name due to misconduct and unscrupulous and illegal actions of the applicant, that his presence and/or continuance in the Asansol office would not only affect discipline but would also disturb the peaceful atmosphere in the Asansol office, that a person against whom a police investigation is pending and who is the object of public for his alleged crimes cannot be allowed to work in the office for maintaining proper discipline and that as such the order of suspension had been issued in public interest for making further enquiries about his misconduct and misuse or abuse of official position.
14.
Mr. Bose has pointed out that there is a charge of forgery against the applicant, the complainant being an outsider, that there was a discrepancy in the explosive licence number in the FIR (e.g. BU/LT/17) and the seizure list (eg BU/TL/59).
He has argued that the suspension was not justified on the complaint of an outsider, there being discrepancy between the FIR and the seizure list.
15.
Mr. Bose has cited two judgments viz. Mohmd.
Wahid v. Union of India, ATR 1989(1) CAT 375 and Vijayakumar Srivastava v. Union of India, ATR 1987(1) CAT 233 on the points that instructions of the Government are binding on the Government and that if there is any difference of opinion the matter is to be referred to a larger Bench respectively.
However, we are not referring to these judgments as in our opinion they are not relevant to the present case.
16.
Mr. CR Bag, has opposed the application.
He has submitted that the plea that the suspension order was not sustainable as it is a rolled up order was not taken in the application and that as such it cannot be taken at the stage of hearing.
He has also argued that the order of suspension is not a rolled up order as the expression 'and' used in the impugned order is disjunctive and not conductive.
Hence, there is no infirmity in the order.
17.
He has also drawn our attention to the standard form of order of suspension in which the relevant portion is as under :-  ORDER Whereas a disciplinary proceeding against Shri......(name and designation of the Government servant) is contemplated/pending Whereas a case against Shri.......(Name and designation of the Government servant) in respect of a criminal offence is under investigation/inquiry/trial.
Mr.
Bag has argued that it is clear from the standard form that both the grounds for suspension viz. contemplation or pendency of a disciplinary proceeding and investigation/enquiry/trial in a criminal case against the delinquent Government employee can be mentioned in the order of suspension as has been done in the impugned order.
18.
He has referred to paras 4(k) and 4(1) of the reply of the respondents to assert that the order of suspension was passed in public interest and also for making further enquiries about the misconduct and misuse of official position by the applicant.
Para 4(k) has already been summarised at para 13 above.
It has been asserted by the respondents at para 4(1) of their reply that the order of suspension was an absolutely bona fide official act, which cannot be challenged on any ground whatsoever.
They have emphatically denied that the order is a mala fide one, initiated on the ground of non-application of mind.
19.
Mr.
Bag has submitted that the two judgments of the Calcutta High Court (of paras 8 and 10 above) relied upon by Mr. Bose referred to Land Acquisition Act cases and have no manner of application to the facts of the present case.
20.
As regards para 4(g) of the reply he has submitted that the verification is only a technicality and too much need not be read into it.
21.
Mr.
Bag has finally drawn our attention to para 4 of the reply of the respondents in which it has been stated that some incident had occurred in the Asansol office on 29889 and 31.8.89, which was of a very serious nature involving law and order problem.
Since the applicant apprehended service of a charge-sheet on him, he deliberately left the office in utmost haste to avoid service of such a charge-sheet.
There is also mention of an accomplice of the applicant named Kajal Kumar Dey.
Respondent 1 had conducted an on the spot enquiry in the Asansol office and came to know that the applicant was involved in various malpractices with Kajal Kumar Dey.
Similar complaints against the applicant are at Annexure R-2 to the reply.
It has been stated that since the police investigation in the criminal case under police investigation in the criminal case under Sections 468 and 471 IPC was pending and also since it was contemplated to issue a charge-sheet against the applicant for his various acts of misconduct, he was placed under suspension vide the impugned order, which was issued in public interest in an absolutely bona fide manner.
22.
In his reply, Mr. Bose has asserted that the objection of Mr.
Bag that the plea that the impugned order being a rolled up order was not taken in the application is not valid as it is quite well settled that violation of general law need not be placed and that pleadings should be a pleading of material facts only.
23.
He has also referred to a judgment of the Kerala High Court in Subramaniam v. State of Kerala, 1973(1) Services Law Reporter 521 to assert that utmost caution must be exercised while ordering suspension.
In Subramaniam's case, the Kerala High Court had observed that an order of suspension should not be lightly passed as it had a disastrous impact of the fair nature and good reputation that may have been earned and built up by the Government employee in course of many years of service.
24.
After giving our anxious consideration to the facts of this case and the submissions of both the parties, we do not see any reason to interfere with the impugned order of suspension.
One of the grounds for issuing the order of suspension, was that a disciplinary proceeding was contemplated against the applicant.
The other ground was that he was allegedly involved in a criminal case, which was under investigation.
We are not inclined to accept the contention that by mentioning both the aforesaid grounds in the order of suspension it becomes a rolled up order.
In fact the principle laid down by the Calcutta High Court in the two land acquisition cases cited by Mr. Bose was that the order of the concerned authority had to be specific and pin-pointing the purpose of requisition.
Since all the possible alternatives were mentioned in the respective orders these were held to be rolled up orders and consequently quashed.
However, in the instant case, there is no ambiguity about the impugned order of suspension which specifies the grounds for issuing the order in clear terms.
It is true that in the ground relating to a criminal offence, the expressions 'investigation', 'enquiry', and 'trial' were all mentioned, but in our opinion that was not a fatal error so as to invalidate the impugned order since the alleged involvement of the applicant in a criminal offence under investigation was an undisputed fact.
25.
It would be pertinent to refer to the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court in Sunderlal v. State of Rajasthan, 1980(3) Service Law Reporter 220 mentioned at page 31 of Swami's Compilation of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 - 15th Edn.
In this case, the Rajasthan High Court held that as both the prosecution and departmental proceedings can take place simultaneously, if a Government servant was suspended on both the counts of a disciplinary proceeding and a criminal offence under investigation or trial, then the suspension order will not come to an end on mere acquittal in the criminal case and will subsist till the Government servant is exonerated in the departmental enquiry also.
It, therefore, follows that a Government servant can be suspended on one or more grounds as mentioned in Rule 10(1) of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965.
26.
The other objection raised by Mr. Bose regarding the verification of the reply by the respondents is, in our opinion, not of much importance in the facts and circumstances of this case as reference to the 'false pain certificate' at para 4(g) of the reply as true to knowledge and derived from the records of the respondents does not have any bearing on the grounds of suspension.
27.
In view of what has been stated above, this application fails.
Accordingly, we dismiss OA 967 of 1989, without any order as to costs.
Application dismissed.