Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - In this writ petition dated January 20th, 2003, the petitioner challenges the decision dated December 18th, 2000.
By it her prayer for compassionate appointment was rejected by the employer bank of the respondents.
2.
Mr. Z Islam, learned advocate for the petitioner, submits that in paragraphs 13, 14 and 16 of the writ petition reasons for the delay have been stated.
3.
Suffice it to say that absolutely no reasons have been given in the paragraphs relied upon.
4.
The writ petition being regarding rejection of the petitioner's prayer for compassionate appointment in connection with her father's death that took place on august 20th, 1998, in my view, the delay of more than two years in approaching the writ court, and that too without giving any explanation for such delay, is a just ground to deny her relief.
5.
However, I am of the view that the writ petition should be decided on merits, since, in spite of the delay, it was admitted on January 31st, 2003.
6.
The petitioner applied on September 15th, 1998.
She complied with all the formalities as directed by the bank.
Finally by the decision dated December 18th, 2000 she was informed that under the new died-in-harness scheme a ward of the deceased employee was not entitled to seek a compassionate appointment.
7.
From November 1st, 2000 the new scheme was introduced, under this only the widow of the deceased is entitled to seek a compassionate appointment.
By it the previous scheme dated December 3rd, 1988 was superseded.
Under the 1988 scheme the widow and other dependants were entitled to seek a compassionate appointment.
8.
Mr. Islam contends that since the death took place before November 1st, 2000, when the new scheme came into force-the petitioner's case could not have been rejected on the basis of the new scheme, because her right to be considered had accrued under the old scheme dated December 3rd, 1988.
9.
He relies on a decision dated May 16th, 2002 given by a learned judge of the Jharkhand High Court in W.P. (S) No. 4348 of 2001 (Prashant Kumar Rai v. United Bank of India & Ors.); and also on the decisions reported at AIR 1989 SC 1976 (Smt. Sushma Gosain & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.) and AIR 2000 SC 1596 (Balbir Kaur and Anr. v. Steel Authority of India Ltd & Ors.).
10.
The Jharkhand High Court single bench decision relied on by Mr. Islam supports his contention.
11.
Mr. Sanyal, learned advocate for the respondents, contends that the Jharkhand High Court decision was given without considering the material facts and the relevant law.
12.
He points out the following facts.
From February 1997, the 1988 scheme was not acted upon, and no compassionate appointment was given, because of a ban on recruitment ordered by the competent authority.
It was not acted upon, also because decision was taken to replace it by a new scheme.
Though the ban was operative (it is still in operation), and a new scheme was awaited, the applications filed by the petitioner and others were being processed, so that with the introduction of the new scheme the cases could be considered without delay.
He relies on the decision reported at AIR 1997 SC 123 (Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd v. Smt. A Radhika Thirumalai).
13.
With great respect, I am unable to agree with the view taken by the learned Judge of the Jharkhand High Court in the decision relied on by Mr. Islam.
14.
When the employer consciously takes a decision not to make any recruitment on the basis of the existing rules, on the ground that such rules are undergoing a process of change, like amendment, or repeal and re- enactment, no right accrues to any one for seeking consideration for appointment in terms of the old rules, when they are amended, or repeal and re-enactment, no right accrues to any one for seeking consideration for appointment in terms of the old rules, when they are amended, or repealed and re-enacted, or superseded and refrained, and the employer takes steps for recruitment under the latest rules.
15.
In my view, the same principle is applicable regarding schemes framed for giving compassionate appointment.
16.
In this case, admittedly, from February 1997 the bank stopped recruiting and giving appointment to any one on compassionate ground in terms of the 1988 scheme; and it so decided for two reasons :- (1) a ban on recruitment and appointment had been imposed by the competent authority; (2) the 1988 scheme was taken up for examination and replacement, and the bank was awaiting the introduction of the new scheme.
17.
The effect of the above noted situation was that from 1997, till the date of taking the impugned decision by the bank there was, in reality, no vacancy available for giving a compassionate appointment to the petitioner.
18.
Law was clearly declared by the Supreme Court in the decision reported at AIR 1997 SC 123 (Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd v. Smt. A Radhika Thirumalai) that in the absence of available vacancy no direction can be given for giving a compassionate appointment.
19.
The single bench decision of the Jharkhand High Court, relied on by Mr. Islam, was given without considering the above noted facts and legal aspects.
20.
I find that the two Supreme Court decisions relied on by Mr. Islam have no manner of application to the present case.
Nothing regarding replacement of an old scheme by a new scheme, and its consequences, like saving of an already accrued right, was decided in them.
21.
One more aspect of the case needs attention, before the writ petition is disposed of.
22.
Mr. Sanyal has taken a plea that the writ petition should be dismissed on the ground that the bank, though the only necessary party, has not been impleaded as a party respondent in it.
He relies on the decision reported at (2003)3 SCC 472 (Chief Conservator of Forests, Govt. of AP v. Collector & Ors.)  23.
In reply, Mr. Islam submits that the officials of the bank were impleaded, and if this court desires, the petitioner will implead the bank as one of the respondents.
24.
I am of the view that it is too late for the petitioner to take steps for impleading the bank, which was the only necessary party in the writ petition.
The plea was taken by the respondents in their opposition.
While filing reply the petitioner chose to avoid an answer to the plea.
So in spite of getting sufficient opportunity to take necessary steps for impleading the necessary party, the petitioner chose not to take any step whatsoever.
Hence I find that on this ground also the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
25.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is hereby dismissed.
26.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to grant costs to the respondents.
Hence there will be no order for costs in the writ petition.
27.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.