M Katju, J - Heard Shri Yogesh Agarwal, learned counsel for the petitioner and learned standing counsel.
2.
The petitioner was a Chief Veterinary Officer in UP Govt. Service who retired on 27121999 on reaching the age of superannuation of 58 years.
The petition was filed before the petitioner retired and the prayer was that the age of retirement of State Govt. employees be raised by amending the relevant rules.
It is stated in paras 3 and 4 of the writ petition that the Vth Pay Commission recommended the increase of age of superannuation of the Central Government employees to 60 years.
On the basis of this recommendation, the Central Government raised the age of superannuation of its employees to 60 years vide Annexure 1 to the petition.
In para 8 of the writ petition it is stated that the State Govt. decided to grant the same pay scale to its employees as is being given to the employees of the Central Government on equivalent posts.
It is submitted that since the State Govt. has granted equivalence of pay scale for its employees vis-a-vis the employees of the Central Government it should also increase the age of superannuation of State Govt. Employees to 60 years.
3.
We are of the opinion that although this court cannot give a binding directive to the State Govt. and the High Court to increase the age of superannuation of its employees to 60 years yet we strongly feel that the State Govt. and the High court should raise the age of superannuation of its employees to 60 years, particularly when equivalence of pay scale has been granted to the State Govt. employees as compared to the Central Government employees.
4.
We, therefore, make a strong recommendation to the State Govt. and the High Court to raise the age of retirement of its employees to 60 years, in view of the above consideration and also because the longevity has increased in this country.
The State Govt. and the High Court shall consider the above recommendation at the earliest.
5.
With the observations the writ petition is disposed of finally.
Petition dismissed.