GS Singhvi, J - Aggrieved by the dismissal of C.W.P.
No. 3311 of 1988 filed by him against the order of dismissal from service, the appellant has filed this appeal under clause X of the Letters Patent.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the questions raised in this appeal are that while he was posted as Constable on deputation in the Vigilance Cell of the Irrigation Department at Chandigarh, the Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Cell passed order dated 1751983 for his repatriation to the cadre of District Police, Gurgaon.
On that very day he was relieved from Chandigarh with the direction to join at Gurgaon on 19.5.1983.
Accordingly, he reported for duty at Gurgaon on 19.5.1983.
But he was not allowed to join duty apparently because till then sanction for his repatriation was not given by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range.
He remained at Police Lines, Gurgaon from 19.5.1983 to 2551983 but was not taken on duty.
Thereafter, he reported back to the Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Cell, Chandigarh on 2651983, who too, declined to take him on duty in view of the order of his representation Annexure P2 dated 2651983 to the Director General of Police, Haryana for issuance of a direction to the authorities to take him on duty.
He also made representation Annexure P.3 dated 2651983 to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon and pointed out that he was not taken on duty at Gurgaon from 19.5.1983 to 2551983.
He requested the Deputy Inspector General that he may kindly inform him about the posting order his home address.
To the same effect a separate representation was made to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon.
On 761983, the Director General of Police wrote Annexure P.5 to the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon that necessary steps be taken to adjust the petitioner in the District Police and the difficulty, if any, in the adjustment of the Constable may be sorted out with the Superintendent of Police, Irrigation or brought to the notice of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range for his guidance.
The Superintendent of Police, Vigilance, Irrigation wrote letter Annexure P.6 dated 1061983 to the Director General of Police, Haryana indicating therein that the petitioner was not available at Gurgaon on 261983 or at Chandigarh.
On 20th June, 1983, the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon ordered the initiation of departmental inquiry against the appellant on the allegation of absence from duty.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Ferozepur Zirka to whom the inquiry was entrusted served statement of allegation upon the appellant charging him with misconduct of remaining absent from duty for 33 days without permission.
On the basis of findings recorded by him the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon dismissed the appellant from service.
The appeal filed by him against the order of dismissal was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon.
3.
The appellant filed C.W.P.
No. 311 of 1983 for quashing of the orders of dismissal passed by the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon as well as the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon dismissing his appeal on the ground of violation of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 and the principles of natural justice.
The respondents justified the dismissal of the appellant by contending that the competent authority has passed the order of punishment in view of the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer on the basis of an inquiry held in accordance with the rules.
Vide his order dated 951988 the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition.
4.
The first contention urged by Shri OP Goyal is that the order passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant in ex facie erroneous because the points raised by the appellant have not been dealt with in a correct perspective.
Shri Goyal argued that the learned learned Single Judge has gravely erred in upolding the order of punishment passed by the respondent No. 1 on the basis of perverse finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
He submitted that the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer on the charge of misconduct levelled against the appellant is perverse because it is based on no evidence and the punshing authority as well as the learned Single Judge have committed serious error in overlooking this aspect of the matter.
The second contention urged by Shri Goyal is that the order of punishment is vitiated due to the violation of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
Learned counsel argued that the punishing authority did not consider the gravity of misconduct, allegedly found proved against the appellant in the light of his past record and performance and, therefore, the order of punishment is liable to be quashed.
The learned Deputy Advocate General supported the order passed by the disciplinary and the appellate autorities and the judgment of the learned Single Judge and urged that the Appellate Bench should not interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Single Judge.
5.
We have given due consideration to the respective submissions made at the bar and are of the considered opinion that the orders passed by the disciplinary authority and the appellate authority as also the judgment of the learned Single Judge are liable to be set aside.
6.
Before examining on merits, the contentions urged by Shri OP Goyal and Shri Jaswant Singh, we deem it appropriate to remind ourselves of the limited scope of the power of judicial review exercisale by the High Court in such like matters.
It is a well established proposition of law that while examining the legality and correctness of the order of punishment passed by the public authorities, the High Court cannot assume appellate jurisdiction.
It cannot re-evaluate or re-appreciate the evidence produced during the course of departmental/domestic inquiry and substitute its own finding in lieu of the finding recorded by the competent autority.
Similarly, the High Court cannot substitute the punishment imposed by the public employer merely because it comes to the conclusion that some other pnishment could have been awarded by the employer.
However, this does not mean that the High Court cannot examine the record of the disciplinary authority with a view to find out whether there exists any evidence to support the finding of guilt recorded against the employee.
Rather, it should also be taken as well settled that in appropriate cases, the High Court can after examining the record of the departmental inquiry hold that the finding recorded by the employer on the allegation of misconduct is perverse because it is based on no evidence or that the inquiry authority/disciplinary authority has recorded finding on the basis of inadmissible evidence.
It can also interfere with the finding of guilt if it is estalished that the inquiry authority or the punishing authority have overlooked vital piece of evidence pointing towards the innocence of the delinquent.
On the issue of quantum of punishment, the High Court can interfere if it is found that the penalty imposed by the employer is shockingly disproportionate or unduly harsh or unconscionable.
7.
Having indicated the limitation of the scope of the writ jurisdiction and the power of judicial review, we shall now deal with the contention of Shri Goyal that the findings recorded by the inquiring authority are perverse and the orders passed by the disciplinary authority and the appellate authority as well as the judgment of the learned Single Judge are patently erroneous.
Some of the salient facts which are clearly borne out from the documents available on the record of this appeal :-  (a) The appellant was employed as Constale in the service of Haryana Police.
While posted at H.A.P.
Madhuban, the appellant was sent on deputation in the Vigilance Cell of the Irrigation Department at Chandigarh vide order No. 21951/52-14/82 dated 5111982 issued by the D.I.G., H.A.P.
(b) The Superintendent of Police (Vigilance) Irrigation Department, Haryana, issued order No.
55-PW-(Vig.
)-83-397-400 dated 1751983 repatriating the appellant to the cadre of District Police, Gurgaon without obtaining prior sanction from the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon, On that very day he was relieved from the Vigilance Cell of Irrigation Department and was asked to report at Gurgaon on 19.5.1983.
A copy of the order dated 1751983 was endorsed to the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon.
The same was received in the letter's office on 1851983.
(c) The appellant reported for duty in District Police, Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 but he was not allowed to join on the ground that concurrence of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon, has not been obtained for his repatriation.
(d) He remained in Police Lines, Gurgaon from 19.5.1983 to 2551983 but he was not taken on duty by the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon.
(e) On 2651983, the appellant reported back to the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh, who too refused to take him on duty by saying that he stands repatriated on 1751983.
On that very day, the appellant wrote letters Annexures P2, P.3 and P.4 to the Director, Superintendent of Police, Haryana and Deputy Inspector General, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon and the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon stating therein that he had remained at Gurgaon from 19.5.1983 to 2551983 but was not allowed of join duty.
(f) Vide his letter dated 761983, the Director General of Police, Haryana wrote to the Superintendent of Police that the appellant should be adjusted in Gurgaon and the difficulty, if any, be sorted out with the Superintendent of Police, Irrigation Department or brought to the notice of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon for his guidance.
(g) The Deputy Inspector General of Police sanctioned the repatriation of the appellant from Vigilance Cell, Irrigation Department to the District Police, Gurgaon, on 261983.
However, copy of the sanction letter was not communicated to the appellant at his home address which he had disclosed in the letters Annexures P2 to P.4 dated 2651983 written to the various authorities.
(h) The appellant reported for duty at Gurgaon on 20th June, 1983.
(i) He was charged with the allegation of having remained absent for 33 days and on the basis of finding recorded by the inquiring authority, the respondent No. 1 dismissed him from service.
8.
In order to appreciate the contentions of Shri Goyal that the finding recorded by the inquiring authority is perverse we deem it necessary to reproduce the letters Annexures P2 to P.4 written by the petitioner, the letter dated 761983 written by the Director General of Police as well as the letter Annexure P.6 dated 1061983 written by the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department to the Director General of Police.
The same read as under :-  Annexure P2 Dated 2651983.
To  The Director General of Police, Haryana Police,  Chandigarh  Sir,  It is respectfully submitted that I, Const.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162, H.A.P., was posted on transfer to Irrigation Deptt.
Haryana, vide D.I.G., H.A.P.
Madhuban letter No. 21951/52-14/82 dated 5111982.
I have been now posted from Irrigation Department, Haryana to District Gurgaon since I was allotted district Gurgaon.
I reported on duty at Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 and presented myself before my superiors.
I was not taken on duty.
I remained from 19.5.1983 to 2551983 at Police Lines, Gurgaon and used to come to the office during those days.
I was not taken on duty nor was my arrival shown.
Therefore, feeling harassed, I went to SP Irrigation, Haryana, Chandigarh on 2651983, but he also showed his helplessness since I stood relieved from there.
I request you to very kindly take pity on me and I shall feel highly obliged.
I shall stay in my house.
Kindly have the orders issued and I shall present myself.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- Shiv Charan, Const.
No. 2/162,  Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh House Address:  Sepoy Shiv Charan  C/o Ram Singh Saini, Near State Bank of Patiala, Dadu Majra,  Chandigarh  Annexure-P.3 Dated 26.6.1983 To  The D.I.G., Haryana Police, Gurgaon,  Gurgaon.
Sir,  It is respectfully submitted that I, Const.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162 was transferred from H.A.P.
to Irrigation Department, Haryana by the order of the D.I.G., H.A.P.
Madhuban, vide order No. 21951/52-14/82 dated 5111982 I have now been transferred from the Irrigation Department to District Gurgaon, because I was allotted district Gurgaon from the H.A.P.
I reached Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 and presented myself before my superior officers.
I was not taken on duty.
I remained from 19.5.1983 to 2551983 in the Police Lines, Gurgaon and I kept on visiting the office during these days, but I was not heard.
It is respectfully prayed that when you receive my orders you may kindly inform me at my home address because I am residing there.
I shall immediately join the duties and feel greatly obliged.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- Shiv Charan, Const.
No. 2/162,  Irrigation Department, Haryana,  Chandigarh.
Home Address :  Const.
Shiv Charan C/o Ram Singh Saini,  Sardar, Near State Bank of Patiala, Dadu Majra,  Chandigarh  Annexure-P.4 Dated 26.6.1983 To  The Senior Superintendent of Police, Haryana,  Gurgaon, Gurgaon.
Sir,  It is respectfully submitted that I, Const.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162 was transferred from H.A.P.
to Irrigation Department, Haryana by the order of D.I.G., H.A.P.
Madhuban, vide order No. 21951/52-14/82 dated 5111982.
I have now been transferred from Irrigation Department to District Gurgaon, because I was allotted district Gurgaon from the H.A.P.
I reached Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 and presented myself before my superior officers.
I was not taken on duty.
I remained from 19.5.1983 to 2551983 in the Police Line, Gurgaon and I kept on visiting the office during these days, but I was not heard.
It is respectfully prayed that when you receive my orders, you may kindly inform me at my home address because I am residing there.
I shall immediately join the duties and feel greatly obliged.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- Const.
Shiv Charan, No. 2/162,  Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh House Address:  Const.
Shiv Charan  C/o Ram Singh Saini, Sardar, Near State Bank of Patiala,  Dadu Majra, Chandigarh  Annexure-P5 Registered.
From  The Director General of Police,  Haryana.
To  The Superintendent of Police,  Gurgaon.
No. 4727/B-1, dated Chandigarh 761983.
Subject: Adjustment of Const.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162 HAP on repatriation from Irrigation Department - Memo.
Enclosed please find an application of Constable Shiv Charan No. 2/162 HAP of your district as his line has since been transferred to Gurgaon district.
2.
Necessary steps may please be taken to adjust Constable Shiv Charan No. 2/162 in your district.
In case there is any difficulty to adjust this Constable, the matter may be sorted out with SP Irrigation or brought to the notice of Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon for his guidance.
But the manner in which the Constable is suffering harassment as has been mentioned in his application needs to be eliminated.
Accordingly, you are requested to call this constable and be allowed to join his duties.
Sd/- For Director General of Police (Haryana).
Endst.
No. B-1 dated Chandigarh.
A copy is forwarded for information and necessary action to :-  1.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon.
2.
The Superintendent of Police, Irrigation, Chandigarh.
Sd/- For Director General of Police Haryana.
Annexure-P.6 From  Superintendent of Police, Vigilance (Irrigation),  Haryana,  S.C.O.
No. 31, Sector 7-C,  Chandigarh.
To  The Director General of Police,  Haryana,  Chandigarh.
Memo No. 658-PW (VIG)-83/508,  Dated Chandigarh, the 10th June, 1983.
Subject : Adjustment of Cosnt.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162 HAP on repatriation from Irrigation Department.
Kindly refer to your office endst.
No. 4738-39/B-1, dated 761983 on the subject noted above.
Const.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162 who was on deputation with the Vigilance Cell, Irrigation, Haryana, Chandigarh, was repatriated to his parent district Gurgaon w.e.f.
1751983 (AN) vide this office order No. 55-PW (Giv.
)-83/397-400 dated 1751983, after having discussion with the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon.
The Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon, informed vide his office T.P.M.
No. 4393/W dated 261983 that Const.
Shiv Charan No. 2/162 attended his office about 8 days earlier and was directed to wait at Gurgaon for the orders from the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon.
The orders of the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon, were received by the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon, vide No. 333-34/A-4 dated 261983.
But Const.
Shiv Charan was found absent from Gurgaon and could not inform to join duty.
Const.
Shiv Charan came to this office on 2651983 for a while and informed that since he has been repatriated to Gurgaon district, therefore, he should wait further orders at Gurgaon.
I personally checked up from Superintendent of Police Office Gurgaon on 261983 while on tour and was informed that the concurrence of Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon, has been received by Deputy Supdt.
of Police, Gurgaon.
The Constable was not present at Gurgaon.
Superintendent of Police vide his office T.P.M.
No. 4393/W dated 261983 informed this office that the Constable is absent from Gurgaon and should be informed to join duty at Gurgaon.
On my return, I got the whereabouts of this Constable checked up from his residence at Chandigarh on 6.6.1983 and found him absent from his house and found it locked.
His present whereabouts are also not known.
Anyhow, he is being regularly checked up at his residential address at Chandigarh.
It appears that after giving some information to the office of the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh, he has absented himself.
In case the whereabouts of the Constable Shiv Charan are known to the office of the Director General of Police, Haryana he may kindly be informed to join duties at Gurgaon.
Sd/- Superintendent of Police Vigilance (Irrigation), Haryana, Chandigarh, Endst.
No. 658-PW (Vig)-83-509 dated 1061983.
A copy is forwarded to the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon, for information and necessary action with reference to the Director."
9.
A bare reading of these documents shows that the appellant had after being relieved on 1751983 from his deputation posting, not only reported for duty at Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 and remained there upto 2551983 but was not allowed to join duty.
He had informed the Director General of Police, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range and the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon about his plight and requested them to take steps for allowing him to join duty.
He also requested them to give intimation of the order at Home Address.
In each of the three communications dated 2651983, the appellant had disclosed his home address to the concerned authorities.
The letter written by the Director General of Police to the respondent No. 1 clearly supports the appellant's version regarding his presence at Gurgaon from 19.5.1983 to 2551983.
The letter written by the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department shows that the appellant had come to his office on 2651983.
This also shows that the appellant did not remain absent between 1751983 to 2651983.
Rather, he had made himself available for duty at Gurgaon but was not allowed to join on the pretext that the Deputy Inspector General Vigilance Cell, of the Irrigation Department (sic).
It is, therefore, reasonable to take the view that the appellant has been punished and deprived of his livelihood to cover up an apparently illegal order passed by the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department for the appellant's repatriation to Gurgaon without obtaining sanction from the competent authority.
It is unfortunate that instead of taking action against the erring Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department for having violated the departmental norms and discipline, the respondents made the appellant a scapegoat by concocting the story of his absence from duty for 33 days.
10.
We have carefully perused the report of inquiry prepared by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Ferozepur Zirka and agree with Shri Goyal that the finding and guilt recorded by the Inquiry Officer is perverse.
What the officer concerned has done is that after reproducing the statements of the departmental witnesses and the defence witnesses, he has recorded finding adverse to the appellant ignoring all the salient features of the case and the background in which action was initiated against the appellant.
He also ignored the important admissions made by the departmental witnesses which are clearly indicative of the fact that the appellant had reported for duty.
In his statement Ram Pal, Force Clerk (PW-1) admitted that no action was taken on the order dated 1751983 passed by the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell) as would appear from the following extract of his statement :-  "The order of SP Vigilance bearing No.
556-PW(Vig.
)-33/432 dated 1751983 was received vide diary No. 6259 on 1851983.
The concurrence of the DIG Police, Gurgaon Range, has not been obtained and therefore no action was taken on this letter."
11.
PW-3, Nihal Chand, Head Clerk also made a statement that the appellant was not allowed to join duty.
This is borne out from the following extract of his statement :-  "The transfer orders relating to Const.
Shiv Charan No. 313 passed by the S.P.
(Vigilance), Irrigation, were received in this office on 1851983 and he put up the same to the Superintendent of Police.
It was ordered that the concurrence of the D.I.G.
should be awaited.
Thereupon a letter No. 4052-W dated 1851983 was written by this office to the S.P.
(Irrigation) Department to the effect that the concurrence of the DIG Police Gurgaon, should be taken in this matter and thereafter the Constable should be relieved.
The wireless order No. 4052-W dated 1851983 is exhibited as P.W.3/A.
Thereafter the S.P.
(Vigilance) vide his office message No.
556-PW(Vig.
)-83/411 dated 2061983 wired to the D.I.G.
for his permission and we received the copy of that message.
The D.I.G.
granted the permission vide his order No. 6333-34/A dated 261983.
We informed the S.P.
(Irrigation) vide wireless message No. 4393-W dated 261983 to the effect that sanction has been granted by the D.I.G.
and the constable should be directed to report to this district, which is exhibited as P.W.3/B."
12.
In his statement DW-1 Bhim Singh stated that the appellant had reported for duty at Police Lines, Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 and remained there upto 2551983.
DW-2 Constable Jagdev, who remained posted as Salesman in the Police Office Canteen from 131983 to 20.8.1983 stated that the appellant used to take his tea from 2051983 to 2551983 in the canteen.
DW-3 in whose house the appellant had taken a room on rent stated that when three persons came in jeep to inquire about Constable Shiv Charan, he had gone to bring medicine for his ailing daughter from Dr. Khanna of Sector 23 and that he remained present at his quarter.
13.
The Inquiry Officer recorded his finding in the following words :-  "On the conclusion of the enquiry, I have gone through the statement of the P.Ws the D.Ws and written statement of the delinquent.
After analysing the prosecution and the defence evidence, I have reached the conclusion that Const.
Shiv Charan No. 313 was posted in the Irrigation Department (Vigilance), Haryana, Chandigarh, before he came to this district, when his transfer was effected from Irrigation Department (Vigilance), Haryana, Chandigarh, vide Message No. 556-PW (Vig.
)-83-402 dated 1751983 and vide which Const.
Shiv Charan No. 313 was directed to report for duty at Gurgaon in the forenoon of 19.5.1983.
This order was received in the office of SP Gurgaon on 1851983, but no sanction regarding his transfer has been obtained from the DIG Police, Haryana and therefore no action could be taken on the basis of that order.
The sanction of the DIG Police Gurgaon was obtained on 261983, but Const.
Shiv Charan did not reach Gurgaon till then.
Thereupon the S.P.
(Irrigation Department), Chandigarh was approached, who replied that Const.
Shiv Charan had been relieved from that office on 1751983 and had not attended the office thereafter.
His whereabouts were enquired from the given address, but his house was found locked."
14.
It is, thus, clear that the Inquiry Officer completely ignored the facts that :-  (i) the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department had unauthorisedly issued order dated 1751983 and relieved the appellant on that very day without seeking sanction from the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon; (ii) the appellant had reported for duty at Gurgaon on 19.5.1983 but was not allowed to join, though he remained in the police lines, Gurgaon upto 2551983.
(iii) the appellant reported back for duty in the Vigilance Cell, Irrigation Department on 2651983 but was not allowed to join; (iv) the appellant had written about the entire episode to the Director General of Police, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon and the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon and had requested that he may be conveyed about the order of the competent authority so that he may join duty at Gurgaon and that the order dated 261983 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon was not sent to him either by ordinary post or by registered post.
15.
The Inquire Officer also overlooked the fact that no evidence was produced by the department to show that the appellant was personally informed of the order dated 261983 and he intentionally avoided joining duty at Gurgaon.
Instead, he relied on the report sent by the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department that the appellant was not found at his address in Village Dadu Majra on the particular date.
While doing so, the Inquiry Officer completely overlooked the fact that the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department was very much interested in getting the appellant booked in order to hide his own act of indiscipline of issuing the order dated 1751983 without obtaining sanction from the competent authority.
16.
In view of this discussion, it must be held that the findings recorded by the inquiring authority is based on a total misreading of the evidence and are perverse and the same could not form basis for imposing the extreme penalty of dismissal of the appellant.
We are also of the opinion that the allegation levelled against the appellant of having remained absent for 33 days can under no circumstances be treated as proved because for the first time his transfer from Irrigation Department to the District Police, Gurgaon was sanctioned on 261983 and that order was never communicated to him.
Even if the appellant had not joined duty after communication of the Order 261983, he could be charged of the allegation of absence from duty only for a period of 16 to 17 days.
17.
The disciplinary authority and the appellate authority have miserably failed to apply themselves to the grave errors committed by the inquiring authority.
As a matter of fact both the authorities mechanically affirmed the findings recorded by the inquiring authority and ignored the most important fact that the appellant could by no stretch of imagination be accused of having remained absent upto 261983.
Therefore, the orders passed by them are also liable to be declared illegal and arbitrary.
18.
In the impugned judgment, the learned Single Judge has completely misdirected himself while deciding the writ petition.
Instead of examining the legality of the proceedings of inquiry, the learned Judge assumed that everything was done in a fair and proper manner and that the punishment imposed on the appellant was justified.
With great respect, we are unable to appreciate the mechanical approach adopted by the learned Single Judge while dealing with the case involving deprivation of livelihood of an employee on the spacious allegation of absence from duty.
19.
We also find considerable merit in the argument of Shri Goyal that the order of punishment as well as the order of appellate authority are vitiated due to non-application of mind to the requirement of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to the State of Haryana, which reads as under :-  "162 Dismissal : Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
20.
This rule can appropriately be divided into two parts.
The first part consists of the cases in which the punishment of dismissal can be awarded.
Such punishment can be awarded where the employee is found guilty of the gravest acts of misconduct or where the cumulative effect of the continued misconduct of the employee proves his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
The second part imposes a duty on the competent authority to take into consideration the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension before dismissing him.
Thus, before a competent authority can exercise power under Rule 162 of the rules, it is imperative for such an authority to record a finding that the employee is guilty of gravest acts of misconduct or that he is guilty of continued misconduct which proves his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
Absence of such a finding will lead to a conclusion that the competent authority has not applied its mind to the nature of misconduct before passing the order of punishment.
It will also lead to a conclusion that the competent authority has not taken into consideration the service record of the delinquent employee before imposing the penalty.
While interpreting this rule in State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex- Constable, AIR 1992 SC 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Before awarding an order of dismissal it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct that too when it impinges the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service."
In State of Punjab v Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SLR 174 : 1992(1) SCT 123, a Division Bench held as under :-  "It is essential for the punishing authority to apply its mind and to record a specific finding as to whether the conduct of the delinquent official which has been complained of is of such a grave nature that if must lead inflexibly to his dismissal."
In the case in hand, the disciplinary authority did not direct its attention to the requirement of Rule 162.
It did not consider the length of service of the appellant, the record of service and the circumstances created due to the order passed by the Superintendent of Police (Vigilance Cell), Irrigation Department without the sanction of the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Rather, he straightaway dismissed the appellant by observing that there are no extenuating circumstances for taking a lenient view.
In our opinion, the failure of the respondent No. 1 to examine the case of the appellant in a correct perspective of Rule 162 has caused grave prejudice to him and, therefore, the same deserves to be quashed.
21.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
The order passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition is set aside.
The order of punishment dated 2961984 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon as well as the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant are quashed.
The appellant shall be reinstated in service and be given all consequential benefits.
However, this is will not debar the respondents from holding fresh inquiry against the petitioner from the stage of the charge- sheet.
Appeal allowed.