Dr. (Mrs.) Sarojnei Saksena, J - The petitioner is seeking quashment of order dated 391992 (Annexure P-4) passed by the respndent No. 3, whereby the petitioner has been prematurely retired from government service.
He is also seeking quashment of order dated 281995 (Annexure P-6) whereby his representation has been rejected.
Facts of The Case  2.
The petitioner joined Punjab Police on 541961 as a Probationer Assistant Sub Inspector.
On being confirmed on 541964, he was promoted as Inspector on 20.8.1970, Deputy Superintendent of Police on 571982 and finally Superintendent of Police on 22.1.1990.
While working as Superintendent of Police headquarters, he fell ill, suffered chest pain, back strain and leg pain from January to March, 1991.
He got treatment from PGI as well as from Government Hospital situated in Sector 22, Chandigarh.
During this period, he was on leave.
3.
The petitioner applied for ex-India leave w.e.f.
15th April, 1991 to 12th July, 1991 to go to Canada.
Leave was sanctioned.
On 3rd July, 1991 the petitioner left Canada for United Kingdom, where he wanted to stay only for a week and was scheduled to come back to India on 11th July, 1991, but on 10th July, 1991, he fell ill and was constrained to stay in England for treatment.
From 10th July, 1991 till 7th April, 1992, the petitioner continued to send his medical certificates issued by Dr. PGR Dawe of Blackheath London, who found him unable to travel back to India due to his ear infection, chest pain and back pain.
During this period he was also under treatment of two doctors of Charlton Road Surgery Blackheath, two Medical Specialists and one Physiotherapist of the District Hospital Greenwich, London.
Medical certificates dated 1071991, 181991, 2081991, 1791991, 12.11.1991, 13121991, 721992 and 741992 were sent to the Additional Director General, Intelligence, Punjab requesting for extension of leave.
4.
The petitioner applied for leave on medical ground.
In reply to his application for extension of leave, the Additional Director General, Intelligence, Punjab, vide his letter No. 14068/EDSB-1 dated 29.5.1992 (Annexure P-2) intimated the petitioner that no further extension in leave would be granted and directed him to report on duty immediately, failing which appropriate action would be taken against him under the relevant rules.
The petitioner sent another letter on 2261992 (Annexure P-3) to the Additional Director General of Police, Intelligence, Punjab, in continuation of his application dated 741992 reiterating that he is again thoroughly checked up by Dr. PGR Dawe, who has advised him not to travel for another three months and thereby he expressed his inability to join duty on 291992 as directed by the letter dated 29.5.1992 (Annexure P-2).
In this letter, he again prayed that his ex-India leave be extended.
In concluding lines of this letter, he requested that in case his leave could not be extended as per rules, he should be given leave without pay as he was sick and unable to join his duties till 291992 and in case the rules do not permit to grant him leave without pay on medical ground, he may be allowed to retire as he is unable to perform his duties with his ill health.
The petitioner received order dated 391992 (Annexure P-4) whereby he was prematurely retired under Rule 3(2) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the `Rules') with effect from 291992.
5.
Petitioner's contention is that he was to attain superannuation age on 3181997 whereas he was prematurely retired on 291992.
He had put in 32 years of service and was 54 years old at the time of his retirement.
His pay was stopped by the department though his 12 days full pay and 600 days half pay leave was due.
This action of the respondents is arbitrary, against the Rules and contrary to the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner averred that his letter (Annexure P-3) could not be made the basis for his premature retirement, as in this letter he has primarily requested for extension of his ex-India leave and he also requested that the leave may be granted to him on medical ground and under those pressing circumstances, he did mention in his letter (Annexure P-3) that if the rules do not permit to grant him leave without pay on medical ground, he may be kindly allowed to retire as he is unable to perform his duties with this ill health.
This was not a notice as is required to be given for pre-mature retirement under the Rules, 1975.
He was prematurely retired from service for extraneous reasons, which cannot be sustained in the eye of law being arbitrary, unconstitutional and against the Rules.
No opportunity of hearing was given to him before passing the order dated 391992 (Annexure P-4).
He had an excellent service career and therefore, the department could not have prematurely retired him without giving him one month's prior notice.
When he came back to India, he submitted his representation dated 411995 (Annexure P-5), which was also dismissed by the Director General of Police vide his order dated 281995 (Annexure P-6), which is a non-speaking order.
Hence, he is seeking quashment of both these orders, Annexures P-4 and P-6 and praying that the writ petition be allowed.
6.
Respondents 1 to 3 in their reply raised preliminary objections that the petitioner filed a representation (Annexure P-5) which was disallowed vide order dated 281995 (Annexure P-6).
Before that he had sent hand-written letter dated 21.10.1993 (Annexure R-1/1), wherein he requested that his pension case be finalised as early as possible; thereby he accepted his retirement and sought its confirmation by asking for payment of all pensionary benefits, which were released to him.
Hence it is objected that by filing this writ petition, he has taken a somersault of service rendered by him.
Respondents contended that on receipt of petitioner's letter dated 2261992 (Annexure P-3) wherein he has stated that he is unable to work or travel for three months due to back strain and also mentioned that in case the rules do not permit to grant him leave without pay on medical ground, he may be allowed to retire as he is unable to perform his duties with this ill-health.
Accordingly, accepting his prayer, he was retired from service with effect from 291992 by the State Government.
It is objected that according to note 1 of Rule 813 of CSR Vol.
I, Part-I, the possession of the medical certificate does not itself confer upon the Government employee concerned any right to leave.
It is also averred that as per rule 8.16(1) of CSR Vol.
I, Part-I the grant of a medical certificate under rule 813 does not in itself confer upon the Government employees concerned any right to leave.
The certificate should be forwarded to the authority competent to grant leave and the orders of the authority should be awaited.
A Government employee, who absents himself from duty without permission of the competent authority is liable to have his absence treated as absence from duty without leave.
Under Rule 8.15 leave cannot be claimed as of right when the exigencies of public service so require discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it.
The petitioner was continuously sending applications for extension of leave and medical certificates at the time when his services were urgently required in the State as terrorism was at its peak.
As soon as peace was restored in the State the petitioner requested to cancel his retirement orders after more than two years.
The petitioner's representation for cancellation of his voluntary retirement order was rightly rejected by the State Government vide order dated 2671995.
Rival Contentions  7.
The petitioner's contention is that under the pressing circumstances of his ill-health and insistence of the department to join duty immediately; in that disturbed state of mind and failing health, he sent the application (Annexure P-3), which was required to be read as a whole.
Primarily, by sending this application, he asked the department to grant him leave on medical ground, if no leave is due then leave without pay on medical grounds be granted to him and finally in the alternative, he submitted that in case as per rules no leave could be granted to him on medical ground, he may be allowed to retire as he is unable to perform his duties with this ill-health.
Thus, the petitioner's learned counsel valiantly argued that the application (Annexure P-3) if read as a whole, cannot be interpreted as a petition for voluntary retirement.
In the petition itself the petitioner has reproduced the rules of voluntary retirement.
He has not given any notice to the department under these rules seeking his voluntary retirement.
On these facts and circumstances, the counsel submitted that in case the department was not inclined to grant him leave on medical ground or extraordinary leave on medical ground, the department ought to have given him an opportunity to explain his circumstances and to extend his leave enabling him to join his duties on being recovered, but the department hurriedly on the basis of the last prayer made in the letter, Annexure P-3, treated this letter as a notice for premature retirement and passed the order, Annexure P-4, which is arbitrary, illegal and against the principle of natural justice.
8.
To support his contention, he has relied on Arun Kumar Gupta v. High Court of HP and another, 1993(2) Recent Services Judgments 449, Mrs. Manju Gupta v. Haryana Agricultural University, 1990(2) Recent Services Judgments 416 and Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking v. Tara Chand, 1978(2) SLR 425.
9.
Respondents' learned counsel refuting all the contentions raised by the petitioner's learned counsel submitted that the petitioner was posted as a Superintendent of Police (Headquarters).
No doubt, from January 1991 to March 1991, he was on leave on medical ground which was a sanctioned leave, but later on he resumed his duties and thereafter in April, 1991 he asked for ex- India leave w.e.f.
1541991 to 1271991, which was also granted.
He left for Canada and thereafter he came back to India in October, 1994.
During this period, the Punjab State was facing the most critical time of terrorists activities.
From 1071991 till 2261992 the petitioner was continuously sending stereo-typed medical certificates wherein his ailment is being described as back strain and then certifying that he is unable to travel for a particular period, is unable to follow his occupation.
No other document was sent along with these medical certificates to show that really he was ill.
Initially, his leave was sanctioned, but ultimately, letter dated 29.5.1992 (Annexure P-2) was sent to the petitioner to immediately report on duty.
In reply to this letter, the petitioner sent letter (Annexure P-3).
No doubt in this letter, he has mentioned that he is under treatment of Dr. PGR Dawe, who has observed that he is unable to work or travel for three months due to back strain.
The medical certificate to that effect was also attached with this letter and the petitioner prayed to extend his leave without pay till 291992, but in the last para he has specifically written: "In case the rules do not permit your honour to grant me leave without pay on medical ground, I may kindly be allowed to retire as I am unable to perform my duties with this ill health."
On the basis of this request, this letter was treated as a notice for voluntary retirement which was accepted and order dated 26.8.1992 (Annexure P-4) was passed by the State Government.
10.
Respondents' learned counsel strongly stressed that the order dated 26.8.1992 (Annexure P-4) was conveyed to the petitioner and thereafter petitioner sent hand-written letter dated 21.10.1993 (Annexure R-1/1), whereby he made a prayer that after the expiry of ex-India leave granted to him earlier, commuted leave on medical ground be granted to him and after commuted leave exhausts, leave of any kind due may be sanctioned.
In the last para, he has requested that his pension case may kindly be finalised as early as possible and his GPF and GIS may kindly be paid at the earliest.
11.
From this letter, it is evident that till he was in England, he accepted that he has applied for voluntary retirement and his prayer has been accepted by the government.
As soon as he landed in India, it dawned upon him to seek quashment of these orders.
Hence, he submitted a representation dated 411995 (Annexure P-5), which was rightly rejected by the department.
12.
Respondents' learned counsel relying on Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, AIR 1992 Supreme Court 1020 : 1992(2) SCT 92 submitted that the order of compulsory retirement is based on subjective satisfaction.
The government has to consider entire service record of the employee.
As the nature of the function to compulsory retirement is not quasi-judicial in nature and the action has to be taken on the subjective satisfaction of the government, there is no room for importing the said facet of natural justice audi alteram partem in such a case, more particularly when an order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment nor does it involve any stigma.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
Such matters can be interfered with by the High Court if it is found that the Order was passed mala fidely or it is based on no evidence or it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material.
13.
After hearing the rival contentions, in my considered opinion, the writ petition deserves dismissal.
14.
So far as the judgment of Baikuntha Nath's case (supra) is concerned, it has no application in the present case because that was a case of compulsory retirement and the petitioner's case is of voluntary retirement.
15.
The cases relied on by the petitioner's learned counsel are also distinguishable on facts.
16.
In Tara Chand's case (supra), respondent-Tara Chand sent the letter of resignation wherein he detailed a catalogue of grievances.
He sent 9 copies of this letter of resignation to various officers of DESU.
He also mentioned that he is in bad health and on sick leave and is compelled by his superiors to write the letter.
He has specifically mentioned "misdeeds" of his immediate superiors and also submitted that he can prove all these allegations by adducing documentary evidence before the Enquiry Committee.
In that letter he also prayed that he be transferred to some other Station, which may be nearer to DESU colony.
Considering all these facts mentioned in the letter, the Division Bench held that the purport or tenor of the letter is to be construed, but not on the basis of how the parties have understood it.
In the opinion of the Division Bench, this letter was nothing but a protest against his officers and hence, their Lordships have arrived at the conclusion that it was not a letter of resignation.
17.
The facts of Manju Gupta's case (supra) are also distinguishable.
In that case Manju Gupta while proceeding on study leave executed a bond in favour of the University to serve it for another five years.
From October, 1986 she was on maternity leave.
She gave birth to a child.
Because of post-natal complication, she was compelled to extend her medical leave, which was declined and was asked to join.
The University also threatened that in case she does not join, disciplinary action will be taken against her.
Under those circumstances, she joined her duties for a week.
Her another request to grant her leave was again declined by the University.
Under these compelling circumstances, she submitted her resignation and also prayed for waiver of condition of fulfilling 5 years' service.
When she was asked to refund the amount of salary and other expenses, she sought withdrawal of her resignation, which was declined.
While deciding her writ, the learned Judge observed that under the aforementioned circumstances when she felt disgusted and frustrated, then she submitted her resignation on 161987.
Action was also considered arbitrary and artificial distinction was made to distinguish her with that of Miss Indra Singh.
Challenging this order, she filed the writ petition.
On these grounds, her petition was accepted.
18.
Arun Kumar Gupta's case (supra) is totally on different premise.
He was a driver employed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.
He was suffering from mental disease described as schzophrenia.
He was under treatment in Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla for this ailment.
In his disturbed state of mind, he submitted his resignation.
The office recommended that this resignation be accepted after obtaining opinion of the Medical Board, but the Registrar submitted his note that resignation be accepted and hence, the Chief Justice of the High Court accepted his resignation.
When this was assailed in a writ petition, the Division Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court held that "the facts and circumstances on record leave no doubt that the act of tendering resignation by the petitioner was not voluntary but was an act of an imbalanced mind."
19.
In this case, as is evident from all the certificates submitted by the petitioner that initially, Dr. PGR Dawe was opining that he is suffering from back pain from disk, but from 1791991 onwards he was issuing certificates certifying that he is suffering from back strain and is unable to travel or work for two-three months and to follow his occupation.
It seems that they are just copies of the certificates issued on various dates by the said doctor.
No other document was sent by the petitioner to the department to consider that he is really suffering so much that he is unable to come back to India and to resume his duties.
He availed ex-India leave from 1541991 and thereafter availing leave period till 1071991, he started sending applications with such stereo-typed medical certificates to the department seeking extension of leave on the ground of ill-health.
When he received department's letter, dated 29.5.1992 (Annexure P-2) to immediately resume his duties, failing which appropriate action will be taken against him, he sent letter dated 2261992 (Annexure P-3) relevant portion of which, is reproduced below :-  "In case the rules do not permit your honour to grant me leave without pay on medical ground, I may kindly be allowed to retire as I am unable to perform my duties with this ill health."
Thus, it is apparent that when his services were badly required by the State, he on the alleged ground of his illness, that too of back strain only, declined to resume his duties and refused to render much needed service at that hour of need to the department.
Further he submitted that in case leave is not granted to him as per rules, he may be allowed to retire.
The department accepted this letter as a notice for voluntary retirement and passed the impugned order dated 26.8.1992 (Annexure P-4).
Under the aforesaid facts and circumstances, it cannot be said that it was not a case of voluntary retirement.
If the petitioner would not have really meant this letter to be read as a letter of voluntary retirement, he would not have sent letter dated 21.10.1993 (Annexure R-1/1) to the Additional Director General of Police, Intelligence praying that his pension case be finalised soon and GPF and GIS be paid to him.
He came back to India in October, 1994 and by then, as peace prevailed in the State of Punjab, he thought of withdrawing his resignation and submitted representation dated 411995 (Annexure P-5), which was rightly declined by the department.
20.
The petitioner was a member of disciplined force.
He was not supposed to take such a plea and to feign illness just to avoid performing his duties at that time when the State of Punjab was engulfed in the wave of terrorists.
When he came back to India, he cogitated over his previous indiscreet decision and submitted the representation (Annexure P-5).
This feint move of the petitioner was rightly declined by the government.
21.
Thus, in my considered view, respondents have rightly arrived at the conclusion that Annexure P-3 was a letter seeking voluntary retirement.
There was no compelling circumstances for the petitioner to send such a letter except his deliberate move, may be an indiscreet decision not to join his official duties when the State of Punjab was badly needing services of such police officers.
22.
Finding no merit in the writ, it is hereby dismissed with costs which are quantified at Rs. 2000/-  Petition dismissed.