Gitesh Ranjan Bhattacharjee, J - In this petition the writ petitioner has challenged the order of the Director of School Education issued under memo No. 629(6)SC/GI dated the 30th March, 1993 by which the petitioner's claim for absorption as Assistant Teacher in the concerned Junior High School, namely, Pandaveswar Rakhal Chandra Balika Vidyalaya has been turned down.
The said school is a four-class junior high school having classes from V to VIII.
Some time in December 1981 the Managing Committee of the said School decided to open classes IX and X and also appointed the petitioner as one of the teachers for those classes and she joined in January 1982.
At that time she was MA (Sanskrit) with honours in Sanskrit at the graduation level.
In 1992 the petitioner qualified herself further with the degree of Bachelor of Education of the Biswa Bharati University which is stated to be a recognised qualification for Work Education teacher in junior high and secondary schools.
The Managing Committee of the school in 1984 decided to close the new classes IX and X and offered opportunity to the writ petitioner and another teacher Shrimati Minakshi Nayak who were earlier appointed for teaching in classes IX and X, to continue to teach in the junior high schools upto class VIII.
The petitioner availed of that opportunity and continued to Act as teacher in the Junior High School.
It appears that the Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL) was giving a grant of Rs. 1,000/- per month to the said school towards expenses for the teachers initially appointed by the Managing Committee of the School for teaching in classes IX and X  2.
It is case of the writ petitioner that due to heavy pressure of in- flow of students, the schools was compelled to open two sections for classes V and VI with effect from 1981 and in pursuance of a resolution of the Managing Committee dated the 24th April, 1984 the Headmistress of the school wrote a letter to the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Burdwan on 4th May, 1984 requesting him to sanction two additional posts of teachers vide annexure at page 42 of the writ petition.
As nothing was done by the authorities concerned in response to the said letter of the Headmistress of the school regarding sanction of additional posts, the petitioner moved a writ petition in this Court being C.O.
No. 1872(W) of 1984 which was disposed of by Suhas Chandra Sen, J (as his Lordship then was) by judgment dated the 14th March, 1985.
In that judgment the learned Judge inter alia directed the District Inspector of Schools to consider the case of the petitioner.
It was also observed in the said judgment that if the petitioner had been in service on the date on which the application was forwarded to the DI of Schools she should be treated as in service.
j The matter was then considered and disposed of by the District Inspector of School by his order conveyed under memo No. 2914 dated the 18th July, 1985, Annexure-D to the writ petition in which the District Inspector held inter alia that the petitioner could not be considered as teacher of the said school on the ground that there was no necessity of opening of classes IX and X beyond 10.3.1979 by the school authority without obtaining prior permission from the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and there was no necessity/cause for the opening of additional section for classes V and VI without making any application or taking any approval for such units from the proper authority.
It may be noted here that it appears from the order of the learned Judge dated 1431995 passed in the said C.O.
No. 18721(W) of 1984 that the learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted before the learned Judge at the time of hearing that the petitioner was willing to serve the school without any remuneration and school authority was directed to consider the case of the petitioner.
In that background the DI of Schools (SE), Burdwan in his said order dated the 18th July, 1985 also observed that since the learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted before the Court that the petitioner was willing to serve the school without any remuneration the school authority might consider the same without any commitment and/or obligation from the side of the respondent whatsoever.
3.
It appear that thereafter the Managing Committee of the school took a resolution on 1291986 to the effect that for want of adequate number of teachers in the school difficulties were being faced in running the classes properly and accordingly Mamta Ghosh (writ petitioner) and another teacher Minakshi Nayak were allowed to take classes.
It was also recorded in the said resolution (vide Annexure-E) that those two teachers were agreeable to work without remuneration and that they would not be entitled to raise any claim as teacher in future.
It was further recorded in the said resolution that if the ECL gave any grant, in that event the said teachers would get remuneration otherwise the school authority would not be responsible for the same.
It was also categorically recorded in that resolution that the two teachers including the writ petitioner were allowed to work without remuneration.
It is the petitioner's case that she was accordingly taking classes in classes V to VIII in different subjects as would be revealed for the class routine for the year 1987-88 (vide Annexure-G).
4.
Subsequently in 1988 the petitioner again moved another writ petition being GO No. 14230(W) of 1988 for her absorption as Assistant Teacher in the said school.
During the pendency of that writ petition the Managing Committee of the School adopted a resolution on 1371989 (vide Annexure-F) recording therein that the total number of students at that time was 534 as against six teachers only.
It was also mentioned in the said resolution that there were 10 units of classes, the number of students in class V-A being 44, V-B 44, V-C 48, V-D 44, VI-A 64, VI-B 50, VII-A 76, VII-B 73, VIII-A 44 and VII-B 48.
The resolution therefore recommended for taking steps with the Office of the DI for getting four additional teachers for running the classes.
The Secretary of the school accordingly in his letter dated 21.9.1989 (Annexure-F) requested the DI of Schools for sanctioning additional posts.
Details of information under various heads were also furnished with the said letter showing requirement of four more posts of teachers, one each for Life Science, Geography, Physical Education and Work Education in addition to the already existing six sanctioned posts of teachers.
It appears that nothing was done by the authorities concerned in response to the said letter of the Secretary of the school.
However, the C.O.
No. 14230(W) of 1988 was disposed of by Mohitosh Mazumdar, J (As his Lordship then was) by judgment dated the 12th June, 1901.
In that judgment the learned Judge took notice of the application made by the school authorities to the DI of Schools for sanction of four additional posts and observed that the application was filed in the year 1989 but nothing was done and that the petitioner was working in the school since 1981.
The learned Judge also observed that in his view sanction of additional posts in the facts and circumstances of the case was merited and in that view of the matter directed the Director of School Education to determine the question of sanction of additional posts after hearing the school authority and the petitioner.
It was also recorded by the learned Judge that the petitioner was eligible for being approved against the post of Work Education and she would complete her training after sanction was accorded.
Pursuant to that order of the the Court the Director of School Education passed the impugned order dated the 30th March, 1993 rejecting the petitioner's prayer for absorption (vide Annexure-H).
Being aggrieved by the said order of the Director of School Education, the writ petitioner, as already stated, moved the present writ petition.
5.
In the impugned order the Director School Education has observed that the school authorities were allowed the admissible number of teachers at the material time of recognition of the Junior High School and the posts were allowed to be filled up by absorbing the six organiser teachers including the teacher-in-charge and that the writ petitioner was not an organiser teacher for the Junior High School.
It may however be noted here that the writ petitioner did not claim absorption as an organiser teacher of the Junior High School.
In the impugned order the Director of School Education has also recorded that as per GO No. 670-Edn(S) dated 491989 prior approval of the Director of School Education, West Bengal has to be taken for opening additional sections in a Junior High School which has not been admittedly taken by the school authorities in the instant case.
It has been further observed by the Director that even if such additional sanctions were allowed the recruitment of the teachers of the same has to be made through local Employment Exchange paying due regard to SC and ST reservation Quota.
According to the Director since the procedure laid down for the purpose of opening the additional sections for the junior high schools has been violated by the school no notice of increase in roll strength without sanction of the appropriate authority can be taken by the Director.
It appears that the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Burdwan submitted a report dated the 23rd June, 1992 to the Director of School Education (vide Annexure-G).
In that report the enrolment figure as available from the grant-in-aid application in respect of the school for the classes V to VIII has been shown thus :-  1988 - 560  1989 - 534  1990 - 578  Now if the normal limit for a class unit is 40 students, as submitted, in that case it is evident that this junior high school for the four classes, namely, V to VIII was having large number of students in the roll strength in excess of the norm of 40 students per class and the position was rather consistent for a number of years.
It was therefore unavoidably necessary for the school, in the interest of the students to open new sections in each class.
We have also seen that as far back as in 1984 the school authorities wrote to the DI of Schools that they were compelled to open two sections for class V and VI because of the increase of roll strength and they needed additional teachers.
At that time the DI of Schools did not say that the additional sections were not justified nor did he say that prior permission should be taken.
Even granting that prior permission for opening of a new section is required, that does not mean that the question of such permission should not be at all adverted to even when the matter is brought to the notice of the concerned authority, simply on the ground that initially the additional section was opened without taking prior permission of the concerned authority.
Well, even if at the initial stage of opening the new additional sections permission was not taken, that does not absolve the authorities concerned of their responsibility to consider the question of granting permission for such new section when the matter is formally brought to their notice.
As we have seen, as far back as in 1984 the school authorities brought to the notice of the DI of Schools that due to increase of roll strength they were compelled to open new sections and obviously that was done in the interest of the students.
On receipt of the such information with a prayer for sanction of additional posts for the same it was incumbent upon the authorities concerned to make an enquiry into the matter and either to specifically say that they would not permit new sections which had already been opened under unavoidable circumstances or to approve such new sections at least with prospective effect from the date of conveying such prospective sanction.
In this case nothing of the sort was done by the authorities concerned and they kept totally silent since 1984 about the running of the new sections brought to their notice by the authority with request for sanction of additional posts.
It is also to be pointed out here that the GO No. 670 referred to in the impugned order of the Director is a GO issued in 1989 whereas the running of additional sections were reported to the DI as far back as in 1984.
In may considered view, after sitting tight over the matter since 1984 when opening of additional sections was brought to their notice with request for additional sanction of posts, the authorities cannot now in the year 1993 the unceremoniously shelve the matter by simply saying that the matter merits no consideration because the additional sections were not opened initially with the prior approval of the Director.
The authorities entrusted with various responsibilities in educational matters will be well advised if they are told to inculcate a wholesome approach in such matters so that inconsequential or curable technicalities may not clog the processes which are otherwise well deserved on merit for the legitimate cause of education.
Having regard to the statistics of roll strength as forthcoming on record it is evident that sanction of at least four more additional posts of teachers for the concerned junior high school, as prayed for by the schools authorities, is smoothly warranted and the refusal to accord sanction for the same is not supported by any substantial ground of justification.
Since there has already been an enormous delay in the matter and since in spite of repeated directions of the Court in the earlier writ petitions the authorities concerned failed to move in the proper direction, I consider it appropriate to dispose of the matter now with the following directions.
6.
The impugned order of the Director of School Education dated the 30th March 1993, Annexure-H to the writ petition, is hereby quashed.
In view of the consistent roll strength of students in the concerned school for years together the Director of School Education is directed to convey sanction of four more posts of Assistant Teachers for the Pandeveswar Rakhal Chandra Balika Vidyalaya which is a junior high school, within eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Of the four such posts one shall be sanctioned for Work Education.
The said post of Work Education shall be made a general category post and this shall be ensured, if necessary, by adjustment of reserve category post with any of the other three sanctioned posts.
On receipt of such sanction for such posts the school authorities shall obtain names of suitable candidates from Employment Exchange.
In view of the fact that the petitioner has been serving in the school for a long period I direct that she will be also allowed to appear before the Selection Committee for consideration of selection and appointment along with the other candidates who may be sponsored by Employment Exchange.
The entire process of selection, approval and appointment shall be concluded within a period of four months from the date of sanction.
Till new appointment is made in compliance with the aforesaid direction, the petitioner's service in the concerned school on existing terms and conditions shall not be interfered with.
In considering the case of the petitioner as directed above age bar, if any, shall be condoned if it is found that in 1984 she was within prescribed age limit.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly without any order as to costs.
Order accordingly.