JS Sekhon, J - The vires of Rule 14 of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar (Volume II), 1986 (for short `the University Calendar') are being challenged in this petition on the ground of vagueness and arbitrarily in so far it provides that the adverse result on re-evaluation of the answer books shall be binding on the student community.
2.
The factual matrix of the case relevant for the disposal of this petition is that the petitioner appeared in MA Economics Part I Examination of the University in April, 1991.
Her result was declared in September, 1991, declaring the petitioner having passed MA Economics Part I Examination.
However, she had obtained 38 and 36 marks respectively in Part II (Macro Economics) and Paper IV(ii) (Economics of Industry), although she alleges having well done these papers.
Aggrieved by the results of low marks, she applied for re-evaluation of these two papers in MA (Macro Economics) and MA (Economics of Industry).
3.
On the basis of the declared results, she took admission in Economics Part II and had already completed the required attendance or lecturers in order to appear in the said later examinations going to be held in April, 1992.
The result of re-evaluation was conveyed to the petitioner in February 1992, whereby her marks had been reduced to 37% in Paper II (Macro Economics) and 27% in Paper IV(ii) (Economics of Industry) and she was declared fail in MA Economics Part I, whereas in her original result she was declared `Pass' securing 162 marks in all.
The petitioner had applied for re-evaluation on the prescribed format and Para 12 therein which provided that the result of re-evaluation whether favourable or unfavorable shall be binding on a candidate who applies for re-evaluation.
Para 12 of the Instructions has been imbibed from rule 14 of the University Calendar, 1962.
Under these circumstances, the petitioner maintains that rule 14 being arbitrary is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as the marks once awarded to a candidate cannot be reduced on an application filed by such candidate on the basis of doctrine of promissory estoppel as-well-as on the underlying principles of re-evaluation at the instance of the candidate.
It was also averred that the re-evaluation of the marks of the answer books in these papers was not conducted on the basis of average of the three awards of the two examiners, who had re-evaluated and the original result.
4.
This petition is resisted by the respondent-University contending that the re-evaluation score supersedes the original score of the candidate and no arbitrariness was involved in the provisions of rule 14 of the University Calendar, 1962.
It was also maintained that the entire procedure given in Ordinances 8, 11, 12, 13 and 14 was followed in the case of the petitioner and that the petitioner being fully aware of clause 12, when she applied for re-evaluation was legally bound by the result of re-evaluation.
It was also maintained that in all fairness re-evaluation is done on the basis of the average of the awards given by two examiners, who had re-evaluated that answer books and the original award.
It was further maintained that the above referred rule and instructions issued by the University are in consonance with the rules and instructions of the University.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties, besides perusing the record.
6.
Rule 14 of the University Calendar, Volume II Part B, 1991 (Annexure R-1) reads as under :-  "The result of re-evaluation whether favourable or unfavourable shall be binding on the candidate who applies for re-evaluation.
Provided that in cases where results of re-evaluation could not be declared before the commencement of the following examination and such students had sat in the examination of the paper in which they had applied for re-evaluation, they may be allowed the benefit of such result as was favourable to them.
Provided further that in cases where the rechecking of answer books is not carried out due to unavoidable circumstances before the commencement of the examination in the paper/s in which the students applied for re-checking after the receipt of answer books later-on and such students had sat in following examination of the paper in which they had applied for re-checking they may be allowed the benefit of such result as was favourable to them."
A bare glance through the same leaves no doubt that this rule makes provisions for the delayed result of the re-evaluation of a failed candidate who has applied for re-evaluation of the case if the re-evaluation is not done till that candidate re-appears in the subsequent examination in the said paper, then the benefit of the result which is favourable to the candidate shall be taken into consideration, but there is no provision in this rule regarding the fate of those candidates, who had claimed re-evaluation, although declared "successful" in the earlier examination in the said papers, simply to improve their marks.
In case their re-evaluation is delayed by the University till they appear in the same paper in the next higher grade.
7.
On the other hand, rule 2 provides that an application for re-evaluation on the prescribed format along with requisite fee et cetera should reach University office under a registered cover within 15 days of the declaration of the result of a particular examination or within 10 days from the date of despatch of result-card by the University, whichever is later.
Rule 3(1) further bars the entertaining of any such application after due date, even on the ground of late procurement form of such application.
Rule 3(2) further disqualifies a candidate from claiming re-evaluation after the expiry of the normal date it his/her result has been delayed on account of his/her own fault.
8.
Under these circumstances, there is considerable force in the contention of Mr. Cheema that the rules framed by the University or the Ordinances issued from time to time do not provide the time-limit of re- evaluation of the papers, although the Ordinance of the Punjabi University, Patiala has provided this time limit to be `15 days' from the date of receipt of such application for re-evaluation.
Thus, this lacuna in these rules and Ordinances of the Guru Nanak Dev University has certainly resulted in hardships to those students who after passing the relevant examination claim re-evaluation for improving their marks and awaiting the result of such re-evaluation they join the next class and attend the lectures, yet all the same, this arbitrariness would not go to the extent rendering such rules or Ordinances as ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
9.
The above referred view is supported from the observation of the Division Bench of Bombay High Court, at Nagpur, in Lalit Taori v. Nagpur University, Nagpur and others, AIR 1986 Bombay 255.
In that case also, the writ petitioner Lalit Taori (a successful candidate in final MBBS Examinations) being not satisfied with the marks awarded, had claimed re-evaluation in the Paper I (Medicine Subject) on 17-12-1984.
The University informed the candidate some time in March, 1985 that as a result of re- evaluation there was adverse change in the marks from original 49 to 42.
As a consequence thereof, the result of Lalit Taori, petitioner, was revised and he was declared unsuccessful under Ordinance No. 159.
Mr. Lalit Taori along with another unsuccessful candidate then challenged the provisions of the said Ordinance and rules for re-evaluation of the answer books of the University, contending that the subsequent result of failure is not binding on him.
The Division Bench of Bombay High Court at Nagpur disposed the writ petition by holding in paragraph 6 of the judgment as under :-  "This takes us to the second point viz. as a result of re-evaluation the marks cannot be varied to the detriment of the student seeking re-evaluation under the Ordinance.
We find that second point is equally devoid of any merit.
Re-evaluation is a part of examination and is a fresh appraisal of the performance of a student by other examiner.
In case the marks increase as a result of re-evaluation the increase is binding on the University which is obliged to vary result on that basis.
How then to decrease in the Marks can be held not binding on the student ?
The result of re-evaluation, whatever it is, has to be accepted as correct and final by all concerned and for all purposes.
Indeed after re-evaluation the result of original valuation is erased.
To hold otherwise would be against the basic concept of re-evaluation, it is submitted that the Ordinance is a beneficial piece of legislation intended for the benefit of student community and must be interpreted in its favour as far as possible.
Apart from the consideration that such interpretation would be basically wrong, neither the letter nor the spirit of this Ordinance leaves any scope for such interpretation Rule 3 makes the intention very clear.
It requires an undertaking by a student that he shall accept the result of re-evaluation instead of the original evaluation.
It also authories the University to re-examine even papers of which re-evaluation is not sought.
No student can be allowed to get over the obligation of these mandatory undertakings but for which re-evaluation is not permissible.
Person giving this undertaking is thus estopped from contending that undertaking is not binding on him."
However, before the Bombay High Court, the time factor was not involved as re-evaluation of the paper in the final examination of MBBS was involved.
10.
The Division Bench of this court in Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala through its Registrar v. Anupama Arya, 1990(1) SLR 765, by relying upon the above referred observations of the Bombay High Court also observed that marks obtained as a result of re-evaluation are the final marks and the merit list for admission to the Engineering course should be prepared on the basis of re-evaluation of marks.
11.
In the fight of the above observations of the Division Bench of Bombay High Court as well as of our own High Court, there is no escape but to conclude that the candidate applying for re-examination/re-evaluation is bound by the marks so evaluated which may be favourable or unfavourable to his result.
12.
The question then arises whether under the circumstances of this case, the delay in re-evaluating the papers had resulted in so much hardship and arbitrariness to the petitioner which would vitiate the adverse result of re-evaluation or entitle the petitioner to re-appear in the said two papers in the regular examination in MA Part I, to be held in April, 1993.
In this regard, the admitted facts are that the petitioner appeared in Macro-Economics Paper II and appeared in MA Economics Part I held in April, 1991 and was declared successful in September, 1991.
He obtained 38 marks in Paper II (Macro-Economics) while 36 marks in Paper IV(ii) (Economics of Industry), but being not satisfied with the said evaluation of her papers, she claimed re- evaluation within the requisite period of 15 days, but the re-evaluation-card was prepared on 25-21992 and it was conveyed to the petitioner some time later.
It is not disputed that the petitioner by that time had already joined the course of MA Part I and had completed the requisite lectures till the end of February, 1992.
In other words, it can be well said that she was eligible to appear in MA Part II Examination at the time when the University declared her on re-evaulation as unsuccessful in MA Part I Examination.
She then filed the present writ petition on March, 1992 and notice of motion was accepted by Mr. Paramjit Singh, Standing Counsel for the University on March 24, 1992.
She also filed Civil Misc.
Application No. 3229 of 1992 in this writ petition on which vide order dated 22-4-1992 she was permitted to sit in MA II Examination subject to the result of this writ petition.
It is stated at the bar by Mr. Cheema that the petitioner had taken MA Part II Examination held in May, 1992.
Under the circumstances, the delay in re-evaluating the marks of the petitioner in the said two papers had certainly resulted in wasting her one academic year in studies.
13.
Consequently, under these circumstances of the case, it appears more equitable that instead of declaring her successful in MA Part I Examination on the basis of the original result, the university should be directed to allow her to appear in these papers in MA.
Part I in the Annual Examination to be held it April, 1993 by relaxing the rules and regulations, if need be.
The University is also directed to declare the result of MA Part II of the petitioner after the declaration of the result of her examination in MA Part I, which she has yet to undertake in April, 1993.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
There is no order as to costs.