Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal'), dated 20112002, whereby on an Original Application filed by respondent-applicant under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985, the learned Tribunal has issued directions to the present petitioners to communicate to the applicant the downgraded Annual Confidential Reports after the year 1995 till 1998 alongwith the reasons for the same.
Liberty was given to the respondent-applicant to make representation against the same and a direction was issued to the petitioners herein to consider and decide the same.
2.
The respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the applicant), was working on the post of Senior Administrative Officer Grade-I in the Research and Development Center under the Ministry of Defence at Chandigarh.
The grievance of the applicant was that she has not been considered fit for promotion to the post of Chief Administrative Officer on the basis of the entries in her Annual Confidential Reports and thus, the action of the petitioners is unjustified.
Before we proceed further, the assessment of the applicant in her Annual Confidential Reports is as under :-  1994 : Good 1995 : Excellent 1996.  : Very Good/Good (There are two entries because of two broken periods in the same year) 1997 : Good 1998 : Good 1999 : Very Good.
3.
The claim of the applicant before the learned Tribunal was that the `Excellent' report for year 1995 has been down graded to `Very Good/Good' in the year 1996 and thus, she has been down graded.
Reliance was placed on a Supreme Court judgment, reported as "UP Jal Nigam and others v. Prabhat Chandra Jain and others, 1996(2) SCT 227 : (1996) 2 SCC 363", to contend that the Annual Confidential Reports cannot be down graded without recording the reason for such down grading.
Therefore, downgrading of the applicant from `Excellent' to `Very Good/Good', without any reason is unjustified and consequently, the direction in the nature mentioned above, was issued.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that the case of the applicant for promotion was again considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee in the year 2000 and the applicant stands promoted in the year 2001.
Still further, the applicant has attained the age of superannuation in the year 2002.
Apart from the said fact, it is contended that the judgment in UP Jal Nigam's case (supra) has been considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "Union of India and another v. Major Bahadur Singh, 2005(4) SCT 844 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 959", wherein it has been held that the judgment in UP Jal Nigam's case (supra) has no universal application.
The said judgment itself shows that it was intended to be meant only for the employees of UP Jal Nigam only.
It is contended that the Annual Confidential Reports containing adverse entry alone are required to be communicated and there is no such concept of down grading of Annual Confidential Reports, as has been raised by the applicant before the learned Tribunal.
5.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner and examining the judgment referred to by the petitioner, we are of the opinion that the order of the learned Tribunal is not sustainable.
The Division Bench of Delhi High Court in "Bahadur Singh (Major) v. Union of India, 2003(2) SCT 514", relying upon the Hon'ble Supreme Court judgment in UP Jal Nigam's case (supra), held that the Annual Confidential Report for the year 1989-90 is an element of adverse reflection and, therefore, the Annual Confidential Reports ought to have been communicated to the applicant.
That was a case where the entry for the year 1989-90 was alleged to be down graded from 7 marks to 6.
During the preceding year ie, 1988-89, the petitioner had been graded `7', whereas in the subsequent year the petitioner was graded `8'.
It was the said judgment, which came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the year 2006 in "Union of India and another v. Major Bahadur Singh, 2006 SCC (L&S) 959".
The Hon'ble Supreme Court found that the fundamental mistake in the approach of the High Court is that it proceeded on the basis as if whenever there was allotment of marks at a figure lower than the previous period, it was down gradation which resulted in adverse consequence and ought to have been communicated before the same was considered while considering the claim of promotion.
It has been held that the question of communication did not arise as there was no adverse entry as such.
It is also held that the judgment of UP Jal Nigam's case (supra) has no universal application and it is intended to be meant only for the employees of UP Jal Nigam only.
It was held to the following effect :-  "xx xx xx xx "8.
As has been rightly submitted by learned counsel for the appellants, UP Jal Nigam's case has no universal application.
The judgment itself shows that it was intended to be meant only for the employees of UP Jal Nigam only.
xx xx xx xx 19.
A reference is also necessary to the instructions issued on 321989.
Para 103 is of considerable importance and reads as follows : "103.
Assessment contained in a CR will not be communicated to the officer except in the following contingencies : (a) When figurative assessment anywhere in the CR is Low or Below Average (i.e.3 marks).
In such cases extract of figurative assessment (i.e. 3 or less) will be communicated to the officer.
(b) When the brief comments (pen picture) contain adverse or advisory remarks.
In such cases complete pen pictures (excluding the box grading) together with comments on Guidance for Improvement will be communicated to the officer.
Further, the box grading will also need communication to the officer when assessment is Low or Below Average (3 or less)."
The modalities provided for recording and communication of adverse entries clearly indicate as to in which cases the communication of adverse or advisory remarks are to be made.
The word "advisory" is not necessarily adverse.
(emphasis supplies)."
6.
In fact, prior to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Major Bahadur Singh's case (supra), earlier the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in case "Rajinder Kumar v. Union of India, 2001(3) SCT 887.
", has also taken the view that the UP Jal Nigam's case was being read out of context.
It was held to the following effect :-  "xx xx xx xx 9.
Coming to the other issue whether "Average" entry earned by the petitioner for four years after the "Very Good" entry for one year could be treated drastic variation to assume adverse character, we feel that the ratio of Supreme Court judgment in Jal Nigam's case (supra) was being read out of context.
The Apex Court in that case had found a drastic variation from "Excellent" entry for one year to "Poor" next year and had held that competent Authority ought to have recorded reasons for such a steep downgrading and communicated it to enable the employee to improve his performance.
But all this was not attracted in the present case because petitioner was graded "Average" which was not an adverse entry under the relevant guidelines not only for one year but for four years non stop.
This, therefore, was not a case of any drastic variation from two to bottom for one year.
Moreover, "Average" entry did not require any communication as it was not considered an adverse entry under the guidelines.
Reliance on the Supreme Court judgment appears misplaced on the face of it."
7.
The Division Bench of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in "Union of India v. Col. (Dr.) Jiban Chandra Saha, 2001(3) SCT 309", also held that the judgment in UP .Jal Nigam's case was under the UP Jal Nigam Service Rules and cannot be read out of context and that it is the judgment on its own facts.
It was held to the following effect :-  "xx xx xx xx 36.
Mr. MK Bhardwaj laid great emphasis on the decision in the case of UP Jal Nigam (Supra) and urged that downgrading in the instant case is the result of bias and amounts to adverse remarks, alternatively he urged that in any case, the petitioner should have been put to notice regarding this fact.
Both these pleas cannot be accepted for the reasons set out hereinafter.
A reference to the opening para 1 of this judgment clearly shows that the order not only covers the case of Prabhat Chander Jain, first respondent in the case but it is to mend the system of recording annual confidential reports prevalent in the UP Jal Nigam - first petitioner.
While considering the matter of recording ACRs under the UP Jal Nigam Service Rules, the aforesaid decision was given and it cannot be read out of context wherein it was meant.
The other reason is that it is the judgment on its own facts.
37.
Another reason to hold that this is not a case of downgrading is that this was the first ACR of the petitioner recorded after his promotion to the rank of Colonel.
It is not his case that in the rank of Colonel prior to it his grading is more than `7'.
This lends credence to the observations of the Reviewing Officer Brig.
SC Khetarpal that the petitioner was orally informed regarding his weaknesses during the relevant year.
In these circumstances by no stretch of imagination it can be said that this is a case of downgrading of the ACR of the petitioner in the relevant year in the rank of Colonel.
In this view of the matter, even if it is assumed that the decision of UP Jal Nigam (Supra) is applicable, it does not advance the case of the petitioner in any manner."
8.
It is only the adverse entries in the Annual Confidential Reports which are required to be communicated in terms of the Government of India office memorandum dated 311978, which is to the following effect :-  "20.
Communication of adverse entries and how to be done - All adverse entries in the confidential report of Government servant, both on performance as well as on basic qualities and potential should be communicated along with a mention of good points within one month of their being recorded.
This communication should be in writing and a record to that effect should be kept in the CR dossier of the Government servant concerned."
9.
In the present case, the petitioner was graded "Excellent" in the year 1995, though in the year 1996 she was graded "Very Good/Good".
It cannot be said that the reasons were required to be recorded for recording the Very Good or Good entries.
The entry for the year 1996 cannot be said to be adverse which alone was required to be communicated in terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bahadur Singh's case (supra).
10.
Thus, we are of the opinion that the order passed by the learned Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench Chandigarh, dated 20112002, Annexure P-3, suffers from patent illegality and irregularity and thus, cannot be sustained in law.
Consequently, the present writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 20112002, Annexure P-3, passed by the learned Tribunal is set- aside.
Petition allowed.