Hemant Gupta, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 5215- CAT of 2003, filed by the members of the Indian Administrative Service, promoted from the State Civil Services (hereinafter referred to as the 'Promotees'), and the Civil Writ Petition No. 12536-CAT of 2003, filed by the Union of India against the order dated 1032003, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the 'Tribunal'), on an Original Application filed by respondent No. 1 herein, i.e., a Direct Recruit to the Indian Administrative Service, Haryana Cadre (hereinafter referred to as the 'Direct Recruit').
2.
The brief facts, out of which the present writ petitions arise, are that the Direct Recruit-Dr. Ashok Khemka (an Indian Administrative Officer of 1991 Batch) filed an application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 before the learned Tribunal, challenging the assignment of the years of 1990 and 1991 as the years of allotment to the Promotees impleaded in the Original Application.
3.
The challenge in the Original Application is that in terms of Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Indian Administrative Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1987, as amended on 31121997 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Seniority Rules'), the year of allotment in terms of the length of service is to be reckoned with reference "to the year in which the Selection Committee held its meeting", whereas, the same has been determined with reference to the year for which the Selection Committee made its recommendation.
In other words, the dispute is whether the year of allotment is to be determined with reference to the year in which the Selection Committee held its meeting or with reference to the vacancies for the year in which the Selection Committee held its meeting.
4.
Before we advert to the respective contentions of the parties, the undisputed facts culled out from the pleadings and/or from the documents produced on record by the State Government or the Central Government, are that there were four vacancies for appointment of Indian Administrative Service in the year 1994-95, meant for filling up the same from the State Civil Services, by promotion.
The meeting of the Selection Committee was not held for the select list for the year 1994-95, therefore, the four vacancies of the year 1994-95 were clubbed with the 9 vacancies of the year 1995-96.
Similarly, 9 vacancies for the year 1996-97 were available to be filled up from amongst the State Civil Services.
In the meeting of the Selection Committee, held on 23/24101999, the Committee considered the members of the State Civil Services to fill up such vacancies in the Indian Administrative Service.
The Union Public Service Commission made recommendations for appointments to the posts of Indian Administrative Service for the vacancies for the years 1995-96 vide Notification dated 27121999 and for the year 1996-97 vide Notification dated 28121999.
On the basis of such recommendations notified, 12 officers were appointed for the select list of the year 1995-96 and 9 officers for the select list of the year 1996-97 vide separate notifications of 21st January, 2000.
Vide subsequent order dated 2412001, the year of allotment to the members of the State Civil Services was assigned the years 1990, 1991, 1992 or 1993, as the case may be.
The assignment of year of allotment of 1990 and 1991 was objected to by the Direct Recruit vide his representations.
The representation of the Direct Recruit regarding fixation of the seniority of the State Civil Services Officer was declined.
Aggrieved against the decision of the Central Government, the Direct Recruit invoked the jurisdiction of the learned Tribunal.
The learned Tribunal, vide its order dated 1032002, Annexure P-9, has allowed the Original Application and directed the Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India, to undertake the exercise afresh and re-determine the year of allotment and seniority of the promotee officers in the light of the provisions of Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Regulations of Seniority Rules, as amended on 31121997, as per the law, within the period of 4 months.
The learned Tribunal has held that the year of allotment has to be determined with reference to the year in which the Selection Committee held its meeting and not with reference to the year of the availability of vacancies.
5.
Another fact, which is required to be noticed is that one Shri CL Lakhanpal, who is junior to Shri Balraj Singh, petitioner No. 1 and Shri Anand Sharma, petitioner No. 2, has been assigned the year 1990 as the year of allotment on the basis of the select list of the year 1995-96.
Said CL Lakhanpal earlier invoked the jurisdiction(of the learned Tribunal claiming the he became eligible for promotion to the Indian Administrative Service in the year 1987, but could not be selected for one reason or the other.
The meeting of the Selection Committee was to be held in March, 1996 for consideration of the Officers for the vacancies of the years 1994- 95 and 1995-96.
But, before the meeting could be convened, one Shri SP Gupta, of the State Civil Services, filed an Original Application before the learned Tribunal and obtained the interim order, Annexure P-1, on 21.3.1996.
The Selection Committee did not held its meeting as scheduled.
Ultimately, Shri SP Gupta withdrew the said Original Application.
Shri CL Lakhanpal, prayed that he is to retire on 30.9.1998 and if the Selection Committee does not convene its meeting, his valuable right will be extinguished.
The Original Application filed by Shri Lakhanpal was dismissed by the learned Tribunal on 991998, but the writ petition filed by him was allowed on 23.11.1998.
It was held that even though Shri Lakhanpal has retired from service, but this cannot be a ground for refusing to consider his claim.
The right to be considered has accrued in the year 1994-95.
The claim of Shri Lakhanpal was directed to be considered with effect from the due date for each of the years viz. 1994-95, 1995-96 and so on.
After the order was passed by this Court, there was an order of stay by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
But later on, opportunity was given to the respondents to proceed with the selection process for the years 1995-96 and 1996-97.
The select list for such years was prepared and the candidates were appointed.
Shri Lakhanpal was appointed subsequently vide notification dated 2222000 as per the select list of 1995-96 and was assigned seniority below Shri Anand Sharma, petitioner No. 2 and above Mrs. Satwanti Ahlawat, petitioner No. 3, with 1990 as the year of allotment vide letter dated 2922000.
6.
The appointment to the posts of Indian Administrative Service, by promotion, is regulated with the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by promotion) Regulations, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Regulations').
In terms of Regulation 3 of the aforesaid Regulations, a Committee is to be constituted for selection of the candidates for appointment to the Indian Administrative Service by promotion.
The said Committee is required to meet at intervals not exceeding one year and prepare a list of such members of the State Civil Service as are held by the Committee to be suitable for promotion to the Service as prescribed by Regulation-5.
The list shall not be more than twice the number of the substantive vacancies anticipated in the course of the period of twelve months.
The Regulation further contemplates that a member of the State Civil Service, who has attained the age of 54 years on the first day of January of the year in which the Committee meets, shall be considered by the Committee, if he is eligible for consideration on the first day of January of the year or any of the years immediately preceding the year in which such meeting is held.
The relevant extract from the said Regulations reads as under :-  "5.
Preparation of a list of Suitable Officers : - (1) Each Committee shall ordinarily meet at intervals not exceeding one year and prepare a list of such members of the State Civil Service as are held by them to be suitable for promotion to the Service.
The number of members of the State Civil Service included in the list shall not be more than twice the number of substantive vacancies anticipated in the course of the period of twelve months, commencing from the date of preparation of the list, in the posts available for them under rule 9 of the Recruitment Rules or 5 per cent of the Senior posts shown against items 1 and 2 of the cadre scheduled of each State or group of States, whichever is greater."
xx xx xx (3) The Committee shall not consider the cases of the members of the State Civil Service who have attained the age of 54 years on the first day of January of the year in which it meets: Provided that a member of the State Civil Service whose name appears in the select list in force immediately before the date of the meeting of the Committee, shall be considered for inclusion in the fresh list, to be prepared by the Committee even if he has in the meanwhile attained the age of 54 years.
Provided further that a member of the State Civil Service who has attained the age of fifty four years on the first day of January of the year in which the Committee meets shall be considered by the Committee, if he was eligible for consideration on the first day of January of the year or of any of the years immediately preceding the year in which such meeting is held but could not be considered as no meeting of the Committee was held during such preceding year or years.
xx xx xx (6) The list so prepared shall be reviewed and revised every year."
The said Regulation contemplates the yearly meeting of the Selection committee to prepare the list of the members of the State Civil Service considered suitable for promotion to the Indian Administrative Service.
After appointment to the Indian Administrative Service, the seniority is required to be determined after determining the year of allotment in terms of Rule 3 of the aforesaid Seniority Rules.
The Promotee Officer, as it appears from Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the aforesaid Seniority Rules, means an Officer appointed to the Indian Administrative Service in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations.
Rule 3 (3) (ii), as it exists after its amendment on 1811988, reads as under :-  " Rule 3(3)(ii) The year of allotment of a promotee officer shall be determined in the following manner :- (a) For the service rendered by him in the State Civil Service upto twelve years, in the rank not below that of a Deputy Collector or equivalent, he shall be given a weightage of four year towards fixation of the year allotment; (b) he shall also be given a weightage of one year for year completed three years of service beyond the period of twelve years, referred to in sub-clause (a), subject to a maximum weightage of five years.
In this calculation, fractions are to be ignored.
(c) The weightage mentioned in sub-clause (b) shall be calculated with effect from the year in which the officer is appointed to the service.
Provided that he shall not be assigned a year of allotment earlier than the year of allotment assigned to an officer senior to him in that select list or appointed to the service on the basis of an earlier select list."
7.
Shri Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel representing the Central Government, has produced the office noting purposing to amend the Service Rules, which led to amendment in the year 1997.
The genesis of proposal for amendment of the Rules, in the office noting reads as under :-  "Presently, the weightage for year of allotment is computed on the basis of date of appointment of each officer to the Service.
Year of allotment (YOA) is always computed and fixed with reference to the Calendar year in which an officer is promoted.
Hitherto, an officer appointed to the Service on the recommendation of the State Government in the previous calendar year prior to 31st December, they all used to enjoy an advantage over another officer from the same select list who is appointed in the succeeding calendar year after January, even though the vacancy meant for him might have occurred in the previous year.
Hence, in the proposed amendment a uniform date (i.e.) 31st December of the year prior to the year in which the meeting of the Selection Committee was held has been suggested since the Select List is prepared for vacancies as on the first day of January.
Further, the reference year shall also be the year of the meeting of the Selection Committee.
In the proposed revised scheme of the Promotion/Selection Regulations, appointments are made to the existing vacancies as on the 1st day of January of any year.
The dates of approval to the Select List would be different for different cadres.
Hence, appointments would also be on different dates.
In order to have a uniformity for the officer appointed by promotion/selection, a common reference date forming the basis for determining the seniority would be imperative.
The proposed method being independent of the date of appointment, would enable fixation of seniority provisionally included officers appointed later to their name being made unconditional in the Select List in the normal manner in the order in which names are arranged in the Select List."
On the basis of aforesaid noting, the Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Seniority Rules was amended on 31121997 which came into force w.e.f.
111998.
The amended Rule 3 (3) (ii) reads as under :-  "The year of allotment of a promotee officer shall be determined with reference "to the year in which the meeting of the Committee to make selection" (Emphasis supplied), to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, was held and with regard to the continuous service rendered by him in the State Civil Service not below the rank of a Deputy Collector or equivalent, upto the 31st day of December of the year immediately before the year in which meeting of the Committee to make selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, in the following manner:- xx xx xx."
8.
Simultaneously, the Promotion Regulations were also amended vide Notification dated 31121997.
Clause 2 (l) was inserted defining "year" to mean the period commencing on the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December of the same year.
Regulation 5 (1) was substituted, wherein the number of substantive vacancies was contemplated to be as existing on the first day of January of the year in which the meeting is held.
The amended Regulation 5(1) reads as under:-  "(1) Each Committee shall ordinarily meet every year and prepare a list of such members of the State Civil Service as are held by them to be suitable for promotion to the Service.
The number of members of the State Civil Service to be included in the list shall be determined by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government concerned, and shall not exceed the number of substantive vacancies as on the first day of January of the year in which the meeting is held, in the posts available for them under rule 9 of the recruitment rules.
The date and venue of the meeting of the Committee to make the Selection shall be determined by the Commission: Provided that no meeting of the Committee shall be held, and no list for the year in question shall be prepared when, xx xx xx xx."
9.
Later, in the year 2000, it was noticed that by virtue of the amendment carried out in the year 1997, the completed years of the State Civil Service were to be determined upto 31st day of the year preceding the year in which the Selection Committee meets.
The weightage for the completed years of service was to be reckoned in the year in which the meeting of the Selection Committee held, regardless to the actual date of appointment.
It was noticed that in terms of the Rule as amended on 31121997, if the Selection Committee meets in the current year to prepare the select list for a year prior to the said year, the seniority would be determined with reference to the current year and not the year in which he is considered for appointment to the All India Civil Services.
This interpretation of the Rule was found to be depressing the seniority of the Officers, so appointed.
It is also against the legal intents of the Rules and against the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in `Devendra Narayan Singh v. State of Bihar, (1996)11 SCC 342'.
The relevant extract from the office note dated 2962000 reads as under:-  "It is proposed that along the lines of the proposed amendment to the Promotion Regulations, the Seniority Rules should also be amended to this limited extent.
This would be essential for fixation of seniority of officers appointed to the All India Services from Select Lists prepared for previous years and for the year wise Select List prepared by a single Selection Committee in terms of the provisions outlined in Regulation 5 of the Promotion Regulations.
In terms of the position obtaining under the present rules, as amended on 31121997, even if the Selection Committee meets in the current year to prepare a select list for any prior year, the seniority of the officer so included in the Select List, would be determined with reference to the current year and not the year for which he was considered for appointment to the All India Service.
This interpretation of the rule would not only go towards depressing the seniority of the officer so appointed, but is also against the legal intent of the rule and would be against the considered opinion of the Apex Court in its judgment in the case of Devendra Narayan Singh v. State of Bihar, (1996) 11 SCC 342.
Reversing the decision of CAT, Patna Bench in the case of DN Singh v. UOI, (1996)2 SLJ (CAT)-322 (Pat.
), the Supreme Court interpreted the Rule 3 (3) (b) of the IPS (Regulations of Seniority) Rules, 1954 as read with Regulations 5, 3 and 9 (1) of the IPS (Appointment by Promotion), Regulations 1955, and has categorically held that the year of allotment of those who were included in said year select list, has to be determined on the basis that they were in the select list of that year though factually the list may have been prepared and approved subsequently.
4.
In light of the above, an amendment to the Seniority Rules providing for the words "the year for which" instead of the words "the year in which" is essential.
However, any amendment to the All India Service Rules has to be undertaken after due consultation with the State Governments as well as the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Environment & Forests, which are the Cadre Controlling Authority for IPS and IFS respectively."
On the basis of the process initiated on the said note, Rule 3(3) (ii) was amended vide Notification dated 3082005.
The year of allotment was to be determined with reference to the year for which the meeting of the Selection Committee to make the selection, was held.
The amended Rule 3 (3) (ii) reads as under :-  "The year of allotment of a promotee officer shall be determined "with reference to the year for which the meeting of the Committee" (Emphasis supplied) to make selection, to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, was held and with regard to the continuous service rendered by him in the State Civil Service not below the rank of a Deputy Collector or equivalent, upto the 31st day of December of the year immediately before the year for which meeting of the Committee to make selection was held to prepare the select list on the basis of which he was appointed to the Service, in the following manner:- xx xx xx."
Still further, vide Notification dated 2572000, proviso in Sub Regulation (1) of Regulation 5 was substituted, but for the purpose of present writ petition, the said substitution is not material.
10.
The learned Tribunal vide order dated 1032003, Annexure P-9, found that it is indubitable that the provisions of Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Regulations of the Seniority Rules, as amended on 31121997, are decisive of the matter.
It was found that Rule, prior to amendment on 31121997, led to manifest absurdities and generated uncalled for litigation.
It did not explicitly define any referential year with respect to which the year of allotment of a Promotee Officer was to be determined as per the specified formula.
It was held that the provisions of the Rule, as amended on 31121997, are clear explicit and unambiguous and that there is hardly any scope of construction or interpretation of the said Rule.
It was held that plain meaning of the provisions is that the referential year for the purpose of determining the year of allotment is that year in which the meeting of the Committee to make selection had taken place.
Referring to the judgment of CL Lakhanpal's case, it was held that what was canvassed, considered and decided in the petition of Shri Lakhanpal, has to be confined or restricted to his case only and the directions of the High Court are not of universal application.
It was held that the decision of the High Court does not give a licence or authority to the Government of India to contravene the provisions of the Rule 3 (3) (ii) in respect of other Promotee Officers as no mandamus can be issued by a Court to violate the law.
Still further, it was found that Shri Lakhanpal has already retired and his promotion to the Indian Administrative Service is only a formality.
Still further, the vacancy against which Shri Lakhanpal was to be considered even notionally prior to 111998, whereas, the Seniority Rule was amended on 31121997 and therefore, the case of Shri Lakhanpal is to be governed by the provisions as they stood prior to the amendment.
The learned Tribunal also held that the Promotee Officers had vested right only for consideration of their case against the vacancies of such year on account of having fallen within the zone of consideration, but certainly no right was vested in them to claim the appointment against the said vacancies.
It was held that on the date of selection as well as the appointment, the Seniority Rules, as amended on 31121997, were applicable and, therefore, it is not the case where the amended provisions of the Rules are being applied retrospectively.
For the reasons, inter-alia, mentioned above, the learned Tribunal found that the order of determination of seniority is not tenable and consequently, quashed the same.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has vehemently argued that the Promotee Officers, who have been granted the year of allotment as 1991/1992, were deleted from the array of parties on 1052002 with the consent of the Direct Recruit.
It is, thus, contended that the proper parties, who are likely to be effected, are not impleaded before the learned Tribunal on account of deletion of their names and therefore, the Original Application itself is not maintainable.
12.
We do not find any merit in the said argument of learned counsel for the petitioners.
The petitioners are the Promotee Officers who have been assigned the year 1990 as the year of allotment.
The Promotee Officers, who have been assigned the year 1991 or later as the year of allotment, are not effected by the assignment of seniority to the Promotee Officers from the year 1990.
In any case, the grievance of not impleading the necessary parties could be raised by only those persons who are likely to be effected adversely and not by the petitioners who are present before this Court.
In view of the said fact, we do not find any merit in the said argument raised by learned counsel for the petitioners.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has strenuously argued that Shri Lakhanpal was junior to some of the petitioners.
The writ petition filed by him was allowed by this Court and such order has attained finality with the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
It is, thus, contended that if the juniors to the petitioners are to be considered and assigned the year of allotment as 1990, the seniors, such as the petitioners cannot be assigned the year of allotment later than the said year.
It is contended that the reasoning given by the learned Tribunal that Shri Lakhanpal was to be given notional promotion, is incorrect as in fact, Shri Lakhanpal was promoted substantively and attained the age of superannuation as a member of the Indian Administrative Service on 30.9.2000.
Still further, the distinction drawn by the learned Tribunal to distinguish the case of Shri Lakhanpal to that of the petitioners on account of availability of vacancy in case of Shri Lakhanpal before 31121997 is factually incorrect, in as much as Shri Lakhanpal and all the Promotee Officers were considered for the vacancies which arose prior to amendment of Rule 3 (3) (ii) on 31121997.
Therefore, the reasoning given by the learned Tribunal to distinguish the binding precedent judgment of this Court in Shri Lakhanpal's case is wholly untenable.
14.
It is also pointed out that in fact the Selection Committee could not held its meeting on account of an order passed by the learned Tribunal in the petition filed by one SP Gupta.
The Selection Committee held its meeting after the Original Application filed by Shri SP Gupta was withdrawn.
Therefore, on account of ad interim order passed by the learned Tribunal, the claim of the petitioners for seniority from the date the Selection Committee was to hold its meeting, cannot be defeated as the act of the Court will not prejudice anyone.
15.
Still further, it has come on record that the Selection Committee was to meet in March, 1996, but could not proceed with the meeting in view of an ad interim order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
There is no other reason for not holding the meeting of the Selection Committee for consideration of the officers of the State Civil Services for appointment to Indian Administrative Service.
The Selection Committee ultimately held its meeting after the Original Application was withdrawn.
Therefore, the meeting of the Selection Committee could not be held on account of an order passed by the learned Tribunal.
Therefore, the consequence thereof cannot be passed on to the petitioners.
It is well settled law that an act of the Court will not prejudice any person.
Therefore, for delayed holding of the meeting of the Selection Committee, the petitioners cannot be denied the rightful due.
16.
Learned counsel for the Direct Recruit has vehemently argued that the judgment in Lakhanpal's case is not a binding precedent so as to arrive at conclusion in respect of determination of year of allotment.
However, the fact that the Selection Committee had held its meeting in October, 1999 considering the State Civil Officers for the vacancies accruing from the year 1994 to 1997, i.e., prior to amendment of the Rules on 31121997, could not be disputed.
Shri Lakhanpal has invoked the jurisdiction of the learned Tribunal in view of the fact that he was nearing his retirement, but he was an officer junior to some of the petitioners.
Once a direction has been issued in the case of Shri Lakhanpal to consider him for the select list for the years 1994-95, 1995-96 or thereafter, it cannot be said that such direction was restricted to the case of Shri Lakhanpal alone and his seniors could be ignored for appointment to the Indian Administrative Service.
As a matter of fact, in the Notification dated 14121999, published by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, in terms of the Regulations, contains the name of Shri Lakhanpal at Sr.No.
3, whereas, the names of Balraj Singh and Anand Sharma, petitioner Nos. 1 & 2 appear at Sr.Nos.
1 & 2 respectively.
In respect of Shri Lakhanpal, an order appointing him to Indian Administrative Service was passed on 2222000, though the Notification appointing the petitioners was issued on 27121999.
Therefore, it is apparent that the distinction drawn by the learned Tribunal in the matter of Shri Lakhanpal with that of the present petitioners is wholly otiose.
17.
In "CO Arumugam v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1991 Suppl.
(2) SCC 199", the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that every Civil Servant has a right to have his case considered for promotion according to his turn and consideration of promotion could be postponed only on reasonable grounds.
It was held to the following effect :-  "5.
As to the merits of the matter, it is necessary to state that every civil servant has a right to have his case considered for promotion according to his turn and it is a guarantee flowing from Articles 14 and 16 (1) of the Constitution.
The consideration of promotion could be postponed only on reasonable grounds. . . . . ." In "Syed Khalid Rizvi and others v. Union of India and others, 1993(2) SCT 236 : 1993 Suppl.
(3) SCC 575", the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the preparation of select list at regular intervals is mandatory.
It was held to the following effect :-  " xx xx xx xx 9. xx xx xx.
The word "may" in Regulation 5 indicates that the Committee ordinarily meets at intervals not exceeding one year.
Though the word "may" indicates that it is not mandatory to meet at regular intervals, since preparation of the select list is the foundation for promotion and its omission impinges upon the legitimate expectation of promotee officers for consideration of their claim for promotion as IPS officers, the preparation of the select list must be construed to be mandatory.
The Committee should, therefore, meet every year and prepare the select list and be reviewed and revised from time to time as exigencies demand.
No officer whose name has been entered in the list has a vested right to remain in the list till date of appointment.
The list would be liable to shuffle and the name may be excluded from the list on the comparative assessment of merit, ability and suitability based on the anticipated or expected availability of the vacancies within quota etc.
The junior may supersede the senior and may be ranked top.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx In Sehgal case, this Court held that chances of promotion and the aspiration to reach higher echelons of service would enthuse a member of the service to dedicate himself assiduously to the service with diligence, exhibiting expertise, straightforwardness with missionary zeal, self confidence, honesty and integrity.
The absence of chances of promotion would generate frustration and an officer would tend to become corrupt, sloven and a mediocre.
Equal opportunity is a fertile resource to augment efficiency of the service.
Equal chances of promotion to the direct recruits and the promotees would produce harmony with accountability to proper implementation of government policies.
Unless the select list is made annually and reviewed and revised from time to time, the promotee officers would stand to lose their chances of consideration for promotion which would be a legitimate expectation.
This Court in Mohan Lal Capoor case held that the Committee shall prepare every year the select list and the list must be submitted to the UPSC by the State Government for approval and thereafter appointment shall be made in accordance with the rules.
We have, therefore, no hesitation to hold that preparation of the select list every year is mandatory.
It would subserve the object of the Act and the rules and afford an equal opportunity to the promotee officers to reach higher echelons of the service.
The dereliction of the statutory duty must satisfactorily be accounted for by the State Government concerned and this Court takes serious note of wanton infraction."
The aforesaid judgments were got approval in "TN Administrative Service Officers Association and another v. Union of India and others, 2000(3) SCT 424 : (2000)5 SCC 728".
In vide of the aforesaid judgments, the Selection Committee was mandatorily required to meet every year.
But the same could not meet every year and, therefore, the consequences of non convening of the meeting of the Selection Committee, as envisaged under the Promotion Regulations, cannot fall on the Promotee Officers.
The meeting could not be held on account of interim order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal and it is equally well settled that the proceedings before the Court shall not prejudice any person keeping in view the maxim 'actus curiae neminem gravabit' applicable, i.e., an act of the Court shall prejudice no man.
18.
Apart from the said fact, even on interpretation of the Rules, we are of the opinion that the order of the learned Tribunal is not legally sustainable.
The vacancies against which the Promotee Officers have been appointed to the Indian Administrative Service, arose prior to the amendment of the Rules on 31121997.
But the subsequent events after the order passed by the learned Tribunal, need to be noticed.
Though, by virtue of the amendment in the year 1997, the year of allotment was to be determined with reference "to the year in which meeting of the Committee is held" but there was subsequent amendment on 3082005 substituting the words "the year for which the meeting of the Committee".
19.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the amendment carried out on 3082005 is clarificatory amendment and, therefore, it will operate retrospectively, i.e., from the date the amendment was carried out in the Rules on 31121997.
It is also argued that in terms of Regulation 5 (1) of the Regulations, the Selection Committee is to meet at intervals not exceeding one year.
Regulation 5 (6) contemplates that the list so prepared shall be reviewed and revised every year.
Therefore, it is contended that the meeting of the Selection Committee and the preparation of the list is an annual affair which is required to be carried out every year mandatorily.
Said Regulation 5 (1) was amended on 31121997 and the number of vacancies was required to be determined as on the 1st day of January of the year in which the meeting is to be held.
Such Regulations have been again amended on 2572000.
A proviso in said Regulation (1) has been added that the select list shall be prepared separately for each year during which the meeting could not be held as on 31st December of each year.
It is, thus, contended that the intention of the Rules and the Regulations is absolutely clear that the Selection Committee should meet every year and make recommendations for appointment to Indian Administrative Service, keeping in view the vacancies available for each year.
It was with a view to remove the anomaly so as to grant the same year as allotment to the Officer falling in the same select list, the Rule was amended in the year 1997.
While considering the amendment, it was found that interpretation of the Rule, as arisen on account of amendment in the year 1997, would not only go towards depressing the seniority of the Officer so appointed, but it is also against the legal intent of the Rule and would be against the considered opinion of the Apex Court in Devendra Narayan Singh's case (supra).
It was with a view to remove the difficulties, the amendment was carried out on 3082005.
20.
Learned counsel for the respondents has vehemently argued that the amendment carried out in Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Seniority Rules on 3082005 is a substantive amendment and cannot be given retrospective effect i.e., in respect of the recommendation of the select list already made.
It is also contended that since such amendment affects the vested rights, therefore, the same cannot be given retrospective effect until it is specifically so made.
Thus, it is contended that prior to the year 2005, the seniority has to be determined with reference to the year in which the Selection Committee held its meeting and not with reference to the vacancies for which the Selection Committee held its meeting.
21.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at some length, we are of the opinion that the amendment in Rule 3 (3) (ii) carried out on 3082005 is clarificatory in nature and, therefore, the Rule be applicable even in respect of the case for which the Selection Committee held its meeting prior to the said amendment.
The basis of the amendment and the nature thereof is clear and categorical that the Rule was amended so as to avoid depressing of seniority on account of interpretation of Rule 3 (3) (ii), as amended on 30121997.
In Devendra Narayan Singh's case (supra), the Court held to the following effect :-  "xx xx xx xx 6.
Having given our anxious consideration to the relevant Provisions, Rules and the Regulations for appointment and for determination of the year of allotment and the earlier directions of the Patna High Court as well as of this Court, we find sufficient force in the contentions of Mr. PP Rao, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants and we come to the conclusion that the Union Government has committed error in treating the appellants to have been included in the Select List only from the year 1986 which is the factual year of their inclusion in the list and thereby determining the year of allotment.
We also come to the conclusion that the Tribunal committee error in ignoring the fact of the earlier direction of this Court and the legal fiction by which it must be held that the appellants were included in the Select List of the year 1983.
It is not disputed that the Patna High Court as well as this Court had issued directions to consider the question of inclusion of appellants name in the Select List for the year 1983 and pursuant to such directions, the State Government having reconsidered the matter included the names of the appellants in the Select List.
Though the list in question was made in the year 1985 pursuant to the direction of this Court and was approved by the Union Public Service Commission in 1986, but in the eye of law, it must be deemed to be a list for the year 1983.
When the appropriate authorities committed error in not preparing the Select List for the year 1983 and the appellants being aggrieved assailed the same and ultimately this Court directed to reconsider the matter, thereafter, the appropriate authority reconsidered the matter and included the appellants name in the Select List for the year 1986, in the eye of law the said Select List can be held to be the Select List for the year 1983. xx xx xx xx."
22.
The amendment carried out on 3082005 is not substantive amendment creating new rights or obligations for the first time which factor is a strong indicative of its operation from the retrospective effect.
The amendment of the Rules on 3082005 was of a proposition clarifying the reference of the meeting of the Selection Committee to the year of vacancies.
In "Zile Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 2005(2) RCR(Civil) 744 : (2004)8 SCC 1", the Court held to the following effect :-  "xx xx xx xx 13.
It is cardinal principle of construction that every statute is prima facie prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary implication made to have a retrospective operation.
But the rule in general is applicable where the object of the statute is to affect vested rights or to impose new burdens or to impair existing obligations.
Unless there are words in the statute sufficient to show the intention of the legislature to affect existing rights, it is deemed to be prospective only - "nova constitutio futuris formam imponere debet non praeteritis" - a new law ought to regulate what is to follow, not the past.
(See Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P.Singh, 9th Edn., 2004 at P.438).
It is not necessary that an express provision be made to make a statute retrospective and the presumption against retrospectivity may be rebutted by necessary implication especially in a case where the new law is made to cure an acknowledged evil for the benefit of the community as a whole (ibid., P-440).
14.
The presumption against retrospective operation is not applicable to declaratory statutes.....
In determining, therefore, the nature of the Act, regard must be had to the substance rather than to the form.
If a new Act is "to explain" an earlier Act, it would be without object unless construed retrospectively.
An explanatory Act is generally passed to supply an obvious omission or to clear up doubts as to the meaning of the previous Act.
It is well settled that if a statute is curative or merely declaratory of the previous law retrospective operation is generally intended..... An amending Act may be purely declaratory to clear a meaning of a provision of the principal Act which was already implicit.
A clarificatory amendment of this nature will have retrospective effect (ibid., pp468-69).
xx xx xx xx 17.
Maxwell states in his work on Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edn.)
that the rule against retrospective operation is a presumption only, and as such it "may be overcome, not only be express words in the Act, but also by circumstances sufficiently strong to displace it" (p-225).
If the dominant intention of the legislature can be clearly and doubtlessly spelt out, the inhibition contained in the rule against perpetuity becomes of doubtful applicability as the "inhibition of the rule" is a matter of degree which would "vary secundum materiam" (p-226).
Sometimes, where the sense of the statute demands it or where there has been an obvious mistake in drafting, a Court will be prepared to substitute another word or phrase for that which actually appears in the text of the Act (p.231).
xx xx xx xx" In view of the aforesaid principles of law, the amendment made on 3082005 is not a new law, but substitution of a proposition to clarify the provisions in the Rule.
We are of the opinion that the retrospective effect to the clarificatory amendment carried out on 3082005 will serve the purpose of the Rules and avoid the anomalous situation.
Therefore, such interpretation is to be preferred than the interpretation which may cause hardship and anomalous results.
For example, a recommendation in respect of the meeting of the Selection Committee held in 2004, would be entitled to the year of allotment as the year in which the meeting is held, but in respect of the meeting held after the amendment so made in the year 2005, would be entitled to the year of allotment from the earlier date.
Though in terms of the proviso to Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Seniority Rules, such members of the State Civil Service may not be actually granted seniority over and above their seniors, but the fact remains that they shall be entitled to seniority from the earlier date.
It appears that the proviso is to meet out a different situation so as to avoid the anomaly for assigning the seniority to the members of the State Civil Service.
Substantive provisions of Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Seniority Rules cannot be interpreted in the manner which lead to anomalous and absurdities when the amendment in the year 2005 has been carried out to an interpretation as was the intention of the Rule Making Authority in the year 1997.
Thus, we have no hesitation to hold that the amendment dated 3082005 is clarificatory amendment wherein the only proposition `in' was substituted by the word 'for' and, therefore, the same is to be applicable to all the recommendations of the Selection Committee after 31121997.
23.
The vacancies, against which the Promotee Officers were appointed to the Indian Administrative Service, arose prior to the amendment of the Rules on 31121997.
Though the learned Tribunal has held that the unamended Rule has led to anomaly and manifest absurdities, but no such anomaly was in fact, pointed out.
As a matter of fact, as per Rule 3 (3) (ii) (c), prior to the year 1997, the weightage for determining the year of allotment was to be calculated w.e.f.
the year in which the Officer is appointed to the service.
The appointment to the service is regulated by Promotion Regulations which contemplate meeting of the Promotion Committee every year.
Such meeting of the Selection Committee is mandatory in terms of the judgments referred to above.
Therefore, had the Rule 3 (3) (ii) (c) of the Rules applied in normal circumstance, the Promotee Officer was entitled to seniority in relation to the meeting of the Selection Committee which was to be held every year.
The Rule was amended so as to provide same year of allotment, though some of the candidates could be appointed before 31st December and some later.
The Rule was not amended with the intention to determine the year of allotment with reference to the date of convening of the meeting of the Selection Committee.
Therefore, the Seniority Rules read with the Promotion Regulations, leave no manner of doubt that the meeting of the Selection Committee is required to be convened mandatorily every year and on the basis of such meeting of the Selection Committee, the year of allotment is required to be determined.
In the present case, the Selection Committee did not convene its meeting for the reason that an interim order was passed by the learned Tribunal.
Therefore, consequence thereof cannot be disadvantageous to the Promotee Officer.
24.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to "Wing Commander J Kumar v. Union of India and others, AIR 1982 SC 1064", to contend that the revised Rules will operate to govern the seniority and future prospects of all the persons in service.
On the basis of the said judgment, it is contended that the seniority of the Promotee Officer has to be determined irrespective of the amendment carried out in the year 1997 on the basis of Rule 3 (3) (ii) of the Seniority Rules, as introduced in the year 2005.
The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, came to be considered by the Larger Bench in the case "P. Mohan Reddy v. E.A.A.
Charles and others, 2001(2) SCT 542 : (2001)4 SCC 433", wherein the reasoning given in Wing Commander J Kumar's case (supra) was not accepted.
It was held therein to the following effect:-  "xx xx xx xx The Court further observed that when a statutory rule governing seniority is issued in respect of a service the said rule would govern the personnel in the service with effect from the date of its promulgation and in so giving effect to the rule in future, there is no element or retroactivity involved.
This observation supports Mr. Dave's contention to a great extent.
But in the teeth of the series of authorities, we have discussed earlier, we are not persuaded to accept the reasoning in this decision for coming to the conclusion that the seniority of the employees has to be re-determined over and over again as and when the criterion changes.
xx xx xx xx 17.
A conspectus of the aforesaid discussions of this Court would indicate that even though an employee cannot claim to have a vested right to have a particular position in any grade, but all the same he has the right of his seniority being determined in accordance with the Rules which remained in force at the time when he was borne in the cadre.
The question of re- determination of the seniority in the cadre on the basis of any amended criteria or rules would arise only when the amendment in question is given a retrospective effect.
If the retrospectivity of the Rule is assailed by any person, then the Court would be entitled to examine the same and decide the matter in accordance with the law.
xx xx xx xx."
In view of the aforesaid judgment, the reliance on the judgment in Wing Commander J Kumar's case (supra) is not tenable.
In view of the above discussion, it is held that the amendment carried out is clarificatory and is, therefore, retrospective in nature and as a consequence thereof, the year of allotment is to be determined in accordance with the amended Seniority Rules.
25.
One of the arguments is required to be noticed that learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the amendment made in the year 2005 affects the vested rights of the Direct Recruits and, therefore, cannot be given retrospective effect in terms of Section 3(1)(a) of the All India Service Act, 1951.
We do not find any merit in the said argument.
The seniority of the Promotee Officers is being determined in terms of the statutory Rules.
The amendment made in the year 1997 has an unintended effect of depressing the seniority of the State Civil Service Officers, which was sought to be remedied by the amendment carried out in the year 2005.
The amendment in respect of determination of seniority does not effect the Direct Recruit as the year of allotment to the Promotee Officer is to be determined in terms of the Rules as may be applicable to the said Officer.
The remote and contingent consequence of such determination of seniority cannot form basis for interpreting that the amendment carried out in 2005 is prospective in nature only.
By the said amendment, it cannot be said that the Direct Recruit has suffered any prejudice.
Therefore, we do not find any merit in the said argument.
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the order passed by the learned Tribunal dated 1032003, Annexure P-9, is not sustainable in law.
The same is set aside.
The present writ petitions are allowed and the Original Application filed by the Direct Recruit is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.