Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for short `the Tribunal') on 922007, whereby the Original application filed by the petitioner under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short `the Act'), for setting aside of the order dated 28/2971997, was dismissed being barred by limitation.
2.
The petitioner joined the District Treasury Office under the Chandigarh Administration as a Clerk on 111967.
She was appointed as Section Officer after she qualified SAS Examinations in November, 1979.
While posted as Assistant Treasury Officer in Treasury Office, Chandigarh, she proceeded on Ex India Leave in October, 1994, which was sanctioned upto 811995 and extended upto 821995, but thereafter, the petitioner did not join the duties and sought extension of leave on medical grounds.
Since the petitioner was abstaining from duties, proceedings under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1970 (for short `the Rules') were initiated and ultimately an order of dismissal was passed on 28/2971997.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the said order in the year 2004, which was declined being barred by time vide communication dated 1692004.
It was thereafter that the petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal by way of filing of an Original Application, which has been dismissed vide the order impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
It is the pleaded case of the petitioner that she has submitted a notice dated 1351997 to seek voluntary retirement, which was forwarded by the District Treasury Officer to the Administration on 661997.
The petitioner has pleaded (para 8 of the writ petition) that she came to know about the issuance of the notice dated 361997 appearing in "The Tribune" through her relative.
The said notice was to the effect that the inquiry was held against the petitioner under Rule 8 of the Rules and the petitioner has been found guilty.
It is further pleaded that she was dismissed from service vide order dated 28/2971997 and when she came to know about her dismissal order, she filed appeal/representation dated 991997.
Such representation has been appended as Annexure P-5.
The petitioner has asked for certain documents on the ground that such documents have not been supplied and also authorised Shri Charanjit Singh to obtain the documents from the Administration.
A communication was addressed to the petitioner on 11121997 (Annexure P-6) which is to the effect that all the documents asked for by the petitioner were sent on her given address.
Even the order relating to rejection of the leave of the petitioner; appointment of the Inquiry Officer against the charges of misconduct; misbehaviour levelled against the petitioner and dismissal order were also published in the leading Newspapers.
It has come on record that such documents were, in fact, received by Shri Charanjit Singh on 2711998.
An affidavit in support of receipt of the documents, has been appended by the respondents with the reply as Annexure R-8.
4.
On receipt of the documents, the petitioner filed representation, almost after 6 years on 18.11.2003 that she be supplied copy of the order dispensing with her services.
Such copy of the order was supplied on 1532004 and thereafter she filed the appeal/representation, which has been declined, as mentioned above.
It may be noticed that the Original Application before the Tribunal as well as the present writ petition before this court were filed by the petitioner through her attorney.
However, during the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the petitioner is present in the Court.
5.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondents have appended the communication dated 1271996 (Annexure R-3) addressed to the petitioner on her USA address communicating that her request for leave upto 31.7.1996 has been rejected.
Annexure R-4 is another communication dated 871996 issued at the address of the petitioner in USA, calling upon the petitioner to join the duties at once.
Annexure R-5 is the public notice published in the newspaper `The Tribune' on 451997.
Annexure R-6 is a public notice published in the Times of India on 1641997 calling upon the petitioner to appear in inquiry proceedings.
6.
A perusal of the record shows that the notices were being sent to the petitioner at her address in USA.
The same were also published in the newspapers.
It is apparent from the record that the petitioner abstained from duties and did not report in respect of notices issued.
She did not participate in the inquiry proceedings, even though notices were issued to her.
An order of punishment has been passed after complying with the entire procedural requirements.
The petitioner admittedly came to know about her dismissal in the year 1997.
The documents sought for by the petitioner were received by her representative in January, 1998, but still the petitioner took recourse to her remedy only in the year 2004.
Such appeal/representation has been rightly declined on account of being barred by time.
Even the learned Tribunal was justified in holding that the invocation of the jurisdiction of the Court is barred by time.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement was submitted before the order of punishment was passed and, therefore, the respondents should have accepted her request for voluntary retirement and that she was in fact entitled to the pensionary benefits.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Hussaini v. The Hon'ble the Chief Justice of High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and others, 1985(3) SLR 56; State of Bihar and others v. Kameshwar Prasad Singh and another, 2000(2) SCT 889 : JT 2000(5) SC 389; Dev Singh v. Punjab Tourism Development Corporation Ltd and another, 2003(4) SCT 249 : JT 2003(7) SC 509; Kailash Nath Gupta v. Enquiry Officer (RK Rai), Allahabad Bank and others, 2003(2) SCT 1018 : JT 2003(3) SC 322; Govt. of India and another v. George Philip, 2007(1) SCT 357 : AIR 2007 SC 705 and a Single Bench judgment of this Court reported as Kailash Sharma v. State of Punjab, 2004(1) SCT 798 : 2004(2) Recent Services Judgments 134.
9.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Rakesh Kumar v. Union of India and others, 2003(4) RSJ 490 and Hukam Chand v. State of Haryana and another, 2006(6) SLR 77, to contend that the invocation of the jurisdiction by the petitioner at this stage suffers from delay and laches and thus, should not be entertained.
It is also argued that moving of an application for voluntary retirement by the petitioner is an effort to somehow circumvent the immediate disciplinary action against her as she was doing so only to get the retiral benefits from the Government.
10.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
The petitioner was aware of the order of dismissal passed against her in the year 1997.
Her authorised representative Shri Charanjit Singh, has admittedly collected the documents for and on her behalf in January, 1998.
But still for 6 years, the petitioner has taken no steps.
Thus, it was after more than 6 years, she filed a representation titled as appeal as well.
The same has been rightly declined by the respondents as barred by limitation.
There is no explanation as to why the petitioner has taken six long years to file so-called appeal.
From the perusal of the record, an inference is drawn that the petitioner was comfortable in USA and therefore, the passing of the order of dismissal was not bothering her.
It is apparent from the fact that even the Original Application and the writ petition before this Court were filed through her attorney.
Therefore, the finding recorded by the Tribunal and by the appellate authority that the claim of the petitioner is barred by delay and laches, cannot be said to be suffering from any patent illegality.
11.
The judgment in Kameshwar Prasad Singh's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner has no applicability to the facts of the present case as that was a case regarding delay in filing of the Special Leave Petition before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The principles of condoning delay in filing of such appeal are not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the present case, the petitioner was aware of the proceedings but still has not taken any action to challenge the order of punishment with due diligence.
12.
In Dev Singh's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that punishment of dismissal for mere misplacement of a file without any ulterior motive is too harsh a punishment which is totally disproportionate to the misconduct alleged and the same certainly shocks the judicial conscience.
However, in the present case the petitioner abstained from duties for more than 2-1/2 years before an order of dismissal was passed.
Thereafter for more than 6 years, the petitioner has not taken any step to challenge the order of dismissal.
Therefore, the said judgment is again not helpful to the petitioner.
13.
In Kailash Nath Gupta's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the High Court or the Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some other penalty.
If the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould the relief, either directing the disciplinary authority/appellate authority to reconsider the penalty imposed or to shorten the litigation, it may itself in exceptional and rare cases impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in support thereof.
In the present case, the petitioner abstained from duties for more than 2-1/2 years before the order of punishment was passed and thereafter for more than six years, no steps were taken by the petitioner.
Such inaction on the part of the petitioner shows a total indifferent attitude of the petitioner so as to take recourse to her remedy in accordance with law.
Having failed to do so, it cannot be said that the punishment awarded is disproportionate in any manner and shocks the conscience of the Court.
We do not find that the punishment imposed is disproportionate to the misconduct in the facts and circumstances of the case.
14.
In Smt. Kailash Sharma's case (supra), the learned Single Judge of this Court found that unblemished service record of 22 years is sufficient to hold that the punishment is vitiated due to non-application of mind.
However, in the present case from the facts available on record, it transpires that the petitioner was comfortable in USA, and therefore, she did not consider it appropriate to take recourse to her appellate or other legal remedies.
Thus, at this stage, we do not find any reason to interfere in the order passed.
Law helps the vigilant and not a person who sleeps over his right.
The petitioner has consciously not taken any steps for more than six years of admittedly acquiring the knowledge of the order of dismissal, therefore, she is not entitled to any discretionary relief.
In view of the above, we do not find any patent illegality in the impugned order so as to warrant interference by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
Hence, the present writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.