Pratap Kumar Ray, J - Heard the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
2.
Against refusal to pass any interim order by the learned Trial Court by its order dated 17th January, 2007 so far as the interim prayer for submission of the form for re-examination of the answer scripts of Part-I (Hons.)
Examination in Chemistry, this appeal has been preferred.
In view of the very nature of the case we wanted to hear both the writ application, appeal and application.
The Principal of the College has filed affidavit in pursuance of the direction of this Court.
From the writ application it appears that the petitioner secured six marks less to qualify the Part-I (Hons.)
Examination in Chemistry though he passed in the pass papers namely, Physics and Mathematics of BSc Part-I Examination of the University of Calcutta.
Under the examination Rule of the University, there is a provision of re-examination of answer scripts on fulfillment of certain condition namely securing of certain percentage of the marks in other Honours papers.
The petitioner fulfilled that condition namely, the eligibility condition of filing any application praying re-examination of the two papers out of four Honours papers in which the petitioner appeared in the Part-I (Hons.)
Examination.
Under the University Rules such form for re-examination on payment of the fees as prescribed is available in the Sales Counter of the University and it does not require any verification or any endorsement by anybody to purchase such forms.
Any student desiring to place his papers for re-examination may purchase form and thereafter it requires an endorsement after filling up the form by the Principal of the College for the purpose of identification of that particular student.
After such the form is required to be submitted to the Office of the University along with the necessary fees for re-examination.
As the petitioner could not clear the Honours paper of Part-I Examination, naturally he is not in a position to appear in the Part-II (Hons.)
Examination, but he is eligible to appear Part-II Examination in general course as he has already cleared the general papers.
It is the case of the writ petitioner/appellant that the department of the University since did not allow him to have the form and at the same time the Principal did no co-operate in the matter, he lodged a Demand Justice through the learned advocate addressing the same to the Pro- Vice Chancellor (Academic), University of Calcutta.
In the letter of the learned Advocate it was threatened in the event of non-response of the grievance by three days, the petitioner would take recourse of the writ proceeding.
We are not happy with the language used by a student while addressing a letter to the Pro-Vice Chancellor (Academic), University of Calcutta.
Furthermore, we are also not convinced with the argument of the learned Advocate of the appellant/writ petitioner as well as on hearing the learned Advocate for the University of Calcutta that there was any cause of action for alleging such grievance in the form of Demand Justice through any learned Advocate by the appellant.
For getting a form from the University Sales Counter it does not require any co-operation/help of any department or of the Principal of any College, the allegation made in the writ application practically has not created any cause of action to move the writ application.
We initially thought to dismiss the writ application and the appeal itself by imposing a cost upon the student as the entire initiation of the writ proceeding is misconceived.
But on looking of the University Regulations, we are restrained ourselves to pass such an order as otherwise the student writ petitioner/appellant will be deprived of to file his application for re- examination for a chance to cover up the six marks as still require for being eligible to appear in the Part-II (Hons.)
Examination.
The filling up of the form of Part-II (Hons.)
Examination as well as the Part-II general course of BSc level already started and the last date is 21st February, 2007 (without fine) and till 28th February, 2007 (with fine).
3.
Before adjudicating the entire issue, we are of the view that the right of any student to pray for re-examination in terms of the University Regulations is required to be considered.
The University of Calcutta prescribed Regulations for the three years' Honours and General Courses from the Session 1998-99 for the BA, BSc and BCom Examinations which are still continuing.
Under the said Regulations under Clause 30 a student is entitled to file an application for re-examination within the time limit as prescribed thereto.
The Regulation 30 reads such :  "30.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Statutes.
Ordinances or Regulations, a candidate for public examination loading to a degree of this University may apply to the Controller of Examinations for Re-examination of his/her answer script(s) ordinarily within one month from the date of receipt of the mark-sheet by the College concerned (in case of External or Non-Collegiate candidate or candidates whose results remain incomplete, application for re-examination to be made within seven days from the date of receipt of mark-sheet by the candidate) in the prescribed form together with the requisite fee/fees, subject to the following conditions....  4.
On a careful reading of the said regulation it appears that the time limit for submission of the application form for re-examination is "ordinarily within one month" from the date of receipt of the mark-sheet by the College concerned in the prescribed form together with the requisite fee/fees, subject to other condition namely, securing of the minimum 40% marks in the other subjects as prescribed under the regulation thereof.
From the said regulation accordingly it appears that the time limit has been fixed as "ordinarily within one month from the date of receipt of the mark-sheet by the College concerned."
It has been submitted by the learned Advocate for the University that the petitioner/appellant since failed to approach the University to submit the re-examination form with prescribed fees within a month from the date of receipt of the mark-sheet by the College and as the last date has already been expired on 2nd January, 2007 at this juncture the petitioner/appellant is not entitled legally to submit the re-examination form.
In view of the contention as made, an interpretation of the statutory provision is required to be done by this Court so far as the time limit for filing the re-examination form.
It appears that "within one month" is preceded by the word "ordinarily".
If we delete the word "ordinarily" for a test about the meaning of the word from the Regulation 30, then the provision would be in the strict jacket identifying the time limit of only one month as the regulation under such situation could be read as that the application could be filed only within one month.
But the University Authority while framing the regulation was conscious of the fact that there may be circumstances where within one month's time limit a student concerned may not file the application and having regard to such unforeseen circumstances the word "ordinarily" has been used to provide an elasticity and/or flexibility of the time limit by the University itself.
It is the submission of the learned Advocate of the University that sometime it may happen that after declaration of the result the time limit falls in the long Puja Vacation and naturally at that situation it requires an extension of time limit further and for that reason a statutory device by using the word "ordinarily" has been incorporated in the Regulations.
The learned Advocate for the University further submits that in the instant case identical situation happened.
Such last date of one month expired within the Christmas Vacation of the University and, as such, it was extended till 2nd January, 2007.
The meaning of the word "ordinarily" is not res Integra and it has been decided by the Supreme Court at different points of time to deal with the statutory provision.
A Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case Kailash Chandra v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1961 SC 1346 while considering the meaning of the word "ordinarily" and its effect as appeared in the Rule 2046(2) (a) of Railways Establishment Code wherein a provision was made in the language "employee may be retired at the age of 55 years but ordinarily should be retained in service if he continues to be efficient up to the age of 60 years", came to the conclusion by defining the meaning of the word "ordinarily" means in large majority cases but not invariably to allow the retention of service till the age of 60 years and, as such, the employee had no right to claim retention in service.
A Three Judges Bench of the Apex Court in the case Shivji Khetshi Thacker v. Commissioner of Dhanbad Municipality and Ors., reported in AIR 1978 SC 836 interpreted the meaning of the word "ordinarily" while dealing with the issue of interpreting Section 106 of Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act, 1922, under section 166 for revision of assessment where the language used as "new valuation list shall ordinarily be prepared.... once in every five years."
An issue was raised that due to the using of the word shall ordinarily be prepared once in every five years, the same was a mandatory provision so far as performance of the duties of the municipal authorities to publish the list of new valuation which admittedly was not done in that case.
While answering the point the Apex Court held in paragraph 24 "the word ordinarily tones down the force of "shall" which immediately precedes it and indicates that the requirements with regard to revision of assessment in every five years to include all the holdings, are not absolute but only directory and can be departed from on extra-ordinary circumstances or in the case of particular holding for good reason".
Another Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case Krishan Gopal v. Shri Prakash Chandra and ors., reported in (1974)] SCC 128 defined the meaning of the word "ordinarily" while interpreting Section 80A(1) of the Representation of People's Act, 1951.
In that case a question arose under the said Section of the Representation of People's Act that the election petition when ordinarily should be heard by the Single Judge of the High Court, allotment of the case for hearing to the Division Bench by the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court was bad in law.
Rejecting such contention the Apex Court held that the word "ordinarily" means normally and as such, setting up of the Bench of Two Judges or more is permissible under the said statutory provision.
The issue again came up in another case before the Two Judges Bench of the Apex Court in the case Mohon Baitha v. State of Bihar, reported in (2001)4 SCC 350 while interpreting the territorial jurisdiction of a Criminal Court in terms of Section 177 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
In that case an issue was raised that since under Section 177 of the Criminal Procedure Code where the jurisdiction of a Criminal Court has been identified with the word "ordinarily".
The Apex Court held that the word "ordinarily" is a general one and must be read subject to special provision of Criminal Procedure Code and accordingly rejected the contention advanced in the case by the accused/petitioner.
In an another case the Apex Court dealt with the issue in a Custom matter in the case Eicher Tractor Limited, Haryana v. Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai reported in (2001) 1 SCC.
315 by interpreting the word Section 14(1)(2) of the Customs Act, 1962.
In that case it has been held that the word "ordinarily" necessarily implies exclusion of "extra-ordinary or special circumstances.
In the promotional matter for preparation of selection list by the Selection Committee the Apex Court, however, answered the point of meaning of the word "ordinarily" by holding its use as mandatory in the case Union of India v. Bepin Chandra, reported in (1996) 6 SCC.
721.
However, this interpretation of the language "ordinarily sitting" of the Selection Committee was defined in the angle of the other provision of the said service regulation which mandated that selection list must be prepared each year to provide a promotional berth to the candidates who were in the feeder post.
5.
Having regard to the interpretation of the word "ordinarily" as considered by the Apex Court on the reflection of different statutory provisions and its impact thereof, this Court is of the view that the word "ordinarily" and its meaning always depended upon the statutory provision where the same has been used, which could be defined in other way that the meaning of the word "ordinarily" will acquire a share of colour from the statutory provision of that particular statute to identify its contour of meaning either of directory or mandatory.
But in general the word "ordinarily" if is considered without any reflection of the other statutory provision, due to absence of such, its meaning would be a directory prevision.
6.
Under the Regulation 30 of the University Regulations on which we are concerned now is being placed in acid test for the purpose of having a meaning of the word "ordinarily" as used in Regulation 30.
Having regard to the said provision which is providing a benefit to the students concerned to seek re- examination being a beneficial piece of the regulation for the students and having regard to the aforesaid interpretation of the meaning of the word "ordinarily" in terms of the Constitution Bench Judgment Kailash Chandra (supra) and the subsequent judgment Shivji Khetshi Thacker (supra), we are of the view that the word "ordinarily" as used has toned down the subsequent words "within one month" and accordingly in view of such regulation though normally an application is required to be filed by the student within one month but it does not speak invariably that time limit is only one month.
The time limit as per our reading on interpretation of the word "ordinarily" could be extended/expanded on extra-ordinary and/or special circumstances.
7.
Having regard to such state of affairs and having regard to the special circumstances of this case that the writ petitioner/appellant practically was misled by not having any proper advice, and to protect the interest of the student concerned due to the sole reason that unless the re-examination paper is filed to avail a chance of securing the less six marks to attain eligibility to appear in the Part-II (Hons.)
examination, he will not get further chance in fixture as already he has exhausted time limit of clearing the Part-I (Hons.)
paper by taking chance for times earlier, though we are expressing our displeasure to the conduct of the student in approaching the High Court as well as by writing a letter to the Pro-Vice Chancellor (Academic) through his learned Advocate in such a manner as already discussed by us, an order should be passed allowing him to file application for re- examination.
It be recorded that the University has not used any affidavit, all allegations are denied.
8.
Considering the balance of equity and for the ends of justice and on taking the meaning of the word "ordinarily" as normally and having molecular component as inherent in the word of expanding the time limit, we are accordingly disposing of the writ application, appeal and stay application everything by directing to this effect as hereunder :  9.
The appellant/writ petitioner will purchase a form from the University Sales Counter for re-examination purpose of the Honours Papers of Part-I Examination and will submit the same within a week from this date to the Principal on filling up the form.
The Principal of the College is present before us and he is directed to take all necessary steps in the positive way so that the form could be deposited by the writ petitioner/appellant with prescribed fees to the University for re-examination purpose.
The University Authorities and their officers and employees are directed to accept such re- examination form on checking up all papers and documents and on payment of the prescribed fees and to declare the result of such re-examination within a fortnight from the date of submission of application form with all requisites which to be done within two weeks from this date positively.
The writ petitioner/appellant, however, will be allowed to fill up the form of Part-II General Examination as per University Rules, subject to the condition that in the event he qualifies by securing less six marks on reexamination of answer papers to appear in the Part-II (Hons.)
Examination, in that event this application form should be converted to an application for appearing in the Honours Examination also along with the pass course subjects on payment of requisite fee as would be required to be paid due to the appearance in the Honours course in the event of such situation arises.
The necessary applications to that effect to be filed by the petitioner.
10.
Before parting with the matter we are recording the apology as tendered by the learned Advocate, Mr. Roy on behalf of the writ petitioner for bringing the Principal of the College in the High Court on alleging a contention which is not the real state of affairs as reflected from the affidavit as filed by the Principal of the College.
11.
With that finding and observation the appeal, writ application and stay application all stand disposed of.
12.
Let Xerox plain copy of the ordering portion of this order duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court) be given to the learned Advocates appearing for the parties on usual undertakings.
Tapas Kumar Giri, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.