Kuldip Singh, J - The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (the Corporation) held selection for the posts of Assistant Stores Purchase officers in the year 1972.
The first four candidates selected in order of merit were as under :-  1.
Shri AM Khan  2.
Shri SS Shirol  3.
Shri KG Doddamani  4.
Shri BK Doreswamy  2.
The reservation for Schedule Castes/Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes was regulated in the State of Karnataka by the Govt.
Instructions dated September 6, 1969.
Annexure-I to the said Instructions provides classification and rotation of vacancies for open competition/backward classes/Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the following manner :  1.
Scheduled Tribes  2.
Scheduled Castes  3.
Backward Classes  4.
Open Competition  3.
Para 6 of the Instructions is as under :  "When a person belonging to Scheduled Tribes, the Schedule Castes or other backward classes is not available for being selected for a vacancy reserved for such class, such vacancy shall be filled by selection on the basis of general merit.
4.
The above mentioned four selected candidates were appointed as Assistant Stores/Purchase Officers by the order dated November 19, 1972.
The appointments were in the following order :  AM Khan (General Category)  BK Doreswamy (Scheduled Caste)  SS Shirol  KG Doddamani  5.
Since no Scheduled Tribe candidate was selected the first vacancy which was meant for the Scheduled Tribes was given to AM Khan, general category candidate, who was even other-wise on the top of the merit-list.
6.
BK Doreswamy filed a writ petition before the Karnataka High Court seeking a mandamus directing the Corporation to treat him senior to AM Khan in the cadre of Assistant Stores/Purchase Officers on the ground that since the Scheduled Tribe candidate was not available he being a member of the Scheduled Castes was entitled to the first vacancy.
The writ petition was allowed by a learned single Judge of the High Court.
Writ appeal filed by the Corporation was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
This appeal by the Corporation is against the judgments of the High Court.
7.
We are of the view that the High Court fell into patent error in interpreting the Govt. instructions dated September 6, 1969.
It is no doubt correct that out of the merit list the first vacancy was to be filled by appointing a Scheduled Tribe candidate.
Since the Scheduled Tribe candidate was not available the vacancy was to be filled in accordance with the provision of para 6 of the Govt.
Instructions.
under the said paragraph, quoted above, when a person belonging to Scheduled Tribe is not available for being selected against the vacancy reserved for the said class, such vacancy has to be filled by selection on the basis of general merit.
Since in the present case the Scheduled Tribe candidate was not available, the first vacancy was rightly filled by appointing AM Khan who was at number on of the merit list.
It is nowhere provided in the instructions of the Govt. of Karnataka that when a person belonging to reserve class is not available then the vacancy is to be filled by a candidate of another reserve class.
On the other hand the instructions specifically provide that in the absence of the candidate belonging to reserved class the vacancy has to be filled by selection on the basis of general merit.
The order of appointment dated November 19, 1972 issued by the State Govt. was in conformity with the Govt.
Instructions and no fault could be found with the same.
AM Khan having been rightly appointed at number one in accordance with the Govt.
Instructions he would rank senior to BK Doreswamy in the cadre of Assistant Stores/Purchase Officers.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow the appeal, set aside the order of the learned single Judge dated November 26, 1982 and of the Division Bench dated June 17, 1986 and dismiss the writ petitions filed by BK Doreswamy before the High Court.
No costs.