SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The father of petitioner died on 29121998.
At that time the petitioner was minor.
On reaching the age of majority, he made an application on compassionate grounds.
2.
Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, we are of the considered opinion that no relief can be granted to the petitioner at this belated stage, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 wherein it has been held as under :-  "2.
The question relates to the considerations which should guide while giving appointment in public services on compassionate ground.
It appears that there has been a good deal of obfuscation on the issue.
As a rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
However, an exception, out of pure humanitarian considerations has been made in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
A provision is, therefore, made to enable the family to make both ends meet.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for the post held by the deceased.
Furthermore, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Classes III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such lowest posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is not discriminatory.
The favourable treatment given to such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz., relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected or required to be given by the public authorities for the purpose.
It must be remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
The exception to the rule made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment which are suddenly upturned."
3.
In paragraph 6 of the aforesaid judgment, it has further been observed as under :-  "6.....For these very reasons, the compassionate employment cannot be granted after a lapse of reasonable period which must be specified in the rules.
The consideration for such employment is not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in future.
The object being to enable the family to get over the financial crisis which it faces at the time of the death of the sole bread winner, the compassionate employment cannot be claimed and offered whatever the lapse of time and after the crisis is over."
4.
The aforesaid observations have been approved and followed by the Supreme Court in the case of Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar and Anr Etc. etc., 1996(1) RSJ 792.
In the case of Haryana State Electricity Board (supra), the point raised before the Supreme Court was similar as in the present writ petition.
In the aforesaid case, the widow of the deceased-employee made an application inter alia indicating therein that she had not married and she had three minor children, the eldest of them having been born in 1972.
As per the existing Circular for giving relief to the distressed member of the family of the deceased employee, ex- gratia payment was given to the widow of the family.
It is only in 1992, the representation was made by the respondent the mother of the Naresh Tanwar, the son of the deceased employee that since the son had attained majority by that time, he should be given appointment on compassionate ground.
The representation was, however, rejected and, therefore, it petition was moved before this Court.
By its judgment, the High Court had directed that compassionate appointment should be given to the respondent-Naresh Tanwar.
The Haryana Electricity Board challenged the aforesaid judgment of the High Court before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court over-ruled the judgment of the High Court.
In the aforesaid case, the Supreme Court also considered the ratio of an unreported decision in the case of Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar (C.A.
No. 10682 of 1995) decided on 13111995.
In that case, the question of appointment on compassionate ground to an applicant who was four years old at the time when his father an ex-employee died in harness, came up for consideration.
It was contended before the Supreme Court that since the appellant was minor when the father died in harness, the compassionate circumstances having continued till the date he made an application for appointment, he was entitled to be appointed on compassionate ground.
This contention was not accepted by the High Court below and upholding the rejection of the claim for appointment, the Supreme Court has observed as follows :-  "The very object of appointment of a dependent of the deceased employees who die in harness is to relieve unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family.
Since the death occurred way back in 1971, in which year, the appellant was four years old, it cannot be said that he is entitled to be appointed after he attained majority long thereafter.
In other words, if that contention is accepted, it amounts to another mode of recruitment of the dependent of a deceased Government servant which cannot be encouraged, de hors the recruitment rules."
5.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.