M. Jagannadha Rao, J - Leave granted.
2.
We have heard Counsel on both sides.
This appeal is preferred against the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court, dated 31398 in Civil Writ Petition No. 9071/96, allowing the writ petition on the ground that the selection already made by the Selection Committee for recruitment of Deputy Forest Rangers was vitiated by several irregularities, arbitrariness and even mala fides.
Against the said judgment, the abovesaid appeal has been preferred.
3.
At the time of the admission on this appeal, an order was passed on 6598 for maintenance of status quo and the said order was continued.
On 16399 an elaborate order was passed by this Court directing a fresh selection to be made as directed by the High Court in accordance with rules.
In regard to the said selection, this Court also gave certain guidelines as to what should be the reasonable marks that could be awarded in the interview.
Pending the said selection, this Court, however, allowed the appellants to continue in office notwithstanding the fact that the High Court had set aside their selection.
This was done with a view to see that work of the Government did not suffer and there was no vacuum before a fresh selection took place.
4.
Now an affidavit has been filed by the Secretary, Haryana Staff Selection Commission in this Court on 2952000, stating that pursuant to the orders of this Court, Public Notice was given on 9799 and on 2412000 regarding the criteria and the scheme of the written examination.
The examination was held on 532000, 1842 candidates, who had previously applied, have also been interviewed.
1128 candidates appeared in the written examination.
The result of the aforesaid examination has been prepared through computerized process.
Candidates equal to three times the number of posts in each category were considered eligible for interview.
5.
The interviews were also completed.
39 candidates were called for the interview; out of them 36 appeared.
Inasmuch as there were only 36 candidates, sufficient time, it is stated, was available to assess the suitability of the candidates.
The Selection Committee also took into consideration the procedure for reservation in the appointments.
The result of the selection is now kept in a sealed cover awaiting further orders from this Court.
6.
The State of Haryana is, therefore, directed to release and publish the names as selected by the fresh selection and take further steps in filling up the vacancy as per the select list after following any further procedure involved before appointment orders are given.
The order of the High Court is affirmed and the appeal is disposed of accordingly.
7.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.