VS Aggarwal, J - Article 21 of the Constitution in its stark brevity unfolds itself in the following words :-  "21.
Protection of life and personal liberty - No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law."
The meaningful words articulately used, set the law into motion and the right to life is recognised as one of the Fundamental Rights.
The Supreme Court in the case of Olga Tellis and others v. Bombay Municipal Corporation and others, 1986 R.R.R.
290 : AIR 1986 SC 180 quoted with approval, the observations from Munn v. Illinois, (1877) 94 US 113 in the following words :-  "and the right to life is a precious freedom.
"Life", as observed by Field, J in Munn v. Illinois, (1877) 94 US 113, means something more than mere animal existence and the inhibition against the deprivation of life extends to all those limits and faculties by which life is enjoyed."
2.
It is this principle which is being highlighted and, therefore, we take liberty in referring to some of the facts and the rules on the subject.
3.
The Central Services (Medical Attendance) Rules 1944 (for short, the Medical Attendance Rules) had been enacted in exercise of the power conferred under sub-section (2) of Section 241 read with sub-section (3) of Section 313 of the Government of India Act, 1935.
The Medical Attendance Rules, in detail prescribe, the medical attendance and facilities in this regard but they apply to all Government servants except certain categories of the said Government servants which we are not delving into for the purpose of the present controversy.
Under Note 2 to Rule 1, the Medical Attendance Rules did not apply to retired Government officials and the relevant portion of the same reads :-  "Note 2.
- These rules do not apply to : (i) Defence Services personnel.
(ii) Government servants who are on leave or deputation abroad.
(iii) Non-Gazetted Government servants, including Group D, and gazetted Government servants (other than Central Services Group A) drawing pay less than Rs. 2500 stationed in or passing through Calcutta for whom special arrangements for medical attendance and/or treatment have been made, vide Section 6 of the Compilation.
(iv) Retired Government officials; (v) Non-officials sent on deputation abroad."
4.
In 1954, the Central Government Health Scheme (for short the CGHS) had been introduced with a view to provide comprehensive medical care facilities to the Central Government Employees and members of their families.
The Scheme which was initially introduced in Delhi had been extended to certain other towns.
Under the said Scheme, residence is to be considered as criteria for determining the eligibility of the said persons to avail of the medical facilities.
So far as pensioners are concerned, if they are staying at places in the CGHS covered cities, they can avail of the said facility on contributing a specific amount.
5.
In the vast country, millions of people have retired.
They have settled in different parts of the country; some of them in remote areas.
The Fifh Central Pay Commission while dealing with such Central Government pensioners had recommended that the Medical Attendance Rules should be extended to those pensioners who are residing in areas not covered by the CGHS so that are enabled to claim expenditure incurred by them on their treatment as well as the treatment of the members of their families.
This recommendation had been considered, and on 9102001, the Director, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had issued the following letter :-  "F.No.S 14025/4/96-MS Government of India Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health) Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi Dated the 24th Sept 2001 910 Office Memorandum Subject : Extension of CS(MA) Rules, 1944 to the Central Government Pensioners who are residing in non-CGHS areas - regarding.
At present, the CS(MA) Rules, 1944 are not applicable to the Central Government Pensioners.
Consequently, the pensioners residing in areas not covered by CGHS are not able to claim medical expenditure incurred by them on their own treatment as well as the treatment of the members of their family.
2.
The Fifth Central Pay Commission have recommended extension of CS(MA) Rules, 1944 to the Central Government pensioners residing in areas not covered by CGHS so that they are enabled to claim expenditure incurred by them on their treatment as well as the treatment of the members of their family.
3.
On the recommendations of the Fifth Central Pay Commission, the Department of Pension & Pensioners Welfare have issued orders for payment of Rs. 1000/- per month to Central Government pensioners residing in non-CGHS areas for their day to day treatment.
However, for undergoing treatment, such pensioners are at present, not eligible for reimbursement of medical expenditure as CS(MA) Rules, 1944 are not applicable to them.
4.
In this regard, it was considered that although this Ministry agreed in principle to extend the CS(MA) Rules to Central Government Pensioners residing outside CGHS areas, yet due to limited resources, financial and administrative, it was found not possible for this Ministry to take over responsibility of reimbursement of medical expenditure for indoor hospitalisation treatment in respect of such pensioners.
It was accordingly proposed and circulated to all the Ministries/departments vide OM of even number dated 1211999 (copy enclosed for ready reference) that the responsibility of reimbursement of medical expenditure of such pensioners should be taken over by the concerned Ministry/department/office as already done in respect of their serving Central Government employees.
In this regard, comments received from some Ministries/Departments showed that they were agreeable to accept the responsibility for reimbursement of medical claims throughout the country.
CGHS has neither the infrastructure nor the resources to handle this extra load of pensioners and accordingly taking into account the magnitude of the responsibility involved, it was proposed in the OM dated 1211999 mentioned above that the responsibility of reimbursement of medical expenditure of such pensioners should be taken up by the concerned Ministries/Departments/offices as they are already doing in respect of their serving employees.
6.
Extension of CS(MA) Rules to pensioners is a matter of policy entailing substantial cost implications.
This financial implication would need to be assessed before a decision is taken in consultation with the concerned Ministries including the Ministry of Finance.
In view of this and to facilitate a decision for extension of CS(MA) Rules, 1944 to Central Government pensioners residing in non-CGHS areas, the Ministries/departments of the Government of India are therefore once again requested to convey their views in the matter immediately.
This may kindly be given top priority.
Sd/- TK Manoj Kumar Director (TKS)."
Till date, no final decision has been taken.
6.
The applicants in different original applications that came up for consideration before this Bench at Chandigarh had claimed medical reimbursement after they had retired and had undergone certain treatment in different hospitals.
On being denied the same, they had filed the original applications in certain cases referred to above.
Some concerned persons had been members of the CGHS but after that they left the area and started residing where the facilities of CGHS are not available.
They had been denied the said benefits on their shifting of residences.
7.
Keeping in view the views expressed by some Benches particularly in the cases of Ram Dev Singh v. Union of India & Anr, in OA No. 686/HR/1999 and Baljit Rai Sur v. Union of India & Anr, in OA 588/CH/2000, following questions have been formulated for consideration of the Larger Bench :-  "(i) The Central Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 framed in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of section 241 read with sub- section (3) of section 313 of the Government of India Act, apply to all govt. servants other than those in railways etc., however, under Rule 1(2) note 2 retired Govt. officials have been excluded from application of these rules.
After the promulgation of the Constitution of India wherein equality of status and protection of life and personal liberty are enshrined, whether Rule 1(2) note 2(iv) of the above rules is ultra vires in the changed circumstances ?
(ii) Whereas the 5th Central Pay Commission have recommended extension of CS (MA) Rules, 1944 to Central Govt. pensioners residing outside CGHS area and Govt. of India in principle have agreed to extension of these rules to such Central Govt. pensioners, but have yet not taken final decision in the matter, can a Mandamus be issued to the respondents to reimburse the medical expenditure incurred by a pensioner residing in area not covered by CGHS ?
(iii) What would be the status of a retired Central Govt. official who enrolls himself under the CGHS initially but in fact resides in an area not covered under C.G.H.S for purposes of claiming medical reimbursement under CS (MA) Rules, 1944/AIS (MA) Rules, 1954 ?"
8.
The learned counsel for the applicants besides putting into service Article 21 of the Constitution also referred to Article 14 to contend that the retired Government servants cannot be treated differently with respect to the medical facilities claimed.
9.
It is not in dispute at either end that Article 14 of the Constitution condemns discrimination in all spheres.
More than half century ago, the Supreme Court in the case of Lachmandas Kewalram and another v. State of Bombay, A.I.R. 1952 SC 235 was concerned with a question as to what would be the meaning of equality before law.
The majority expressed the view that Article 14 forbids class legislation but not reasonable classification.
However, the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia and that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
We take liberty in reproducing the principle enunciated which stood the test of time and reads :-  "It is now well established that while Art. 14 forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation.
In order, however, to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguished persons or things that are grouped together from others who are left out of the group and (ii) that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act.
What is necessary is that there must be a nexus between the basis of classification and the object of the Act."
10.
In the case of CI Emden v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1960 SC 548, the same principle had been re-stated.
A presumption could be drawn against an accused person facing trial under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code.
The challenge was to the procedure adopted for a particular class of public servants who were brought within the mischief of Section 4(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Keeping in view that the evil of corruption amongst public servants posed a serious problem and had to be effectively rooted out in the interest of clean and efficient administration and with this objective this provision had been enacted.
The validity of the same was upheld and the Supreme Court concluded :-  "The scope and effect of the fundamental right guaranteed by Art. 14 has been considered by this Court on several occasions; as a result of the decisions of this Court, it is well-established that Art. 14 does not forbid reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation; no doubt it forbids class legislation; but if it appears that the impugned legislation is based on a reasonable classification founded on intelligible differentia & that the said differentia have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by it, its validity cannot be successfully challenged under Art. 14 (Vide: Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia v. SR. Tendolkar, 1959 SCR 279) : (AIR 1958 SC 538).
In the present case there can be no doubt that the basis adopted by the Legislature in classifying one class of public servants who are brought within the mischief of S 4(1) is a perfectly rational basis.
It is based on an intelligible differentia and there can be no difficulty in distinguishing the class of persons covered by the impugned section from other classes of persons who are accused of committing other offences.
Legislature presumably realised that experience in courts showed how difficult it is to bring home to the accused persons the charge of bribery; evidence which is and can be generally adduced in such cases in support of the charge is apt to be treated as tainted, and so it is not very easy to establish the charge of bribery beyond a reasonable doubt.
Legislature felt that the evil of corruption amongst public servants posed a serious problem and had to be effectively rooted out in the interest of clean and efficient administration.
That is why the Legislature decided to enact S 4(1) with a view to require the raising of the statutory presumption as soon as the condition precedent prescribed by it in that behalf is satisfied.
The object which the Legislature thus wanted to achieve is the eradication of corruption from amongst public servants, and between the said object and the intelligible differentia on which the classification is based there is a rational and direct relation.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that the challenge to the vires of S 4(1) on the ground that it violates Art. 14 of the Constitution must fail.
Incidentally, we may refer to the decision of this Court in A.S Krishan v. State of Madras, 1957 SCR 399 : (AIR 1957 SC 297) in which a similar challenge to the vires of a statutory presumption required to be raised under S 4(2) of the Madras Prohibition Act 10 of 1937 has been repelled."
11.
Once again a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of the State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd, AIR 1964 SC 1179 took up the same question where no tax was imposed on persons carrying on agricultural operations in other regions of Madhya Pradesh State.
The Supreme Court reiterated the same principle and held as under :-  "It cannot be too strongly emphasized that to make out a case of denial of the equal protection of the laws under Art. 14 of the Constitution, a plea of differential treatment is by itself not sufficient.
An applicant pleading that equal protection of the laws has been denied to him must make out that not only he had been treated differently from others but he has been so treated from persons similarly circumstanced without any reasonable basis, and such differential treatment is unjustifiably made."
12.
On again, in the case of Hari Krishna Bhargav v Union of India and another, AIR 1966 SC 619, it was concluded that Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality before the law and equal protection of the laws.
But thereby the power of the Legislature to make a reasonable classification of persons, objects or transactions for attaining certain objectives is not excluded.
If a classification is based on some real and substantial distinction, bearing a just and reasonable relation to the objects sought to be achieved, the same was held to be valid.
13.
Same was the view expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of Workmen of the Motor Industries Co Ltd v. Management of Motor Industries Co Ltd, and another, AIR 1969 SC 1280.
14.
From the aforesaid, it is clear that when the law is challenged as denying equal protection, the question for determination before this Tribunal is not whether it has resulted in inequality but whether there is some difference which bears a just and reasonable relation to the object of the said rule.
This Tribunal would not interfere unless the classification results in pronounced inequality but mini classification would not be upheld where distinction between a class and categories is inconsequential.
15.
While stating the aforesaid principle of law, a clear distinction has to be drawn in the scope of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
Article 14 refers to equality before law while Article 21 for the purpose of the present order refers to the right to life.
16.
In strict sense, if Article 14 is looked into, it is patent that the classification has been made between a class of persons, namely who were serving Government servants and who have since retired.
It would be a reasonable classification, if only Article 14 is applied.
Reason being that serving Government servants would be entitled to certain facilities in the best interests of running the Government efficiently.
The same principle may not apply to those Government servants who have since retired.
Therefore, if the Medical Attendance Rules did not apply to retired Government servants, in that event, it cannot be held to be discriminatory.
Such a question had come up before a Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Ram Autar Pandey v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another, AIR 1962 Allahabad 328.
In the cited case, a notification had been issued pertaining to the age of superannuation to be 58 years.
The question for consideration as to who was to retire and at what time had come up and the Court held :-  "Under 1957 notification, the age of superannuation was 58 years.
If a Government servant is kept in service till he completes 58 years, he can have no grievance.
There is no reason why he should continue in service after completing 58 years.
Although discrimination is prohibited under Art. 14, reasonable classification is permissible.
They classification made by the subsidiary notification in dealing with Government servants falling in the first group appears reasonable.
Government servants falling in the second group and the third group will continue in service till 31121961.
The petitioners's case falls under the second group mentioned in the subsidiary notification.
He will, therefore, remain in service till 31121961.
No one falling in any of the three grounds will be able to continue in service beyond 31121961.
The subsidiary notification does not involve any discrimination against the petitioners."
Keeping in view the aforesaid principles as referred to above, it cannot be termed that it would violate Article 14 of the Constitution  17.
In this regard, Article 21 of the Constitution cannot be lost sight of.
We have already referred to in the preceding paragraphs that right to life has been recognised by the Supreme Court in the case of Olga Tellis (supra).
Subsequently in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Mohinder Singh Chawla, etc., 1997(1) SCT 716 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1225, the Supreme Court once again concluded that having had the constitutional obligation to bear the expenses for the Government servant while in service or after retirement from service, the Government is required to fulfil the constitutional obligation.
18.
Another Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab & Ors. v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga etc.etc., 1998(1) SCT 716 (SC) : JT 1998(2) SC 136 reiterated the same principle by holding that it is one of the most sacrosanct and valuable rights of a citizen and equally sacrosanct sacred obligation of the State, every citizen of this Welfare State looks towards the State for it to perform its this obligation with top priority including by way of allocation of sufficient funds.
The Supreme Court even rejected the contention that the State can neither urge nor say that it has no obligation to provide medical facility.
If that were so, it would be ex facie violative of Article 21 of the Constitution.
At the same time, the Supreme Court held that no State of any country can have unlimited resources to spend on any of its project.
That is why, it only approves its projects to the extent it is feasible.
The same holds good for providing medical facilities to its citizens including its employees.
Provisions of facilities cannot be unlimited.
It has to be to the extent finance permits.
If no scale or rate is fixed then in case private clinics or hospitals increase their rate to exorbitant scales, the State would be bound to reimburse the same.
In the peculiar facts, the concerned person had been operated upon in the Escorts Heart Institute but the Supreme Court directed reimbursement at the rules prescribed by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.
19.
The Delhi High Court in the case of Narendra Pal Singh v. Union of India & Ors., 1999(3) SCT 577 (Delhi) : (1999) DLT 358 was concerned with a Government servant who had retired.
The facts indicated that he had suffered an heart ailment and it required urgent and immediate treatment.
He had not taken prior sanction for treatment in non-C.G.H.S Hospital.
The contention that such prior sanction should have been taken was rejected holding that it had to be done in an emergency.
The Division Bench of the Delhi High Court permitted reimbursement of the medical expenses holding that the concerned person had the right to take steps in self preservation.
He could not stand in queue before the medical board.
The Bench relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab and Ors., 1996(2) SCT 234 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1388 wherein the Supreme Court held that self preservation of one's life is the necessary concomitant of the right to life enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India, fundamental in nature, sacred, precious and inviolable.
20.
This principle has been recognised even in the case of Vincent Panikurlangara v. Union of India and ors., AIR 1987 SC 990 with respect to the obligation of the State to improve the public health besides other facts about the nutrition and the standard of living.
The Supreme Court observed :-  "While endorsing what has been said above, we would refer to Art. 47 in Part IV of the Constitution.
That Article provides :- "The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the immprovement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health."
This Article has laid stress on improvement of public health and prohibition of drugs injurious to health as one of thte primary duties of thte State.
In Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamachari (AIR 1981 SC 298) this Court has pointed out that, "the Fundamental Rights are intended to foster the ideal of a political democracy and to prevent the establishment of authoritarian rule but they are of no value unless they can be enforced by resort to courts.
So they are made justiciable.
However, it is also evident that notwithstanding their great importance, the Directive Principles cannot in the very nture of thtings be enforced in a Court of Law, but it does not mean that Directive Principles are less important than Fundamental Rights or that they are not binding on the various organs of the State."
In a series of pronouncements during the recent years this Court has culled out from the provisions of Part IV of the Constitution these several obligations of the State and called upon it to effectuate them in order that the resultant, pictured by the Constitution Fathers may become a reality.
As pointed out by us maintenance and improvement of public health have to rank high as these are indispensable to the very physical existence of the community and on the betterment of these depends the building of the society of which the Constitution makers envisaged.
Attending to public in health, in our opinion, therefore, is of high priority - perhaps the one at the top."
Same were the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of Pt. Parmanand Katara v. Union of India and others, 1990(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 75 : 1990(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 545 : (1989) 4 SCC 286 about the obligation of a doctor in the Government hospitals to extend assistance for preserving the life.
21.
From the aforesaid, it is clear that right to life is a basic feature of the Constitution.
As a corollary, it follows that right to medical assistance also would be a basic feature in the case of retired Government servants.
Since this is one of the basic rights, the State has a legal obligation to provide assistance to the Government servants who had rendered service during the prime of their life subject to reimbursement and availability of medical facilities and the resources of the State.
22.
During the course of submissions, it was pointed that the CGHS facilities are not available with respect to many areas in the country.
Even in the case of Chandigarh, half of the city is covered by the Scheme and not the rest.
It was pointed further that even if one is a member of the Scheme and resides within an area where the facility is available, when he leaves to some other area where the facility is not available, he loses all the benefits and in that event this Act is discriminatory.
23.
What is not being disputed by either side is that this Scheme is available to certain cities and areas.
A member of the Scheme has to contribute a particular amount either on monthly basis or as per the Scheme and thereupon in accordance with the scheme and the facilities that are provided, reimbursement is permissible.
It is also not in dispute that the retired Government servants, as already referred to above, are paid a specific amount every month for day to day medical facilities but not for indoor treatment.
24.
The argument that it is irrational on the ground that certain members of the CGHS who contribute towards the same but may not draw any medical facility and others who do not even had the medical facility and get a monthly amount, does not appear to be logical.
But on the said ground, it cannot be held that the Scheme by itself would be hit on the ground of being discriminatory.
This is for the reason that the Scheme had been made applicable to certain areas and is being extended from time to time.
In a vast country, every person in this regard because of geographical features cannot be treated alike.
If a person, therefore, being a Member of the CGHS chooses to reside where the facility is not available, he indeed cannot complain of being discriminated.
He necessarily falls in line with other retired Government servants.
25.
As a consequence of the aforesaid, we necessarily draw the conclusion that a scheme with respect to indoor treatment of the retired Government servants must be drawn because right to health is a basic feature of the Constitution.
While drawing the scheme, care must be taken with respect to persons who have already laid their claim and spent their hard earned income on the said treatment.
26.
Obviously, it was urged that in the circumstances, if a mandamus should be issued or not.
Once the matter comes within the purview of the Tribunal, necessarily the jurisdiction of the Tribunal would include the power to issue such directions.
27.
Consequently, we hold that :-  (a) the Medical Attendance Rules are not ultra vires of the provisions of the Constitution.
However, it is directed that the Central Government within a period of six months shall draw a scheme keeping in view its resources and availability of medical facilities for reimbursement of the claims particularly for indoor treatment of the retired Government officials.
While doing so, care must be taken about the retired Government servants who have already taken indoor treatment and have since not been reimbursed; (b) keeping in view the findings given above, it is held that a mandamus can be issued as directed above; and  (c) till such time the scheme is not formulated and subject to what has been above, if a retired Government servant who enrolls himself under the CGHS initially but in fact resides in an area not covered under the Scheme will not be entitled to claim reimbursement immediately.
28.
These cases may now be listed before the appropriate Division Bench for further action as may be deemed fit.
Order accordingly.