Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - Twenty-three persons have joined together as petitioners in this writ petition.
2.
The State of West Bengal, the superintendent of Vidyasagar Hospital at Behala, and the director of Health Services and Family Welfare of the Government of West Bengal are the three respondents.
3.
The petitioners pray for a writ of mandamus to direct the respondents to absorb their.
and/or to regularize their appointments as group-D staff/general duty attendant in Vidyasagar Hospital.
They are seeking such relief on the basis of the state government memordandum (No. Health/MA/5502/14-IC/81) dated August 10th, 1981.
4.
The memordandum dated August 10th, 1981 was issued by the secretary to the Government of West Bengal, department of Health and Family Welfare (Medical Administration Branch) to the director of Health Services, West Bengal.
It was issued for absorption of special attendants in group-D posts in the hospitals under the department of Health and Family Welfare.
5.
The contents of the memorandum dated August 10th, 1981, as relied on by the petitioners, are reproduced below :  "The undersigned is directed by order of the Government to say that the Governor has been pleased to sanction the following scheme for absorption of special attendants in hospitals under the Deptt of Health & Family Welfare :- (i) Persons who have worked as special attendants for 5 (five) consecutive years or more in a Govt. hospital and have put in at least 240 days of service in each of three years and have their names registered with the authorities of the hospital shall be eligible for appointment to vacant posts of Group `D' worker in the regular establishment in only that hospital in which they have worked as special attendants :  (ii) for the purpose of selection for such appointment, they shall have to take chance alongwith candidates normally sponsored by the Employment Exchange;  (iii) not more than 15% of vacancies occurring in a year in a particular hospital shall be filled up by special attendants;  (iv) the maximum age of a special attendant to be considered for such appointment shall not exceed 75 (sic) years on the first day of the year in which recruitment is made;  (v) there shall be in each hospital in which a special attendant is employed separate panels of male and female special attendancts found fit for absorption in the regular establishment, and the Superintendents of the hospitals shall be authorised to or mark (sic) vacancies for male or female candidates as the case may be having regard to the requirements of the hospitals.
2.
The scheme shall take immediate effect.
3.
The Governor is also pleased to direct that there shall be no fresh amendment (sic) of special attendants in any of the Government hospitals."
The case of the petitioners is this.
Vidyasagar Hospital at Behala is a government hospital under the department of Health and Family Welfare of the Government of West Bengal.
Its superintendent engaged them as special attendants during February 1980 to May 1980.
They have been working as such to the satisfaction of the authority concerned.
In terms of government memorandum dated August 10th, 1981 they are entitled to be absorbed or appointed in group-D posts of the hospital.
Although they repeatedly requested the competent authority to absorb them, no action was taken.
Being aggrieved they filed an application (OA No. 280 of 2003) in the West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal.
By order dated April 2nd, 2003 the tribunal permitted them to withdraw such application, with liberty to file a fresh application before the appropriate forum.
Against the tribunal's such order they filed a writ petition (WPST No. 525 of 2003) before the division bench of this Court.
By order dated May 11th, 2004 such writ petition was dismissed on the ground that without being state employees they were not entitled to move the tribunal.
6.
Affidavit-of-service has been filed stating that notice was given to the respondents.
However, no one appears for the respondents.
7.
By drawing attention of the learned advocate for the petitioners to the provisions in sections 15 and 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, I gave him opportunity to explain how the subject matter of the present writ petition can be adjudicated by the writ Court as the Court of first instance.
8.
Learned advocate has submitted that in view of the orders passed by the tribunal and the division bench of this Court, the subject matter of the writ petition can now be adjudicated by the writ Court as the Court of first instance.
He has also relied on an order passed by me a similar writ petition.
9.
In my opinion, in view of the provisions in sections 15 and 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and the apex Court decision in L Chandara Kumar v. Union of India & Ors. reported at AIR 1997 SC 1125, the subject matter of the present writ petition cannot be adjudicated by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution of India as the Court of first instance.
The reasons for my such view are the following.
10.
The West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal has been established in terms of provision of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985; hence regarding the matters mentioned in section 15 of this Act only such tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain an application from an aggrieved person.
In view of the law declared by the apex Court in L Chandra Kumar case the division bench of this Court has jurisdiction to entertain a writ petition against an order passed by the tribunal in such an application.
11.
As held by the Supreme Court in Union of India & Ors. v. Baleshwar Singh, reported at 1994 Supp (2) SCC 587, there will be inherent lack of jurisdiction in the High Court, if regarding the matters mentioned in sections 14 and 15 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 it entertains a writ petition as the Court of first instance.
12.
In Union of India & Ors. v. Deep Chand Pandey & Anr., reported at (1992) 4 SCC 432, it was held by the Supreme Court that the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 covers a very wide field, and there is nothing to suggest that the provisions dealing with the jurisdiction of the tribunal should receive a narrow interpretation in that case the casual typists engaged on daily wages in the office of the Deputy Chief Engineer (Construction), Central Railway, Gwalior, on termination of their employment, moved writ petitions before the Madhya Pradesh High Court, and such writ petitions were allowed.
On appeal their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that since the casual typist as were claiming the right to continue in the employment of the Union of India as before, with additional claim of temporary status, it would, therefore be idle to suggest that such a claim was not covered by the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
It was held that the High Court did not have jurisdiction to entertain the claim of the casual typists.
13.
From the provisions in section 15 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 it is apparent that all the jurisdictions, powers and authority in relation to recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any civil service of the state or to civil posts under the state, shall be exercised only by the State Administrative Tribunal, when such a tribunal is established.
14.
The Act was enacted to provide for the adjudication or trial by the Administrative Tribunals, inter aila, of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment to public services, and posts, in connection with the affairs of any state.
15.
The process of recruitment is the initial step for making an appointment in a service or in a post.
Absorption is one of the modes of appointment.
16.
If a person claims a right to be appointed by way of absorption, the recruitment process on such claim begins with the scrutiny of his application for ascertaining his eligibility for empanelment, approval and appointment.
17.
So if a person makes a complaint about inaction on the part of the state government regarding initiation of the recruitment process for his appointment in a group-D post of the government by way of his absorption in terms of the policy decision of the government notified by its circular, such complaint can be entertained, and the disputes therein can be tried and adjudicated, only by the State Administrative Tribunal, when such tribunal is functioning.
18.
A complaint of the above nature can neither be thrown away by the tribunal for want of jurisdiction, nor can it be entertained by the writ Court as the Court of first instance, on the ground that the person does not hold a civil post under the state or that he is not an employee of the state government.
19.
He claims a right to be appointed in a civil post under the state, and hence his such claim can be adjudicated only by the State Administrative Tribunal.
20.
In the present case the petitioners claim that in view of the policy decision of the state government, notified by its memorandum dated August 10th, 1981, they are entitled to be appointed in group-D posts of the government hospital by way of their absorption.
21.
Their grievance is that though the respondents are under an obligation to initiate the recruitment process, and then to appoint them after examining their claims, they have taken no steps whatsoever inspite of repeated requests.
22.
The complaint, in my opinion, can be entertained, tried and adjudicated only by the State Administrative Tribunal, and in view of the provisions in sections 15 and 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, and the decisions of the apex Court as noted before, there is inherent lack of jurisdiction in this Court to entertain the writ petition as the Court of first instance.
23.
The situation has, however, become somewhat complicated because of the orders passed by the tribunal and the division bench of this Court in connection with the application moved by the petitioners before the tribunal with their complaint.
24.
The order dated April 2nd, 2003 passed by the tribunal reads as follows :-  "On the prayer of petitioner is allowed to withdraw the petition and make fresh application to the appropriate forum, if so advised.
Plain copy."
The order dated May 11th, 2004 passed by the division bench of this Court reads as follows : "After hearing the Id.
Advocates for the parties we find that there is no ground for interfering with the impugned order passed by the Tribunal as we fully agree with the order of the Tribunal that the petitioner before the Tribunal not being the State employees were not entitled to move the Tribunal.
It appears that the Tribunal already granted liberties to the petitioners to move appropriate forum for their reliefs.
In that view of the matter, no interference is required.
The writ petition is dismissed accordingly."
I do not find any merit in the submission that in view of the orders passed by the tribunal, and then by the division bench of this Court, the present writ petition is maintainable.
25.
Because of the order dated May 11th, 2004 passed by the division bench of this Court, this Court cannot assume jurisdiction, as there is lack of inherent jurisdiction in this Court to entertain the petitioners' present writ petition as the Court of first instance, when its subject matter can be adjudicated, under the law, only by the West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal established under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
26.
I also do not find any force in the submission that in a similar case previously I entertained a writ petition and passed appropriate order in it.
In the previous case the question that has now arisen did not arise.
The position of law is not that if once jurisdiction was wrongly exercised, it is to be repeated, even when the wrong exercise of jurisdiction on the previous occasion appears to be apparent.
27.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is dismissed as not maintainable.
There will be no order for costs.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order may be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.