MM Kumar, J - The State of Haryana has challenged order dated 9.3.2005 passed by the Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Hisar dismissing the objection raised by the judgment debtor-petitioner (for brevity JD-petitioner) which was filed against the execution of the decrees dated 1101987 and 1981993.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the decree holder-respondent (DH- respondent) was working on the establishment of Sessions Court, Hissar and he succeeded in persuading the trial Court to pass a decree dated 1101987 which was confirmed by the learned Addl.
District Judge, Hisar on 1981993.
The respondent was held entitled to claim the difference of pay and other allowances on the post of Superintendent from 1.4.1980 with the benefit of increment from December, 1979 i.e. the date when persons junior to the DH- respondent were promoted.
The decree-holder respondent was also held entitled to all consequential retrial benefits alongwith interest @ 18 per cent from the date of decree i.e. 12101987.
Thereafter the DH-respondent initiated execution proceedings.
In execution proceedings the judgment debtor-petitioner raised the plea that the decree in question was not executable because it was a decree for declaration simpliciter.
A further plea was raised that a period of 12 years from the date of passing the decree dated 1101987 had expired and that such a decree is not executable.
The executing Court rejected the objection by holding that the DH-respondent was found senior than those who were impleaded as defendants by the Court which passed the decree.
He was further held entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
The executing Court has not considered the decree as merely a declaratory decree and rejected the objections by observing as under :  "It is clear from the decree dated 1101987 that the plaintiff was held to be senior than defendant Nos. 4 to 8 and plaintiff was also held entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
Therefore, it is clear that the decree dated 1101987 is not merely declaratory decree but, in fact, the plaintiff was held entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
In these circumstances, the authority titled as State of MP (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case and executing Court is bound by the terms of the decree.
On the same reasoning the authority titled as Parkash Chand (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case and infact, the plaintiff is entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
The authority titled as AS Murthy (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case because in that case, the suit for declaration was filed that order of removal of plaintiff was illegal, null and void and said suit was decreed.
But in the present case, the plaintiff was held senior to defendant Nos. 4 to 8 and he was also found entitled to pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
As such, it cannot be said that the decree is merely a declaratory decree and is not executable.
The other objection of the JD is that the representation of the decree holder was rejected by Hon'ble High Court on administrative side and, therefore, the decree is not executable.
Observations made by Hon'ble High Court on administrative side would not affect the right of the plaintiff to execute the decree in question.
As such merely by rejection of representation of DH, it cannot be said that the decree has become unexecutable."
Shri Suresh Monga, learned State counsel has argued that perusal of the decree dated 1101987 shows that it is merely a declaratory decree which is not capable of execution and only a declaration has been granted in favour of the decree-holder-respondent.
According to the learned counsel the decree-holder respondent is required to file a civil suit for recovery of pay as per the decree instead of filing the execution proceedings.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on para 8 of the Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case Prakash Chand v. SS Grewal, 1975 Crl.
LJ 679.
3.
Having heard the learned counsel at a considerable length, I am of the considered view that the instant petition is liable to be dismissed.
It is true that a declaratory decree merely declares the rights of the decree-holder viz-a-viz. the judgment-debtor and it does not in term direct the judgment- debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or things.
The question, however, is whether in the present case the decree which is sought to be executed could be held merely a declaratory decree or it goes beyond declaration.
To solve the aforementioned controversy it is necessary to make a reference to the operative part of the decree which reads as under :  "It is ordered that the suit of plaintiff for declaration that the plaintiff is senior to defendant Nos. 4 to 8 and order dated 14.6.1968 read with confirmation order dated 5.11.1969 passed by defendant No. 3 in favour of defendant No. 4 and the order of confirmation dated 27.12.1980 passed by defendant No. 3 in favour of defendant No. 5 confirming on the administrative side by the Hon'ble High Court on 1711980 are declared wrong, illegal, inoperative on the rights of the plaintiff and set aside and the plaintiff is held entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted and I decide in favour of the plaintiff.
The parties are left to bear their own costs."
A perusal of the afore-mentioned decree would show that after declaring the DH-respondent as senior to the private defendants therein, the Court had proceeded to set aside the order dated 14.6.1968 read with confirmation order dated 5.11.1969 passed by the JD-petitioner which were in favour of those private defendants.
Similarly order dated 27.12.1980 passed by the JD- petitioner confirming another defendant which was endorsed and approved by the High Court on administrative side on 1711980 - declared wrong, illegal and inoperative on the rights of the decree-holder respondent and those orders were set aside.
As a consequence to the declaration the petitioner was also held entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
Therefore, it is evident that the DH-respondent has been held entitled to get pay for the period during which he would have been promoted.
The executing Court accepted the decree in the afore-said terms and had ordered payment in terms of the decree.
The executing Court has rightly declined the prayer of the decree holder-respondent for the grant of interest as no observation has been made by the Court passing the decree in that regard.
Nothing has been pointed out by the learned State counsel that the relief of difference of pay between the post held by the DH-respondent and the promotional post was not claimed in the suit.
Even otherwise once the Court has found him entitled all to those reliefs by passing a decree the executing Court cannot go behind the decree and decline to grant the relief which has been given by the decree.
The hyper-technical argument that declaratory decree cannot be executed would not be applicable to this case.
I am further of the view that technicalities should be used to advance justice not to defeat justice.
In State of MP v. Mangilal Sharma, 1998(1) SCT 322 (SC) : 1998(2) SCC 510, no decree was passed with regard to entitlement of the employee granting him consequential benefits in respect of arrears of salary.
It was in that context that the Supreme Court held by referring to Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 that a declaratory decree merely declares the legal character or a right of a decree-holder and it does not issue any directions to the judgment-debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or thing.
This view of the Supreme Court becomes explicit from a perusal of para 6 which reads as under :  "A declaratory decree merely declares the right of the (sic) and does not in terms direct the judgment-debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or thing.
Since in the present case decree does not direct reinstatement or payment of arrears of salary the executing Court could not issue any process for the purpose as that would be going outside or beyond the decree.
The respondent as a decree-holder was free to seek his remedy for arrears of salary in the suit for declaration.
The executing Court has no jurisdiction to direct payment of salary or grant any other consequential relief which does not flow directly and necessarily from the declaratory decree.
It is not that if in a suit for declaration where the plaintiff is able to seek further relief he must seek that relief though he may not be in need of that further relief.
In the present suit the plaintiff while seeking relief of declaration would certainly have asked for other reliefs like the reinstatement, arrears of salary and consequential benefits.
He was, however, satisfied with a relief for declaration knowing that the Government would honour the decree and would reinstate him.
We will, therefore, assume that the suit for mere declaration filed by the respondent-plaintiff was maintainable, as the question of maintainability of the suit is not in issue before us."
4.
It is further pertinent to mention that the view taken by the Full Bench of this Court in Parkash Chand's case (supra) has also been approved by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
The principles laid down by the Supreme Court would have applied to the facts of the present case had there been no decree holding that the decree-holder was entitled to get pay for the period during which he had remained promoted.
Therefore, there is no ground to interfere in the well reasoned order of the executing Court.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.