SS NIjjar, J. (Oral) - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners are praying for a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to pay to the petitioners equal pay as is being paid to their counterparts.
Initially, the writ petition had been filed claiming the relief of regularisation.
By efflux of time, relief for regularisation has become infructuous as all of them, according to the learned counsel, have since been regularised.
Relief with regard to regularisation is thus not pressed.
With regard to the claim for equal pay, only few necessary facts need to be noticed.
2.
The petitioners at the relevant time were working on various Class III and Class IV posts such as Pump Operators, Beldar, Sewermen, Chowkidar and Oilmen etc. in the Public Health Department of the State of Punjab.
The petitioners were daily wage employees.
All the petitioners were working against the identical posts manned by the regular employees.
They were performing identical duties.
In fact, there was continuous inter-change between the regular employees and ad hoc employees or daily wagers.
However, regular employees were getting regular grades of Rs. 400-600 and Rs. 325-430/-.
3.
The respondents have filed written statement.
There is no specific denial to the averments made in the writ petition to the effect that the petitioners were performing the identical duties to the duties performed by the employees working on regular basis.
The respondents have sought to contest the case of the petitioners only on the ground that regular employees would be subject to the terms and conditions as enumerated under the statutory service rules whereas the petitioners have been employed on daily wages.
This, in my opinion, can hardly be a justification to deny equal pay to the petitioners.
This proposition of law is no longer res integra.
The Supreme Court in the case of Dhirendra Chamoli and another v. State of UP, 1986(1) LLJ SC 134, observed as under :-  "The casual workers cannot be denied the same salary and conditions of service of regularly appointed class-IV employees when they perform the same duties as class-IV employees appointed on regular basis.
The fact that these casual employees accepted employment with full knowledge that they will be paid only daily wages and they will not get the same salary and conditions of service as other class-IV employees, cannot be a ground to avoid the mandate of equality enshrined in Article-14 of the Constitution of India.
It is implicit in this Article that there must be equal pay for work of equal value.
It makes no difference whether these casual employees are appointed against sanctioned posts or not".
4.
The Supreme Court directed the Government to accord to the casual workers who were performing the same duties as Class-IV employees, the same salary and conditions of service as are being received by Class-IV employees appointed on regular basis.
Similar proposition was reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of Surinder Singh and another v. The Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD and others, AIR 1986 SC 584.
The relevant part is as under :-  "The persons employed on daily wage basis in the CPWD are entitled not only to daily wages but are entitled to the same wages as other permanent employees in the Department employed to do the identical work.
In this connection, it cannot be said that the Doctrine of equal pay for equal work is a mere abstract doctrine and that it is not capable of being enforced in a court of law.
The Central Government, the State Governments, and likewise, all public sector undertakings are expected to function like modern and enlightened employers and argument that the principle of equal pay for equal work is an abstract doctrine which cannot be enforced in a Court of law should ill come from the mouths of the State and State Undertakings."
5.
Mr. Arora, learned counsel for the petitioners at the time of hearing has also brought to the notice of this Court number of other judgments of the Supreme Court and of this Court laying down the same principle of law.
It is not necessary to notice all the judgments cited by Mr. Arora.
However, directions given by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Devinder Singh and others, Civil Appeal No. 4493 of 1997, arising out of SLP(C) No. 1502 of 1997 would be relevant and would entirely cover the claim put forward by the petitioners in this case.
The Supreme Court observed as under :-  "Leave granted.
By consent of learned counsel for the parties, the appeal is taken up for final hearing.
The short question is whether the High Court was justified in directing the appellants-State to pay to the respondents-petitioners before the High Court the salary and allowances as are being paid to the regular employees holding similar posts and whether the respondents could be held entitled to the payment of difference of the pay-scale for the period of last three years from the date of filing of the writ petition.
It is not in dispute and cannot be disputed that the respondents are NMR daily wage Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks.
Their contention before the High Court was that they were doing the same work as regular Ledger Clerks who are recruited by the employer.
Consequently, they must be paid equal pay on the ground of equal work.
In our view, the principle of `Equal Pay for Equal Work' can enure to the respondents to the limited extent that when they were found to have been giving similar work as Ledger Clerks/Ledger Keepers they could have been paid the minimum of the pay-scale of a Ledger Keeper which was available to regularly appointed Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks.
Learned counsel for the respondents could not successfully contend that such an order should not have been passed.
We, therefore, allow this appeal to the limited extent that though the respondents are held limited on the principle of Equal pay for Equal work to get the salary available to the Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks who are regularly appointed Ledger Keepers and they cannot be straightaway paid the running time scale as they were not regularly appointed as Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks.
If the respondents claim to be regularised, it will be open to the respondents to approach the appellants for the same which request obviously will be considered by the appellants on its own merits.
The direction issued by the High Court in favour of the respondents entitling them to get the salary and allowances as regularly appointed employees is set aside and instead it is directed that the respondents will be entitled to get the minimum of the pay scale available to the Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks with permissible allowances on that basis and the difference between the emoluments already paid to each of the respondents and those payable to them pursuant to the present order will be payable to the respondents for a period of three years prior to the filing of the writ petition and thereafter minimum salary in the time scale of Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks with appropriate allowances thereon shall be available to the respondents so long they work as daily wage Ledger Keepers/Ledger Clerks.
In view of the present order if in case any amount is found to have been paid to the respondents in excess it will be adjusted in a phased and reasonable manner so that the respondents may not be out of pocket to a large extent.
No costs."
6.
Following the aforesaid observations, I am of the considered opinion that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The respondents are directed to grant to the petitioners the minimum of pay scale available to the regular employees on the corresponding posts with permissible allowances.
The difference between emoluments already paid to each of the petitioners and those payable to them will be payable for a period of three years and two months prior to the filing of the writ petition.
Thereafter, minimum salary of time scale of appropriate category with appropriate allowances thereon as revised from time to time shall also be paid to the petitioners so long as they work or have worked as daily wagers.
Let the benefits flowing from this order be given to the petitioners within a period of three months from the receipt of a certificate copy of this order.
Petition allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.