Mukul Mudgal, J (Oral) - Rule.
2.
With the consent of the counsel for the parties, the matter is taken up for final hearing.
3.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner not having completed 240 days in service is not claiming any benefit under Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act in this Court.
However, in so far as Section 25G & 25H of the Act are concerned, the Labour Court while holding against the petitioner has relied upon a judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court reported in Kamal Central Cooperative Bank Ltd v. PO Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Rohtak & others, 1994 II LLJ 1005 to hold that any of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act are not available to the petitioner who does not fulfil the criteria of having worked for 240 days.
Sections 25G and 11 of the Act read as under :  "25G.
Procedure for retrenchment.
- Where any workman in an industrial establishment, who is a citizen of India, is to be retrenched and be belongs to a particular category of workmen in the establishment in the absence of any agreement between the employer and the workman in this behalf, the employer shall ordinarily retrench the workmen who was be last person to be employed in that category, unless for reasons to be recorded the employer retrenches any other workman.
25H.
Re-employment of retrenched workmen.
- Where any workmen are retrenched and the employer proposes to take into his employ any persons he shall in such manner as may be prescribed, give an opportunity [to the retrenched workmen who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re- employment and such retrenched workmen] who offer themselves for re-employment shall have preference over other persons."
4.
A view contrary to the above view was taken by this Court's judgment reported as 2003 VI AD (Delhi) 256.
Accordingly it is clear that in so far as the Tribunal and Labour Courts of NCT of Delhi are concerned they are bound to follow the judgments of this Court and not that of Punjab & Haryana High Court.
Accordingly the writ petition is partly allowed and the matter is remanded back for consideration in accordance with law on the question of Section 25G & H as per the provisions laid down in judgment of this Court in 2003 VI AD (Delhi) 256 & the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Samistha Dubey v. City Board Etawah, 1999(2) SCT 284 (SC) : 1999 II AD (SC) 257.
Medical Supdt.
GTB Hospital, Shahdara v Balbir Singh, 1997 LLR 628, Kamlesh Singh v. Presiding Officer and Another, 1987 SCC (Lab) 75.
Accordingly, the writ petition stands disposed of.
The parties to appear before the Labour Court-I on 21st January, 2004.
Petition partly allowed.