GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing order dated 442001 (Annexure P4) vide which Chief Warden Hostel, Pt. BD Sharma, PGIMS, Rohtak rejected his demand for regularisation of service and payment of salary in the regular pay scale.
He has further prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise his service on the post of Chowkidar in terms of the policy framed by the Government of Haryana which was circulated vide letter dated 1831996.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that on the basis of sanction granted by Director, Medical College, Rohtak, the petitioner was engaged as Chowkidar in Boys Hostel w.e.f.
1.12.1993.
Vide office order dated 29.6.1994 (Annexure P.1), the Director sanctioned payment of wages to the petitioner and nine other Common Room Attendants and Chowkidars at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner, i.e., Rs. 1025/- per month with a stipulation that the expenditure will be debited to Sub-Head Common Room under Students Funds, Medical College, Rohtak.
After more than 7 years of continuous service, the petitioner sent legal notice dated 122001 to Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Government, Haryana, Health Department and Director-cum-Principal, Pt. BD Sharma, PGIMS, Rohtak for regularisation of his service in accordance with the policy framed by the State Government by asserting that the services of similarly situated person, namely, Hari Singh had been regularised in pursuance of the direction given by the High Court.
His claim was rejected by Chief Warden Hostel, Pt. BD Sharma, PGIMS, Rohtak on the grounds that he had not been appointed against a sanctioned post and that he was paid wages out of Students Funds and not from the College's Funds.
3.
Shri SP Chahar relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in GB Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 2000(4) SCT 295 and of the Division Bench of this Court in Hari Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(2) RSJ 749 and argued that the petitioner is entitled to be regularised in service in accordance with the policy instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular letter dated 7.3.1996 read with letter dated 1831996.
Shri Chahar submitted that appointment of the petitioner with the sanction of the Director and payment of salary at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner are clearly indicative of the fact that he was employed in the service of the college and the mere fact that he was paid out of Students Funds cannot be made basis for denying him the benefit of the policy of regularisation.
4.
Ms. Ritu Bahri, learned Deputy Advocate General referred to order dated 25.11.1998 passed in C.W.P.
No. 1593 of 1998-Mulakh Raj v. State of Haryana and others and argued that the petitioner cannot claim regularisation of service in terms of the policy framed by the State Government because he was not appointed on a sanctioned post and he was paid out of Students Funds.
She, however, conceded that the petitioner was appointed with the sanction of the Director-cum-Principal and was paid at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
She also conceded that the petitioner has been continuously working as Chowkidar in the Boys Hostel of the College.
5.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
It is an undisputed position that hostels are integral part of Pt. BD Sharma, PGIMS and Dental College, Rohtak.
The same have been established and are maintained by the authorities of the Institute and the College.
The employees engaged as Attendants and Chowkidars work under the supervision and control of the authorities of the Institute and the College.
The petitioner was engaged as Chowkidar with the sanction of the Director of the College and was paid at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
Therefore, the mere fact that the petitioner was paid out of Students Funds cannot be made a ground to deny him the benefit of the policy framed by the government for regularisation of the services of daily wage employees.
6.
In Parimal Chandra Raha and others v. Life Insurance Corporation of India, 1995(3) SCT 248 (SC) : JT 1995(3) SC 288, the Supreme Court considered the question relating to status of the employees of the canteen being run in the premises of the office of Life Insurance Corporation and held that the canteen workers are employees of the Corporation.
Paragraph 31 of that judgment, which contains discussion on this issue, reads as under :  "The facts on record on the other hand, show in unmistakable terms that canteen services have been provided to the employees of the Corporation for a long time and it is the Corporation which has been from time to time, taking steps to provide the said services.
The canteen committees, the cooperative society of the employees and the contractors have only been acting for and on behalf of the Corporation as its agencies to provide the said services.
The Corporation has been taking active interest even in organising the canteen committees.
It is further the Corporation which has been appointing the contractors to run the canteens and entering into agreements with them for the purpose.
The terms of the contract further show that they are in the nature of directions to the contractor about the manner in which the canteen should be run and the canteen services should be rendered to the employees.
Both the appointment of the contractor and the tenure of the contract is as per the stipulations made by the Corporation in the agreement.
Even the prices of the items served, the place where they should be cooked, the hours during which and the place where they should be served, are dictated by the Corporation.
The Corporation has also reserved the right to modify the terms of the contract unilaterally and the contractor has no say in the matter.
Further, the record shows that almost all the workers of the canteen like the appellants have been working in the canteen continuously for a long time whatever the mechanism employed by the Corporation to supervise and control the working of the canteen.
Although the supervising and managing body of the canteen has changed hands from time to time, the workers have remained constant.
This is apart from the fact that the infrastructure for running the canteen, viz., the premises, furniture, electricity water etc. is supplied by the Corporation to the managing agency for running the canteen.
Further, it cannot be disputed that the canteen service is essential for the efficient working of the employees and of the offices of the Corporation.
In fact, by controlling the hours during which the counter and floor service will be made available to the employees by the canteen, the Corporation has also tried to avoid the waste of time which would otherwise be the result if the employees have to go outside the offices in search of such services.
The service is available to all the employees in the premises of the office itself and continuously, as pointed out earlier.
The employees of the Corporation have all along been making the complaints about the poor or inadequate service rendered by the canteen to them only to the Corporation and the Corporation has been taking steps to remedy the defects in the canteen service.
Further, whenever there was a temporary breakdown in the canteen service, on account of the agitation or of strike by the canteen workers, it is the Corporation which has been taking active interest in getting the dispute resolved and the canteen workers have also looked upon the Corporation as their real employer and joined it as a party to the industrial dispute raised by them.
In the circumstances, we are of the view that the canteen has become a part of the establishment of the Corporation.
The canteen committees, the cooperative society of the employees and the contractors engaged from time to time are in reality the agencies of the Corporation and are only a veil between the Corporation and canteen workers.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the canteen workers are in fact the employees of the Corporation."
7.
In GB Pant University of Agriculture and Technology v. State of Uttar Pradesh (supra), the Supreme Court, while examining the correctness of the directions given by Allahabad High Court to treat the workers of the Cafeteria of the University as employees of the University and regularise their services in accordance with the regulations framed by it, observed as under :  "Admittedly, Cafeteria employees need succour for livelihood - would they continue to remain half-fed and half-clad as long as they live - is this is the society that we feel proud of ?
Is this the guarantee provided by the founding fathers of our Constitution or is this the concept of socialism which they conceived ?
None of the answers can possibly be in the affirmative.
The situation is rather awesome and deplorable - the University by compulsion directs students to be residents of hostel with a definite ban on having food from outside agencies excepting under special circumstances and the provider of food, namely, the staff of the Cafeteria ought not to be treated as an employee of the University - whose employees they are if we may ask and we think it would not be impertinent on our part to ask the same - is it the consumer of food ?
Since when the consumer of food becomes the employer ?
These are the questions which remain unanswered.
The society shall have to thrive.
The society shall have to prosper and this prosperity can only come in the event of there being a wider vision for total social good and benefit.
It is not bestowing any favour to anybody but it is a mandatory obligation to see that the society thrives.
The deprivation of the weaker section we had for long but time has now come to cry halt and it is for the law courts to rise up to the occasion and grant relief to a seeker of a just cause and just grievance.
Economic justice is not a mere legal jargon but in the new millenium, it is the obligation for all to confer this economic justice to a seeker.
Society is to remain, social justice is the order and economic justice is the rule of the day.
Narrow pedantic approach to statutory documents no longer survives.
The principle of corporate jurisprudence is now being imbibed on to industrial jurisprudence and there is a long catena of cases in regard thereto - the law thus is not a state of fluidity since the situation is more or less settled.
As regards interpretation widest possible amplitude shall have to be offered in the matter of interpretation of statutory documents under industrial jurisprudence.
The draconian concept is no longer available.
Justice - social and economic, as noticed above ought to be made available with utmost expedition so that the socialistic pattern of the society as dreamed of by the founding fathers can thrive and have its foundation so that the future generations do not live in the dark and cry for social and economic justice."
8.
In Hari Singh's case (supra), this Court examined the claim of the petitioner, who too was employed in the service of the Institute for regularisation of service and upheld the same.
Paragraph 5 of the order passed in that case which has direct bearing on the claim of the petitioner, is extracted below :  "5.
After hearing Shri Sharma and Shri Parmod Goyal, we are convinced that the order Annexure P.9 passed by respondent No. 2 refusing to regularize the services of the petitioner cannot be held (upheld ?)
because it is ex-facie contrary to the directions given by the High Court.
A bare reading of the order dated 31.3.1997 passed in C.W.P.
No. 16872 of 1996 shows that while deciding the previous writ petitions filed by Suresh Kumari and the petitioner, the Court had taken cognizance of the plea raised by the respondents that the petitioners, who were appointed against the posts funded by amalgamted fund were not entitled to be regularised in terms of the instructions issued by the Government.
Rather, after taking note of the nature of duties performed by the petitioners and the length of service rendered by them, the Court gave an unequivocal direction to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners against the sanctioned posts of Clerks which were lying vacant.
In view of this, it is not permissible for the respondent to contend that the petitioner is not entitled to be regularised in service because he was paid salary out of the amalgamated fund.
The respondent No. 2, in our view, cannot refuse regularisation of the services and the petitioner on a ground which was not accepted by the High Court in the previous litigation."
9.
In our opinion, the ratio of above noted three judgments is squarely applicable to the case of the petitioner.
It is an undisputed position that as on the date of filing the writ petition, he had completed more than 7 years service as Chowkidar.
As on today, he has completed more than 11 years service.
Therefore, there could be no justification to deny him benefit of the policy of regularisation which is applicable to the service of the Institute/College only on the ground that he was paid out of Students' Funds.
10.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision contained in Annexure P4 is quashed with a direction to respondent No. 2/competent authority to consider the petitioner's case for regularisation of service in accordance with the policy contained in circular letter dated 7.3.1996 read with circular letter dated 1831996 and pass appropriate order within a period of 3 months from the date of presentation of certified copy of this order.
If it is found that the petitioner fulfils the conditions enumerated in the policy, then his services be regularised and he be given all consequential benefits.
If, on the other hand, it is found that the petitioner does not fulfil the conditions enumerated in circular letters dated 7.3.1996 and 1831996, then the concerned authority shall consider his case for regularisation of service in accordance with the policies framed by the government after 1831996 and pass appropriate order within next three months.
11.
Copy of the order be given dasti on payment of the fee prescribed for urgent application.
Petition allowed.