GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing order dated 982001 (Annexure P6) passed by Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Punjab under Rule 10 read with Rule 5(i) to (iv) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short the `Rules') and communications dated 1762002 (Annexure P8) and 2122003 (Annexure P10) vide which he was informed that the appeal filed against the order of punishment has been dismissed.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Clerk on 181973 in the office of Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
He was promoted as Assistant on 21.11.1977 and as Senior Assistant in 1988.
In September, 2000, a regular departmental enquiry was initiated against him under Rule 10 of the Rules on the following charges :-  "Shri Hari Singh was working as Tehsildar, Nihalsinghwala in the year 1999.
He had done the following irregularities while sanctioning Mutation No. 6274 dated 5499, inheritance of Santokh Singh s/o Jion Singh, R/o Mehdev Ke.
a) This mutation was entered in the name of his widow Mukhtiar Kaur, but Shri Hari Singh sanctioned the mutation in the name of his nephew - Jagtar Singh & Kamldeep Singh on the basis of Will.
Mukhtiar Kaur was the legal heir of deceased so she cannot be ignored without hearing in this mutation.
b) Will on the basis of which Mutation was sanctioned was prepared on 19199 and Santokh Singh died on 2299 and Will was registered under Section 40-41 of Indian Registration Act in March, 1999 after the death of Santokh Singh.
Thus this will was entered after the death of Santokh Singh and since Mukhtiar Kaur natural heir was being ignored a doubt would have arisen in the mind of Tehsildar and before sanctioning of mutation all facts were required to be verified and, therefore, it was compulsory to hear Mukhtiar Kaur.
c) DC Moga issued instruction on 14.2.98 that the mutation on the basis of unregistered Wills and Wills registered under Section 40, 41 of Indian Registration Act shall not be sanctioned by the Tehsildar but these Wills be sanctioned by Sub-Divisional Officers.
Shri Hari Singh violated the order of DC by sanctioning this mutation.
Therefore, it is clear that if Hari Singh, Tehsildar had taken correct action at the time of sanctioning of mutation and Mukhtiar Kaur was heard, then the position would have been cleared.
This mutation being contested would have gone to the Court of Collector for hearing.
Tehsildar intentionally misused his power and ignored Mukhtiar Kaur."
3.
The petitioner submitted detailed reply Annexure P5 to controvert the allegations.
After considering the same, Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Punjab vide order dated 982001 (Annexure P6) imposed the penalty of stoppage of one annual increment without cumulative effect.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of punishment was dismissed by the State Government and he was informed about this vide Annexure P8, the relevant portion of which is reproduced below :-  "It is to inform on the above subject that the appeal filed by you on 28.9.2001 has been rejected by the competent authority after consideration."
4.
On receiving Annexure P8, the petitioner submitted application dated 422003 (Annexure P9) to Deputy Secretary, Revenue (E) for supply of detailed order passed by the competent authority.
In reply, he was informed vide Annexure P10 that his appeal has been rejected by the competent authority and the punishment awarded vide order dated 982001 has been kept intact.
The relevant extracts of Annexure P10 are also reproduced below :-  "You are informed on the above subject with reference to you letter that your appeal has been rejected by the competent authority and the punishment awarded vide the Deptt.
order dated 982001, issued vide endst.
No. 2(1) 77/99-RE 1 (6)/5722 dated 27.8.2001 has been kept intact.." 5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
In our opinion, it is not necessary to adjudicate on the legality of the order of punishment because we are convinced that the decision of the appellate authority is liable to be quashed on the ground that it is not in consonance with the mandate of Rule 19(2) of the Rules and also because it does not satisfy the requirement of a speaking order.
6.
Rule 19(1) and (2) of the Rules which relates to consideration of the appeal, reads as under :-  "19.
Consideration of appeal - (1) In the case of an appeal against an order of suspension, the appellate authority shall consider whether in the light of the provisions of rule 4 and having regard to the circumstances of the case, the order of suspension is justified or not and confirm or revoke the order accordingly.
(2) In the case of an appeal against an order imposing any of the penalties specified in rule 5 or enhancing any penalty imposed under the said rule, the appellate authority shall consider - (a) whether the procedure laid down in these rules has been complied with, and if not, whether such non-compliance has resulted in the violation of any provision of the Constitution of India or in the failure of justice;  (b) whether the findings of the punishing authority are warranted by the evidence on the record; and (c) whether the penalty or the enhanced penalty imposed is adequate, inadequate or severe; and pass orders - (i) confirming, enhancing, reducing; or (ii) setting aside the penalty; or remitting the case to the authority which imposed or to any other authority with such direction as it may deem fit in the circumstances of the case."
7.
An analysis of the rules reproduced above shows that while deciding an appeal filed against the order of punishment, the appellate authority is required to consider not only procedural aspect of the enquiry and the merits of the findings recorded by the punishing authority but also the quantum of punishment and then pass appropriate order.
8.
In Ram Chander v Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 1173, the Supreme Court interpreted Rule 22(2) of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules 1968, which is pari materia to Rule 19(2) of the Rules, and held as under :-  "In the absence of a requirement in the statute or the rules, there is no duty cast on an appellate authority to give reasons where the order is one of affirmance.
But, Rule 22(2) of the Railway Servants Rules in express terms requires the Railway Board to record its findings on the three aspects stated therein.
Rule 22(2) provides that in the case of an appeal against an order imposing any of the penalties specified in Rule 6 or enhancing any penalty imposed under the said rule, the appellate authority shall "consider" as to the matters indicated therein.
The word "consider" has different shades of meaning and must in Rule 22(2), in the context in which it appears, mean an objective consideration by the Railway Board after due application of mind which implies the giving of reasons for its decision.
It is of utmost importance after the Forty-Second Amendment as interpreted by the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case (1985) 3 SCC 398 that the Appellate Authority must not only give a hearing to the Government Servant concerned but also pass a reasoned order dealing with the contentions raised by him in the appeal.
Reasoned decisions by tribunals, such as the Railway Board in the present case, will promote public confidence in the administrative process.
An objective consideration is possible only if the delinquent servant is heard and given a chance to satisfy the Authority regarding the final orders that may be passed on his appeal.
Considerations of fairplay and justice also require that such a personal hearing should be given."
9.
A bare reading of Annexure P8 and P10 shows that the appellate authority has not considered either of the factors specified in Rule 19(2) of the Rules and arbitrarily rejected the appeal without assigning any reason whatsoever for upholding the order of punishment.
It is, thus, clear that dismissal of the appeal filed by the petitioner is vitiated due to violation of Rules 19(2) of the Rules.
10.
The decision of the appellate authority is liable to be quashed on an additional ground, i.e., non-compliance of one of the facets of natural justice namely, recording of reasons by every authority entrusted with quasi- judicial functions and communications thereof to the affected party.
the requirement of recording of reasons and communication thereof has been read as an integral part of the concept of fair procedure.
The necessity of giving reasons flows from the concept of rule of law which constitutes one of the corner stones of our constitutional set up.
The administrative authorities charted with the duty to act judicially cannot decide the matters on considerations of policy or expediency.
The requirement of recording of reasons by such authorities is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the rule of law.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and minimises arbitariness in the decision making process.
Another reason which makes it imperative for the quasi-judicial authorities to give reasons is that their orders are not only subject to the right of the aggrieved persons to challenge the same by filing statutory appeal and revision but also by filing writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Such decisions can also be challenged by way of appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
The High Courts have the power to issue writ of certiorari to quash the orders passed by a quasi judicial authority/Tribunal.
Likewise, in appeal the Apex Court can nullify such order/decision.
This power of judicial review can be effectively exercised by the Superior Courts only if the order under challenge contains reasons.
If such order is cryptic and devoid of reasons, the Courts cannot effectively exercise the power of judicial review and we cannot countenance a situation in which the administrative authorities vested with the power to decide the rights of the parties may stultify the powers of the Court simply by not recording reasons in support of their decisions or by refraining from communicating such reasons to the affected person.
This is the reason why the Courts have insisted on rigorous compliance of the requirement of recording of reasons and communication thereof by every quasi judicial authority.
Some of the judicial precedents, which can appropriately be cited to support the above mentioned proposition, are :-  1.
Harnagar Sugar Mills Limited v. Shyam Sunder Jhunjhunwala, AIR 1961 SC 1669; 2.
Bhagat Raja v Union of India and others, AIR 1967 SC 1606; 3.
Travancore Rayon Ltd v . Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 862; 4.
Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar v. State of UP, AIR 1970 SC 1302; 5.
Woolcombers of India Limited v. Woolcombers Workers Union, AIR 1973 SC 2758; 6.
M/s Ajantha Industries and others v. Central Board of Direct Taxes, New Delhi and others, AIR 1976 SC 437; 7.
Siemens Engineering and Manufacturing Company of India Limited v Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1785; 8.
SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984 : 1991(1) SCT 241 (SC); 9.
Shanti Prasad Agarwalla v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 814; 10.
Krishna Swami v. Union of India, 1992(3) SCT.
456 : AIR 1993 SC 1407; and 11.
ML Jaggi v. Mahanagar Telephones Nigam Ltd, 1996(1) R.R.R.
646 : AIR 1996 SC 2476.
11.
In Testeels Ltd v. NM Desai, Conciliation Officer and another, AIR 1970 Gujarat 1, a Full Bench of the Gujarat High Court has made an extremely lucid enunciation of law on the subject and we can do no better than to extract some of the observations made in that decision.
The same are :-  "The necessity of giving reasons flows as a necessary corollary from the rule of law which constitutes one of the basic principles of the Indian Constitutional set-up.
The administrative authorities having a duty to act judicially cannot therefore decide on considerations of policy or expediency.
They must decide the matter solely on the facts of the particular case, solely on the material before them and apart from any extraneous considerations by applying pre-existing legal norms to factual situations.
Now the necessity of giving reasons is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the duty to act judicially.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and excludes or, at any rate, minimises arbitrariness in the decision-making process.
Another reason which compels making of such an order is based on the power of judicial review which is possessed by the High Court under Article 226 and the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution.
These Courts have the power under the said provisions to quash by certiorari a quasi- judicial order made by an Administrative Officer and this power of review can be effectively exercised only if the order is a speaking order.
In the absence of any reasons in support of the order, the said courts cannot examine the correctness of the order under review.
The High Court and the Supreme Court would be powerless to interfere so as to keep the administrative officer within the limits of the law.
The result would be that the power of judicial review would be stultified and no redress being available to the citizen, there would be insidious encouragement to arbitrariness and caprice.
If this requirement is insisted upon, then, they will be subject to judicial scrutiny and correction."
12.
In M/s Brij Bassi Hitech Udyog Ltd v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) P.L.R.
538, a Division Bench of this Court dealt with an issue whether, while exercising appellate/revisional powers under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, the Sales Tax Tribunal is required to record reasons and communicate the same to the affected party.
After making reference to the judicial precedents on the subject, the Court held that the Tribunal is not only bound to record reasons in support of its decision but also communicate the same to the affected person.
13.
In the present case, the appellate authority neither considered the points raised by the petitioner in his appeal nor assigned any reason for rejecting the same.
Therefore, there is no escape from the conclusion that Annexures P.8 and P10 are violative of the rules of natural justice.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexures P8 and P10 are declared illegal and are quashed with the direction that the appellate authority shall decide the appeal fresh by passing a speaking order.
The needful be done within a period of two months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.