JS Khehar, J - Out of the 25 petitioners of Civil Writ Petition No. 10957 of 1999, 21 petitioners were inducted into the service of the Food and Supplies Department, Haryana, as Junior Analysts by way of direct recruitment.
Petitioners No. 12, 15, 17 and 19 were inducted into the service of the Food and Supplies Department, Haryana as Sub-Inspectors but were subsequently promoted to the post of Junior Analyst.
At the time of filing of the writ petition, all the petitioners were substantively holding the post of Junior Analyst.
2.
Conditions of service of Sub-Inspectors and Junior Analyst including the manner of their recruitment are regulated by the Haryana Food and Supplies Department Sub Offices (Group `C') Service Rules, 1982, (hereinafter referred to as the `1982 Rules').
Rule 9(1)(o) of the 1982 Rules prescribes the sources of recruitment for the post of Junior Analyst.
The aforesaid rule is being extracted hereunder, for the facility of reference :-  "9(1) Recruitment to the service be made :- (o) In the case of Junior Analyst -  i) 33% by promotion from amongst Sub-Inspectors; and (ii) 67% by direct appointment."
A perusal of the aforesaid rule reveals that 33% of the post of Junior Analyst are to be filled up by way of promotion from amongst Sub-Inspectors.
The controversy raised by the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10957 of 1999 was that the Junior Analysts should be placed in a pay scale higher than the pay scale of the post of Sub-Inspector.
In this behalf, the petitioners invited the attention of this Court to Appendix `A' of the 1982 rules, wherein the pay scale of the post of Junior Analyst has been specified as Rs. 400-660/- whereas the pay scale of the post of Sub-Inspector (which is a feeder post to the post of Junior Analyst) has also been specified as Rs. 400-660/-.
For the cadre of Sub-Inspectors, Appendix `A' also provides for a selection grade of Rs. 480-760 (for 20% of the permanent posts).
Since a higher selection grade has been provided for the cadre of Sub-Inspectors, it is pointed out that an eventuality may arise where an employee substantively holding a cadre post of Sub-Inspector could draw a salary higher than maximum emoluments payable as salary for the post of Junior Analyst.
The contention of the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10957 of 1999 is that the petitioners cannot be placed in a scale inferior to the pay scale envisaged for the feeder post.
In this behalf, it was pointed out that promotion by itself envisages the discharge of duties and responsibilities of a higher nature.
In addition thereto, the petitioners through their pleadings had invited the attention of this Court to the conditions for eligibility for appointment by promotion to the post of Sub-Inspectors and Junior Analyst delineated in Appendix `B' of the 1982 rules.
Relevant extract thereof is being reproduced hereunder :-  APPENDIX-B S.No.
Name of Post Academic Qualification and Exp.
for appointment by promotion.
14.
Sub Inspector Three years exp.
as a Clerk.
15.
Junior Analyst Two years exp.
as a Sub Inspector."
From the aforesaid extract of Appendix `B', the petitioners wished to elucidate that for appointment by promotion to the post of Sub-Inspector only, 3 years experience against the lowest ministerial post of Clerk has been envisaged, whereas for promotion to the post of Junior Analyst, 2 years experience as Sub-Inspector has been stipulated.
According to the petitioners, the aforesaid requirement also affirms the superiority of the post of Junior Analyst vis-a-vis the post of Sub-Inspector.
3.
Besides the aforesaid averments based on statutory rules regulating the conditions of service of the petitioners, it is pointed out that the pay scale of the post of Junior Analyst has always been higher than that for the post of Sub-Inspector upto the year 1979, however, on the revision of pay scales w.e.f.
1.4.1979, the anomaly in question was created.
Despite the fact that the petitioners had filed various representations and despite the fact that the Director, Food and Supplies had recommended the claim of the petitioners for a higher scale, with reference to the pay scale for the post of Sub- Inspector, through a communication dated 2981980 (Annexure P-3 with the writ petition), the State Government had failed to redress the petitioners grievances.
The aforesaid apathy at the hands of the Government had prompted the petitioners to file Civil Writ Petition No. 10957 of 1999.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by an order dated 342001, which is being extracted hereunder :-  "The controversy raised in this petition is covered by the decision of this Court in the case of Sunder Lal Jain v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 564 (P&H) : 1995(1) SLR 215 and in Civil Writ Petition No. 8960 of 1999, titled Pratap Singh Narwal v. State of Haryana and another, decided on 732001, laying down the principle that the promotional post is required to be paid higher pay scale than the feeder post.
Admittedly, the petitioners who are Junior Analysts are working on higher posts as compared to the Sub- Inspector which is in fact a feeder post.
According to the petitioners, the Sub Inspectors are getting higher pay as compared to the petitioners.
It is stated that the Anomaly Committee considered this aspect and directed the State Government to remove the anomaly.
In view of the decisions of this Court, referred to above, we dispose of this petition directing the respondents to decide the claim of the petitioners vis-a-vis the Sub Inspectors in the same department from the dates the anomaly was created, within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
However, the payments of arrears shall be restricted to 38 months immediately from the date of filing of the petition."
The State Government filed petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 68 of 2002 against the order passed by this Court on 342001.
The same was, however, dismissed as withdrawn on 822002.
Whereafter on 2632003, after the passage of more than one year since the dismissal of the Petition for Special Leave to Appeal, the State Government filed a Review Application under Order XLVII Rule 1.
The instant order is being passed in furtherance of the plea raised in the aforesaid review application.
4.
In the review application, the applicants have raised following issues :-  "3.
That some material facts could not be brought to the notice of this Hon'ble Court before passing of the order dated 342001 and therefore, the order dated 342001 deserves to be reviewed on the followings grounds :- i) That the facts and circumstances of the CWP No. 10957 of 1999, Rattan Singh Thakar and others v. State of Haryana and others are all together different from the facts and circumstances of CWP No. 8960 of 1999, titled as Partap Singh Narwal v. State of Haryana and Sunder Lal Jain v. State, 1985(1) SLR 215. ii) That so far as the facts concerning the CWP No. 4176 of 1998, filed by Sh. Sunder Lal Jain and others v. State of Haryana are concerned, in their case as per provisions contained in service rules Senior Laboratory Assistants are promoted from the post of Jr.
Lab Assistants and Jr.
Lab Assistants are promoted from the post of Lab Attendants and the qualifications and duties of all the three categories, as referred to above, are different but in their case the State Government placed all the three posts in the same pay scale w.e.f.
111986 and thus the petitioners who were holding the posts of Sr.
Lab Assistant/Jr.
Lab Assistant with higher academic qualifications and more technical jobs to perform, filed the CWP No. 4176 of 1998 and the Hon'ble High Court decided the same on 12101994 that the authorities responsible for fixing the pay scale of the petitioners immediately should get down and see through that the justice is done to the petitioner by fixing them in a pay scale commensurate to their nature of duties and posts.
iii) As regards the CWP No. 8960 of 1999, filed by Sh. Pratap Singh Narwal v. State of Haryana and others, it is submitted that the petitioner Partap Singh Narwal was Assistant Apprenticeship Advisor Junior (A Group) in Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana, Chandigarh and a graduate in Engineering.
The said post is governed by statutory rules called the Haryana Industrial Training and Vocational Education Department (Group-A) Service Rules, 1989.
Under these rules three posts namely, Assistant Director Technical Group A Junior, Principal Technical Industrial Training Institute Group A Junior and Assistant Apprenticeship Advisor (Technical) Group A Junior are of equal status.
All the above three categories are entitled to be promoted to the post of Deputy Director Technical/Deputy Apprenticeship Advisor (Technical) Group A Senior.
When the pay scales were revised with effect from 1479, all the three categories were granted the same pay scale i.e. Rs. 900-1700.
There is only one post of Assistant Apprenticeship Advisor (Technical) Group A Junior.
The petitioners contended that the post of Assistant Apprenticeship Advisor (Technical) Group A Junior can be filled by direct recruitment or by promotion from the Assistant Director (Technical) Group B In this way the post of Assistant Apprenticeship Advisor (Technical) Group A Junior is higher post and Assistant Director (Technical) Group B is a feeder post.
Therefore, the pay scale of the feeder post should be lower and in this way the claim of the petitioner for the grant of higher scale cannot be denied.
The petitioner urged that the scales of the feeder post and the post, which the petitioner is holding, is identical and therefore, the petitioner must be given a higher scale.
The Hon'ble High Court vide order dated 732001 accepted the CWP with the directions that the State should consider the claim of the petitioner on a higher scale as may be deemed appropriate in the light of the judgment already delivered in the case of Sunder Lal Jain and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1985(1) SLR 215. iv) So far as the facts and circumstances in the CWP No. 10957 of 1999 filed by Sh. Rattan Singh v. State of Haryana and others are concerned, it is respectfully submitted that the Hon'ble High Court failed to appreciate that the post of Sub Inspector is not a feeder post of Junior Analyst to the extent of cent percent.
As per provisions contained in the service rules 67% posts of Junior Analyst are to be filled by direct recruitment from those candidates who possess Matric with IInd Division with science or its equivalent.
It is further submitted that only 33% posts are given to those Sub-Inspector who possess two years experience on the post of Sub-Inspectors on the basis of option otherwise the Sub-Inspectors on the basis of option otherwise the Sub- Inspectors are promoted to the post of Inspectors.
It would be thus clear that 33% posts of Junior Analyst are given to those Sub- Inspectors who submit their options and not on the basis of seniority-cum- merit alone.
Whereas in the case of CWP No. 4176 of 1998 titled as Sh. Sunder Lal Jain and other, CWP No. 8960 of 1999, titled as Partap Singh Narwal v. State of Haryana there is no question of option.
Their promotions are made on the basis of seniority- cum-merit and there is no other channel or promotion in their case.
The petitioner in the writ petition No. 10957 of 1999 are misleading the Hon'ble Court from the actual facts in the matter.
v) That the case of the petitioner was referred to the Anomaly Committee for consideration and the said committee observed that there is no anomaly.
The pay scale of the post of Sub-Inspector Food and Supplies and Junior Analyst both being Class III were clubbed in 1.4.1979 in the scale of Rs. 400-600 (Selection Grade Rs. 480-760) and in 1986 the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 and in 1996 the pay scale was Rs. 3050-4590.
If the pay scale of Junior Analyst had been reduced below Sub-Inspector Food and Supplies it would have a case of anomaly but this has not happened.
The Pay Commission w.e.f.
1979 and 1986 has reduced the number of standard to 30 by clubbing various pay scales.
Hence in the present case no anomaly is made out.
vi) That from 1979 the pay scale of Sub-Inspector and Junior Analyst are the same and after a span of 20 years the issue by the petitioner is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches."
None of the pleas raised in the review application constitute a valid ground for review of the judgment rendered by this Court on 342001.
Ordinarily, we would have dismissed the review application at the out-set.
The only inference that can legitimately be drawn on the action of the authorities in filing a review application, consequent upon the withdrawal of the Petition for Special Leave to Appeal by the Apex Court, after a lapse of more than one year, is some strongly motivated intent in an administrative functionary, to deny the petitioners the benefit of the order passed by this Court on 342001.
During the course of hearing, however, learned counsel for the applicant Sh. Rajbir Sehrawat, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana raised a number of pleas beyond the pleadings in the writ petition as well as the pleadings in the review application.
These pleas most certainly transgressed the scope of review delineated in Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and also deserved to be rejected at the out-set (without the necessity of recording reasons).
Be that as it may, in the vehement manner of commitment to the cause in which arguments have been addressed and also for setting at rest the agony that may have persuaded the administrative functionary in question in not complying with the order passed by this Court on 342001, we have persuaded ourselves to deal with the various pleas raised during the course of arguments.
5.
The first contention of the applicants is based on the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in Secretary, Finance Department v. West Bengal Registration Services Association, 1992(2) S.C.T.
301 : AIR 1992 SC 1203.
Learned counsel for the applicants placed reliance on the following observations made by the Apex Court, in the aforesaid case :-  ".....it is well-settled that equation of posts and determination of pay scales is the primary function of the executive and not the judiciary and, therefore, ordinarily courts will not enter upon the task of job evaluation which is generally left to expert bodies like the Pay Commissions, etc.
But that is not to say that the court has no jurisdiction and the aggrieved employees have no remedy if they are unjustly treated by arbitrary State action or inaction.
Courts must, however, realise that job evaluation is both a difficult and time consuming task which even expert bodies having the assistance of staff with requisite expertise have found difficult to undertake sometimes on account of want of relevant data and scales for evaluating performances of different groups of employees.
This would call for a constant study of the external comparisons and internal relativities on account of the changing nature of job requirements.
The factors which may have to be kept in view for job evaluation may include (i) the work programme of his department (ii) the nature of contribution expected to him (iii) the extent of his responsibility and accountability in the discharge of his diverse duties and functions (iv) the extent and nature of freedoms/limitations available or imposed on him in the discharge of his duties (v) the extent of powers vested in him (vi) the extent of his dependence on superiors for the exercise of his powers (vii) the need to co-ordinate with other departments, etc. We have also referred to the history of the service and the effort of various bodies to reduce the total number of pay scales to a reasonable number.
Such reduction in the number of pay scales has to be achieved by resorting to broadbanding of posts by placing different posts having comparable job charts in a common scale.
Substantial reduction in the number of pay scales must inevitably lead to clubbing of posts and grades which were earlier different and unequal.
While doing so care must be taken to ensures that such rationalisation of the pay structure does not throw up anomalies.
Ordinarily a pay structure is evolved keeping in mind several factors, e.g. (1) method of recruitment, (ii) level at which recruitment is made, (iii) the hierarchy of service in a given cadre, (iv) minimum educational/technical qualifications required, (v) avenues of promotion, (vi) the nature of duties and responsibilities, (vii) the horizontal and vertical relativities with similar jobs, (vii) public dealings, (ix) satisfaction level, (x) employer's capacity to pay, etc. We have referred to these matters in some detail only to emphasise that several factors have to be kept in view while evolving a pay structure and the horizontal and vertical relativities have to be carefully balanced keeping in mind the hierarchical arrangements, avenues for promotion, etc.
Such a carefully evolved pay structure ought not to be ordinarily disturbed as it may upset the balance and cause avoidable ripples in other cadres as well ........
There can, therefore, be no doubt that equation of posts and equation of salaries is a complex matter which is best left to an expert body unless there is cogent material on record to come to a firm conclusion that a grave error had crept in while fixing the pay scale for a given post and court's interference is absolutely necessary to undo the injustice."
The contention of the learned counsel for the applicants is that it is not the function of a Court to evaluate the duties and responsibilities of a post, or to compare the duties and responsibilities of one post with another, so as to adjudicate upon the suitability of a pay scales assigned to a particular post.
In this behalf, it is pointed out (on the basis of the averments made in the review application) that the claim of the petitioners was referred to the Anomaly Committee constituted by the State Government.
However, it is alleged that the Anomaly Committee did not make a favourable recommendation for an upward revision of the scale assigned to the post of Junior Analyst.
It is, therefore, contended that an expert body having examined the matter in detail and having satisfied itself that the pay scale for the post of Junior Analyst had been appropriately determined, there was no justification for this court to interfere in the same.
In our view the aforesaid claim of the applicants is wholly misplaced.
Unfortunately, the applicants have not appropriately appreciated the order passed by this Court.
This Court did not arrive at the conclusion that the scale assigned to the post of Junior Analyst was not commensurates to the duties and responsibilities assigned thereto.
The order dated 342001 passed by this Court is based on only one factual consideration, namely, that for the feeder cadre post of Sub-Inspector emoluments superior to the promotional post of Junior Analyst have been prescribed.
The undisputed factual position is, that on the relevant date of consideration, namely, 1.4.1979, the pay scale of the post of Sub-Inspector was Rs. 400-660 without the provision of selection grade; whereas the pay scale of the feeder post of Sub-Inspector was Rs. 400- 660, and a selection grade of Rs. 400-660 was provided for 20% of the permanent posts.
It is, therefore, evident that an employee placed in the selection grade in the cadre of Sub-Inspectors could be drawing emoluments higher than the maximum salary of a person holding the promotional post of Junior Analyst.
The aforesaid illustration clearly demonstrates an unacceptable discrimination whereby a person holding an inferior post (as in the instant case, the post of Sub Inspector) could draw emoluments higher than the persons holding a superior post (as in the instant case, the post of Junior Analyst).
In the scales delineated above, a Junior Analyst could draw salary in the maximum basic pay of Rs. 660/-, whereas a Sub Inspector holding a feeder post could draw salary in the maximum basic pay of Rs. 760/-.
The aforesaid condition is unacceptable as it violates the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The equality clause contained in Article 14 of the Constitution of India requires that all persons subjected to a legislation should be treated alike under like circumstances and conditions.
In other words, equals have to be treated alike, and unequals ought not to be treated equally.
Through the illustration referred to above, an inferior could be entitled to a carry home salary in excess of a superior.
The illustration, therefore, demonstrates a clear violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the applicants, to our mind, clearly propounds that a pay structure should be determined expressly keeping in mind the horizontal and vertical relativity.
It would be justified for the authorities to assign the same pay scale to a post equated horizontally.
However, the posts of Sub-Inspectors and Junior Analysts are placed at a vertical axis, wherein the post of Junior Analysts occupies a higher position on account of the fact that it is a promotional post and that the post of a Sub-Inspector is a feeder post thereof.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, the action of the authorities in assigning the particular pay scale referred to above to the post of Junior Analyst is not in conformity with parameters expressed by the Apex Court in the judgment referred to above.
6.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the applicants is based on a historical perspective, namely, the demands from various associations/unions of employees in the State of Haryana that the recommendations made by the Central Government Pay Commission for its employees should be adopted by the State Government.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the applicants that the State Government favourably considered the aforesaid demand and adopted the recommendations made by the Central Government.
It is the case of the learned counsel for the applicants that the Central Government had reduced the number of pay scales and had recommended only 30 standard pay scales.
While adopting the parameters laid down by the Central Government, the State Government encountered a number of problems.
The aforesaid problems have been expressed in the guide-lines issued by the Government of Haryana, Finance Department, involving pay revision and anomalies related thereto, through a policy instruction dated 2042001.
The problems encountered during the revision of pay scales as expressed in the aforesaid instruction are reproduced hereunder :-  "* Firstly, the State Government was faced with a gigantic task of fitting over 70 existing pay scales to its own employees.
* Secondly, it was observed that working of the Central Government is quite different in respect of many services especially in respect of those which are in the domain of the stages alone there are a number of field organisations in the State that do not exist in the Central Government at all.
* Third, there are many posts in the State Government where the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the nature of duties for the posts are different when compared with those in the Central Government even though the posts carry similar designations.
* Fourth, in certain cases, the designations were similar but the qualifications prescribed were found to be different for the posts.
* And lastly, there were certain categories of posts which were in no way identifiable with those in the Central Government."
In this context, reference may also be made to the averments in paragraph 10 of the policy instructions dated 2042001, which crystalises the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the applicants.
Para 10 is being extracted hereunder :-  "10.
Fitment of 70-odd pre-revised pay scales into 30-odd revised pay scales would mean that a number of different pre-revised pay scales would have to be clubbed and given a substitute pay scale.
This is clear from a perusal of the Table showing the different pay scales existing as on 1479, 1186 and 1196 (enclosed as Annexure `A').
A natural consequence of such convergence of scales was that identical pay scale had to be prescribed in a number of cases for the feeder post as well as the promotional post in a particular department.
Realising that such a situation should not result in dissatisfaction amongst the employees, it was specifically provided in the Pay Revision Rules of 1987 that wherever the same pay scale had been provided as functional pay scale for the feeder post as well as the promotion post on account of clubbing of pre-revised pay scales of such posts, an employees, on his promotion in the identical revised pay scale, would be granted the benefit of one increment, and his pay, on his promotion, would be fixed at the stage next above."
It is vehemently contended that it was imperative to club a number of posts together so as to reduce 70 or more standard pay scales prevalent in the State of Haryana to approximately 30 revised standard scales, envisaged by the Central Government Pay Commission.
The aforesaid argument to our mind is totally misconceived.
The instant argument cannot apply to pay scales revised w.e.f.
1.4.1979.
The historical perspective referred to above relates to the revision of pay scales w.e.f.
111986.
That apart, the argument stems from the assumption that the scales of pay in the State of Haryana must be reduced to 30 standard pay scales in terms of the recommendations made by the 4th Central Government Pay Commission unmindful of the hardship/inequality caused thereby, as if, the same was in the form of an infallible charter.
The aforesaid concept of the applicants is wholly unacceptable in law in fact the policy instructions itself demonstrate the fallacy of the aforesaid contention.
An extract of paragraph 11 of the policy instruction dated 2042001, is being reproduced hereunder :-  "11.
Thereafter the State Government has carried out a general pay revision w.e.f.
1196.
While the Central pattern of pay scales has been broadly followed in this general revision as well, the State Government has maintained differences from the Central Pay Scales whenever warranted on account of the exigencies of services in the State.
It has to be understood that while recommending the pay scales for Central Government employees, the Fifth Pay Commission considered various factors such as transferability of people throughout the length and breadth of the country whereas those situations do not prevail in case of State Government employees.
While giving effect to the general revision of pay scales w.e.f.
1196, certain standard pay scales had to be bifurcated.
For example, the pay scales of Rs. 1400-2600 and Rs. 1600-2660 have been clubbed by the Central Government and replaced by a corresponding revised scale of Rs. 5000-8000, the State Government had to bifurcate this scale into two i.e. Rs. 5000-7850 and Rs. 5450-8000 in view of the hierarchical structure of services in the State.
Similar treatment had to be resorted to in case of a few other pay scales.
Had this not been done, the problems of pay scales of feeder posts and promotion posts would have been further compounded.
It is evident from a perusal of the aforesaid extract of the policy instruction that hierarchical level of the post had to be maintained and was maintained by the State Government in certain cases.
The issue here is also hierarchical in nature.
The post of Sub-Inspector is heirarchically interior to the post of Junior Analyst and as such it was imperative for the authorities to assign a superior pay scale for the promotional post of Junior Analyst vis-a-vis the pay scale of the post of Sub-Inspectors.
7.
The third contention of the learned counsel for the applicants is that the pay scale assigned to the post of Junior Analyst cannot be considered to be a anomaly so as to call for judicial intervention.
In this behalf, learned counsel for the applicants, in order to assist this Court on the parameters of the term "anomaly" again referred to the policy instruction dated 2042001, wherein the State Government described the following eventualities to constitute an anomaly :-  "(a) When the pay scales are revised by the Government through a general pay revision notification for all its employees and the revised sales are not prescribed in respect of some posts/departments on account of inadvertent omission.
(b) When the functional pay scale prescribed for a promotion post is lower than the functional pay scale of the feeder post.
(c) Where there is a loss of pay in the case of an employee on account of revision of pay scales.
(d) Where, on promotion, an employee draws lower emoluments than what he was drawing prior to his promotion.
(e) Where the pay of a senior employee gets fixed at a lower stage as a consequence of pay revision qua a similarly situated junior employee."
Learned counsel for the applicants also referred to paragraphs 19 and 20 of the aforesaid policy instruction dated 2042001 whereby it was sought to be demonstrated that cases in which the feeder post as well as the promotional post are in the same scale, would not be an anomaly.
This court's attention was also invited to the illustrations under paragraph 20 of the aforesaid instruction so as to demonstrate that the claim of the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10957 of 1999 as well as the determination of this Court by its order dated 342001 was misconceived, it is not necessary for us to evaluate the parameters of the term "anomaly" in the aforesaid policy instructions or to refer to the conclusions drawn in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the aforesaid policy instructions, and even for that matter, to the illustrations referred to under paragraph 20, for the simple reason that the same are clearly inapplicable to the facts and circumstances to the present controversy.
In the instant case, it has been clearly demonstrated by us while dealing with the first contention (of the learned counsel for the applicants) that it is possible for an employee in the feeder cadre of Sub- Inspectors to draw salary in the basic pay of Rs. 960/- whereas the maximum basic pay in which a Junior Analyst can draw his salary is only Rs. 660/-.
It is, therefore, amply clear that an employee in the feeder cadre could draw salary far in excess of an employee holding the promotion post.
We are, therefore, satisfied that the submissions advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the applicants is clearly inapplicable to the controversy in hand.
8.
The Division Bench of this Court in Sunder Lal Jain v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SLR 215, held as under :-  "It is totally unreasonable to place a Junior Analyst post and higher post in the same pay scale.
A Division Bench of this Court in Har Kishan and anr. v. State of Punjab and anr., 1987(5) SLR 539 held that wherein a lower post is equated with regard to pay scale with the promotional post, it was a clear anomaly and was highly irrational.
Another Division Bench of this Court in PL Goyal v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) S.C.T.
177 : 1990(5) SLR 108, held that reducing the pay scale on promotion would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In Civil Writ Petition 10534 of 1991 (Mani Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(1) S.C.T.
742) decided by me on September 20, 1993, it was held that it was legitimate aspiration of every citizen to be better placed, both in status and pay on promotion and if this is to be frustrated, it will obviously damper the growth of the man which is and natural desire of everyone if there is no increase in the emoluments of a citizen on his promotion, no one would ever work with zeal and dedication nor would he ever like to acquire better experience and more qualifications.
This would result into complete stagnation, the action of the respondents in equating the promotional posts with that of inferior posts in the matter of pay scale would obviously result in restricting the natural aspiration of human being to go higher and higher in his service graph and would, thus, be wholly arbitrary.
A direction is, thus, issued to forthwith fix the pay of petitioners in the scale immediately higher than the one they were getting on a lower post from which they were promoted.
This Court is of the considered view that the authorities responsible for fixing the pay scales of petitioners should immediately get down and see through that the justice is done to the petitioners by fixing them in a pay scale commensurate to their nature of duties and post.
This exercise must be done within six months form today.
However, petitioners be paid forthwith all the arrears that might be due to them by fixing them in a pay scale immediately higher to that they were getting on the post from which they were promoted.
This petition deserves to be allowed with costs quantified at Rs.
3,000/-."
The aforesaid determination has been re-affirmed in Pratap Singh Narwal v. State of Haryana, C.W.P.
No. 8960 of 1999, decided on 732001.
9.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the applicants.
We find no infirmity in the order passed by the Court dated 342001 calling for interference under Order XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The instant application is accordingly dismissed.
10.
As already noticed above, the pleas raised in the review application are beyond the scope of review in view of the parameters stipulated under Order XLVII Rule 1.
In fact the applicants having preferred Petition for Specials Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 68 of 2002, could not have filed the instant review application.
The Apex Court had passed the following order while disposing of SLP No. 68 of 2002 on 822002 :-  "Petitioners wish to file a review application before the High Court, and they, therefore, wish to withdraw this special leave petition.
The SLP is dismissed as withdrawn."
It is clear from the order extracted above that the Apex Court did not grant the applicants the liberty to file a review petition.
Despite the fact that the matter came to be disposed of before the Supreme Court on 822002, the instant review application was only filed on 2632003 i.e. after a passage of more than one year.
Such actions at the hands of the authorities demonstrate a complete apathy towards individual rights determined at the hands of this Court.
No administrative functionary has the right to frustrate the cause adjudicated upon by a Court on the basis of personal convictions.
The instant review application demonstrates an attitude which needs a reprimand.
So as to impress upon the applicants that their action does not further the cause of justice but negates it, we consider it just and appropriate to dismiss the instant application with costs.
Costs are quantified at Rs. 10,000/-.
The same shall be paid to the Legal Services Authority, Haryana.
A copy of the instant order be forwarded by the Registry of this Court to the Secretary, Legal Services Authority, Haryana.
Application dismissed.