GS Singhvi, J - Historically, the doctrine of equal pay for equal work has been associated with the movement against discrimination based on sex.
Equal pay laws, like Equal Pay Act, 1970 and the Equal Pay (Amendment) Regulations, 1984 enacted by the British Parliament and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 enacted by the Indian Parliament provide for payment of equal remuneration to men and women and are meant to prevent discrimination against women on the ground of sex.
The framers of the Indian Constitution incorporated the concept of equal pay for equal work in Article 39(d).
In the last three decades, the Courts have applied this doctrine to invalidate the action of the State and its instrumentalities to discriminate similarly situated employees in the matter of grant of pay scales, fixation of pay etc.
In Kishori Mohan Lal Bakshi v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1139, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court declared that abstract doctrine of equal pay for equal work had nothing to do with Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
However, after 19 years, the Supreme Court gave a revolutionary interpretation to the said doctrine in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 and treated it as a part of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India by making the following observations :  "It is true that the principle of equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by our Constitution to be a fundamental right.
But it certainly is a Constitutional goal.
Art. 39(d) of the Constitution proclaims `equal pay for equal work for both men and women' as a Directive Principle of State Policy.
Equal pay for equal work for both men and women means equal pay for equal work for everyone and as between the sexes.
Directive principles, as he has been pointed out in some of the judgments of this Court have to be read into the fundamental rights as a matter of interpretation.
Art. 14 of the Constitution enjoins the State not to deny any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws and Art. 16 declares that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
These equality clauses of the Constitution must mean something to everyone.
To the vast majority of the people the equality clauses of the Constitution would mean nothing if they are unconcerned with the work they do and the pay they get.
To them, the equality clauses will have some substance if equal work means equal pay.
Whether the special procedure prescribed by a statute for trying alleged robber-barons and smuggler kings or for dealing with tax evaders is discriminatory, whether a particular Governmental policy in the matter of grant of licences or permits confers unfettered discretion on the Executive, whether the take-over of the empires of industrial tycoons is arbitrary and unconstitutional and other questions of like nature, leave the millions of people of this country untouched.
Questions concerning wages and the like, mundane they may be, are yet matters of vital concern to them and it is there, if at all that the equality clauses of the Constitution have any significance to them.
The preamble to the Constitution declares the solemn resolution of the people of India to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist Democratic Republic.
Again the word `Socialist' must mean something.
Even if it does not mean `To each according to his need', it must at least mean `equal pay for equal work'.
The principle of equal pay for equal work is expressly recognised by all socialist systems of law, e.g., Section 59 of the Hungarian Labour Code, para 2 of Section 111 of the Czechoslovak Code, Section 67 of the Bulgarian Code, Section 40 of the Code of the German Democratic Republic, para 2 of Section 33 of the Rumanian Code.
Indeed this principle has been incorporated in several western labour codes too.
Under provisions in S. 31 (g. No. 2d) of Book I of the French Code Du Travail, and according to Argentinian law, this principle must be applied to female workers in all collective bargaining agreements.
In accordance with section 3 of the Grundgestz of the German Federal Republic, and Clause 7, Section 123 of the Mexican Constitution, the principle is given universal significance (vide : International Labour Law by Istvan Szaszy p. 265).
The preamble of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation recognises the principle of equal remuneration for work of equal value as constituting one of the means of achieving the improvement of conditions "involving such injustice, hardship and privation to large numbers of people as to produce unrest so great that the peace and harmony of the world are imperiled".
Construing Articles 14 and 16 in the light of the Preamble and Art. 39(d), we are of the view that the principle "Equal pay for equal work" is deducible from those Articles and may be properly applied to cases of unequal scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer."
(Underlining is mine).
2.
The new dimension given to the doctrine of equal pay for equal work in Randhir Singh's case (supra) led to the filing of hundreds of petitions by employees in different High Courts and the Supreme Court claiming parity in the matter of pay scales etc. and one can find a number of reported decisions of the Supreme Court and the High Courts in which the doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' was invoked for granting relief to the petitioners.
However, in State of UP v. JP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 SC 19, the Supreme Court adopted a cautious approach and accepted the plea of the State that different pay scales can be prescribed for persons holding similar posts.
The propositions laid down in that case read as under :  "Equal pay for equal work for both men and women" has been accepted as a `constitutional goal' capable of being achieved through constitutional remedies.
Art. 39(d) of the Constitution proclaims "equal pay for equal work".
This article and other like provisions in the Directive Principles are rooted in social justice.
They were intended to bring about a socio-economic transformation in cur society.
In matters of employment the Government of a socialist State must protect the weaker sections.
It must be ensured that there is no exploitation of poor and ignorant.
It is the duty of the State to see that the under-privileged or weaker sections get their dues.
Even if they have voluntarily accepted the employment on unequal terms, the State should not deny their basic rights of equal treatment.
It is against this background that the principle of equal pay for equal work has to be construed in the first place.
Second, this principle has no mechanical application in every case of similar work.
It has to be read into Art. 14 of the Constitution.
Art. 14 permits reasonable classification founded on different basis.
It is now well established that the classification can be based on some qualities or characteristics of persons grouped together and not in others who are left out.
Those qualities or characteristics must, of course, have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.
In service matters, merit or experience could be the proper basis for classification to promote efficiency in administration.
He or she learns also by experience as much as by other means.
It cannot be denied that the quality of work performed by persons of longer experience is superior than the work of newcomers.
Higher pay scale to avoid stagnation or resultant frustration for lack of promotional avenues is very common in career service.
The entitlement to those higher pay scales depends upon seniority- cum-merit or merit-cum-seniority.
The differentiation so made in the same cadre will not amount to discrimination.
The classification based on experience is a reasonable classification.
It has a rational nexus with the object thereof.
To hold otherwise, it would be detrimental to the interest of the service itself.
Thus there can be two scales of pay in the same cadre of persons performing the same or similar work or duties."
(Emphasis supplied).
3.
In that particular case, the Supreme Court held that prescription of different pay scales for the Bench Secretaries of the High Court of Allahabad was based on proper classification and did not violate Articles 14 and 16 read with Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
4.
In Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 1291, the Supreme Court recognised the right of the State to prescribe different pay scales for persons doing apparently similar jobs and observed :  "Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental right.
But equal pay must depend upon the nature of the work done, it cannot be judged by the mere volume of work, there may be qualitative difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
Functions may be the same but the responsibilities make a difference.
One cannot deny that often the difference is a matter of degree and that there is an element of value judgment by those who are charged with the administration in fixing the scales of pay and other conditions of service.
So long as such value judgment is made bona fide, reasonably on an intelligible criterion which has a rational nexus with the object of differentiation, such differentiation will not amount to discrimination.
"(Emphasis added).
5.
In Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 334, the Supreme Court recognised the need of giving due weightage to the recommendations of the Pay commission and observed :  "If the classification is proper and reasonable and has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved, the doctrine of equal pay for equal work, will not have any application even though the persons doing the same work are not getting the same pay.
Normally, when a Pay Commission has evaluated the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts and has also made the equation of posts, the Court should not interfere with the same.
It is not the business of the Court to fix the pay scales in exercise of its jurisdiction under Art. 32.
It is for the government or the management to fix the pay scales after considering various other matters and the Court can only consider whether such fixation of pay scales has resulted in an invidious discrimination or is arbitrary or patently erroneous in law or in fact."
(Emphasis supplied).
6.
In V Markendeya v. State of AP, AIR 1989 SC 1308, their Lordships of the Supreme Court emphasized that the court must examine the rationale of the State action in prescribing different pay scales for similarly situated persons and interfered only when it is found that there is no reasonable classification.
Some of the observations made in that decision are extracted below :  "But before such relief is granted the Court must consider and analyse the rationable behind the State action in prescribing two different scales of pay.
If on an analysis of the relevant rules, orders, nature of duties, functions measures of responsibility, and educational qualifications required for the relevant posts, the Court finds that the classification made by the State in giving different treatment to the two classes of employees is founded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the classification must be upheld.
Principle of equal pay for equal work is applicable among equals, it cannot be applied to unequals.
Relief to an aggrieved person seeking to enforce the principles of equal pay for equal work can be granted only after it is demonstrated before the Court that invidious discrimination is practised by the State in prescribing two different scales for the two classes of employees without there being any reasonable classification for the same."
7.
In State of MP v Pramod Bhartiya, 1993(1) S.C.T.
138 : AIR 1993 SC 286, a Division Bench of the Supreme Court held that the burden to establish the right to equal pay or the plea of discrimination is on the petitioner.
The Court further held that the doctrine of equal pay for equal work is inapplicable where the discrimination is based on qualitative different in functions and responsibilities and observed :  "Equal pay for equal work is implicit in the doctrine of equality enshrined in Art. 14, it flows from it.
Because clause (d) of Art. 39 spoke of equal pay for equal work for both men and women it did not cease to be a part of Art. 14.
To say that the said rule having been stated as a Directive Principle of State Policy is not enforceable in a court of law is to indulge in sophistry.
Parts IV and II of the Constitution are not supposed to be exclusionary of each other.
They are complementary to each other.
The rule is much a part of Art. 14 as it is of clause (1) of Art. 16.
Equality of opportunity guaranteed by Art. 16(1) necessarily means and involves equal pay for equal work.
It means equality that it is neither a mechanical rule nor does it mean geometrical quality.
The concept of reasonable classification and all other rules evolved with respect to Arts.
14 and 16(1) come into play wherever complaint of infraction of this rule falls for consideration.
In this context, it would be appropriate to refer to the definition of the expressions same work or work of similar nature contained in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, enacted by Parliament to implement Article 39(d) of the Constitution and the obligation created by the Convention concerning equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal value to which India is a signatory.
It would be evident from that definition that the stress is upon the similarity of skill, effort and responsibility when performed under similar conditions.
Further, the quality of work may vary from post to post.
It may vary from institution to institution.
This reality cannot be ignored or overlooked.
It is not a matter of assumption but one of proof.
Since the plea of equal pay for equal work has to be examined with reference to Art. 14 the burden is upon the persons complaining of discrimination to establish their right to equal pay, or the plea of discrimination, as the case may be.
"(Underlining is mine).
8.
In Shiba Kumar Dutta v. Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC 545 : 1997(2) SCT 816 (SC), the Supreme Court cautioned against the Court's interdiction with the decision taken by the State on the recommendations of the Expert Committees and held :  "Nomenclature and fitment is one of executive policy of the Government.
Unless the action is arbitrary or there is invidious discrimination between persons similarly situated, doing some type of work, it would be difficult for the Courts to go into the question of equation of posts or fitment into a particular scale of pay.
They must be left to be decided by Expert Committees and Government.
The Courts cannot go into them and evaluate the job criteria and scales of pay prescribed for each category."
9.
In State Bank of India v. MR Ganesh Babu, (2002) 4 SCC 556 : 2002(2) SCT 749 (SC), their Lordships of the Supreme Court recognised the right of the public employer to prescribe different scales for employees belonging to the same cadre on the basis of qualitative difference in the nature of work and responsibilities and held :  "The principle of equal pay for equal work has been considered and applied in many decisions of the Supreme Court.
It is well settled that equal pay must depend upon the nature of work done.
It cannot be indeed by the mere volume of work; there may be qualitative difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
Functions may be the same but the responsibilities make a difference.
Often the difference is a matter of degree and there is an element of value judgment by those who are charged with the administration in fixing the scales of pay and other conditions of service.
So long as such value judgment is made bona fide, reasonably on an intelligible criterion which has a rational nexus, with the object of differentiation, such differentiation will not amount to discrimination.
The judgment of administrative authorities, concerning the responsibilities which attach to the post and the degree of reliability expected of an incumbent, would be a value judgment of the authorities concerned which, if arrived at bona fide, reasonably and rationally, is not open to interference by the Court."
10.
In Government of AP v. P Hari Hara Prasad, (2002) 7 SCC 707 : 2002(4) SCT 562 (SC), the Supreme Court reversed the order of Andhra Pradesh High Court vide which relief was granted to the employees of Subordinate Courts by directing payment of salary to them at par with the employees holding corresponding posts in the Secretariat and held :  "The employees of the subordinate courts and the employees of the State Secretariat are governed by different rules and, therefore, their pay scales and other conditions of service are to be governed by the respective rules applicable to them.
Ordinarily, it is not permissible to go into the nature of duties of employees while exercising writ jurisdiction under Article 226 and on that basis direct grant of pay scales which are applicable to employees of a different service.
Therefore, the issue of the writ of mandamus directing the parity of pay scales on the assumption that posts were identical and the two sets of employees performed the same nature of duties cannot be sustained insofar as the employees of the subordinate courts are concerned."
11.
I have prefaced the decision of this petition by noticing the propositions laid down by the Supreme Court in different cases because after having considered the rival pleadings and arguments of the learned counsel, I am convinced that the claim made by the petitioners, who are employed under the Directorate of Public Instructions (Punjab) for parity in the pay scales with their counter-parts employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat and offices of the Financial Commissioners, etc. is misconceived and is liable to be rejected.
12.
The facts :  Before partition of the country, the office of Director, Public Instructions, Punjab was classified as `A' class office and the staff employed therein was treated at par with those employed in the corresponding cadres in Punjab Civil Secretariat and offices of Financial Commissioners in the matter of pay scales and other conditions of service.
After partition, this position was reiterated in letter No. 9637-FR-55/3681 dated 3041956 issued by Secretary to Government of Punjab, Finance Department for the purpose of re- classification of various offices under the State Government.
The criteria adopted for re-classification was :  (a) Work done in the Secretariat office.
(b) Work done in the offices of Head of Departments.
(c) Work done in the subordinate offices.
13.
In 1958, Government of Punjab created a separate post of Secretary for the Education Department.
The Director, Public Instructions continued to remain the Head of Department but the administrative control of the department was vested in the Secretary, Education.
14.
In 1967, the State Government set up the First Punjab Pay Commission for undertaking a comprehensive review of the existing structure of pay scales, allowances etc. and to recommend such changes or rationalisation in the structure of the pay scales of such employees as was considered desirable and feasible.
After detailed examination of the issues referred to it, the Commission submitted its report to the government on 1.11.1968.
In paragraph 612 of the report, the Commission recommended that the offices of the Chief Engineer, Irrigation and Public Works Department, Building and Roads, the Inspector General of Police and the Director of Public Instructions should be re-classified as `B' Class offices.
For the sake of reference, that paragraph is reproduced below :  "The Commission has not been able to find any reason, historical or functional for upgrading the office of the Commission from `D' Class to `A' Class in 1956.
Similarly, it does not find any justification for the offices of the Chief Engineer, Irrigation and Public Works Department, Buildings and Roads, the Inspector General of Police and the Director of Public Instructions to be classed as `A' Class.
These offices cannot, in any way, be said to be dealing with matters relating to laying down of policies any more than other Heads of Department offices.
The Commission, therefore, recommends that they should be reclassified as `B' Class offices.
Persons working the said offices and enjoying the existing grade of posts in `A' class offices shall, however, continue to enjoy the said grade.
The recommendations regarding pay scales, while dealing with the above departments have been made according to the existing status of these offices and those recommendations are subject to the observations in this paragraph."
(Emphasis added)  15.
After considering the report of the Pay Commission, the State Government decided to classify the offices in the following two categories -- (i) those closely and directly associated with the shaping of policies and programmes to be known as A Class offices; and (ii) those responsible mainly for execution of policies and programmes to be known as `B' class offices.
16.
In pursuance of the decision taken by the government, the function of laying down policies was taken away from the Director, Public Instructions and vested in the Secretary, Education Department, though the office of the Director, Public Instructions continued to be classified as `A' Class office and the employees working under the Director, Public Instructions also continued to enjoy the monetary benefits at par with Secretariat staff.
However, when the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1979 were framed for implementing the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission, higher pay scales came to be prescribed for the ministerial employees of the Punjab Civil Secretariat, those employed in the offices of Financial Commissioner and some other offices.
This was also reflected in letters dated 261981 (Annexure P.3) and 461981 (Annexure P4) issued by the State Government for further revision of pay scales of Assistants/Senior Assistants and Senior Scale Stenographers.
Vide letter dated 461981 (Annexure P.5), the State Government granted special additional pay of Rs. 50/- to Superintendents Grade-II posted in Punjab Civil Secretariat/offices of Financial Commissioners, Punjab Vidhan Sabha and Raj Bhawan, but similar benefit was not given to the petitioners.
The representations made by the petitioners for restoration of parity with their counter-parts in Punjab Civil Secretariat, offices of Financial Commissioners and the employees of Punjab Vidhan Sabha did not yield any result and this is the reason why they have invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to treat them at par with the staff employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat and offices of Financial Commissioners in the matter of grant of higher pay scales, senior grade, selection grade, special pay etc.
They have pleaded that the decision of the State Government to prescribe higher pay scales for their counter-parts in Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha, Raj Bhawan and offices of the Financial Commissioners has resulted in discrimination and violation of their fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16(1) read with Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
17.
The respondents have controverted the petitioners' claim for parity with the staff of Punjab Civil Secretariat etc. by contending that higher pay scales were prescribed for the employees of those offices which are involved in decision/policy making.
According to them, the office of Director, Public Instructions is not involved in the decision making process or laying down of policies and, therefore, the employees working under the Director of Public Instructions are not entitled to claim parity with the staff employed in the Secretariat, Vidhan Sabha or the offices of Financial Commissioners.
18.
The petitioners have filed replication reiterating their claim for parity in the matter of pay scales and allowances with the staff employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat etc.  19.
I have heard Shri RL Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri DV Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab and perused the record.
I have also gone through the recommendations of the First and Second Punjab Pay Commissions and the provisions contained in Punjab Education Department (Office of the Director of Public Instructions) Service Rules, 1941 and the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Service Class-III) Rules, 1976, on which reliance has been placed by the learned Additional Advocate General.
20.
Shri RL Sharma emphasised that till 1978, there was a complete parity of pay scales between the staff employed in the office of Director, Public Instructions and those employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat and offices of Financial Commissioners and argued that the grant of higher pay scales and allowances to the employees of Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha etc. on the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission and denial thereof to the petitioners has resulted in violation of their fundamental right to equality.
He submitted that there is no quantitative or qualitative difference in the nature and functions of duties performed by the petitioners vis-a-vis the duties performed by their counter-parts in Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha etc. and argued that denial of pay scales and allowances to them at par with their counter-parts employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha etc. is liable to be declared as discriminatory.
21.
Shri DV Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General submitted that there is qualitative difference in the nature of functions and duties of the staff employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha and offices of the Financial Commissioners vis-a-vis those employed under the Director or Public Instructions and argued that the petitioners cannot claim parity with the former or seek a direction for grant of higher pay scales and allowances.
22.
In my opinion, the learned Additional Advocate General is right in his submission that the decision of the State Government to prescribe higher pay scales for the employees of Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha, Raj Bhawan and the offices of Financial Commissioners is based on rational consideration, i.e., qualitative difference in the nature of functions and duties performed by such employees vis-a-vis those employed in other offices, like the Directorate of Public Instructions.
It has not been disputed by the petitioners that the offices falling in the first category are involved in the process of laying down policies which are required to be executed and implemented by the offices falling in the second category.
Thus, the classification made between the employees employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat etc. on the one hand and other offices, like Directorate of Public Instructions on the other hand is reasonable and is not violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined in the Constitution.
23.
It has also not been disputed by the petitioners and their counsel that the First Pay Commission set up by the State Government had taken cognizance of the fact and recommended that the offices of Director, Public Instructions etc. should be reclassified.
The Second Pay Commission also considered this factor along with others for prescribing higher pay scales for the employees employed in the offices/establishment of first category.
The State Government accepted the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission and framed the rules prescribing higher pay scales and allowances for those employed in Punjab Vidhan Sabha etc.
It is, thus, evident that the so-called disparity in the pay scales of the ministerial employees employed in Punjab Vidhan Sabha etc. on the one hand and those employed in other offices including the Directorate of Public Instructions on the other is based on rational consideration and is not arbitrary.
The degree of responsibility shouldered by those employed in Punjab Civil Secretariat etc. is certainly higher than those employed in the office of Director, Public Instructions etc.
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the claim of the petitioners that denial of higher pay scales etc. to them has resulted in violation of their fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment.
In any case, I do not find any justification to nullify the decision of the government which, as mentioned above, is based on the recommendations of the Pay Commissions.
24.
In the light of the above discussion and by applying the propositions laid down in Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers v. Union of India (supra), V Markendeya v. State of AP (supra) and Government of Andhra Pradesh v. P Hari Hara Prasad (supra), I hold that the petitioners have failed to make out a case of discrimination and violation of their fundamental right to equality and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition dismissed.