Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of Constitution of India, petitioner prays for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant promotion to the petitioner to the post of Senior Accounts Officer from the date his juniors were promoted i.e. 191980 to 121981 and also for consequential benefits in that regard.
2.
In June, 1952, the petitioner was selected as Divisional Accountant on the basis of a competitive examination held by the Accountant General, Punjab where he was confirmed as Divisional Accountant.
In November, 1962, the petitioner passed S.A.S.
Examination.
The name of the petitioner was placed on the seniority for Superintendent and Assistant Accounts Officer as on 181970 and 111979.
According to the petitioner he was not considered for promotion to the post of Accounts Officer (later designated as Senior Accounts Officer) from 191980 to 1983.
The persons who were junior to the petitioner were promoted as Accounts Officers and then Senior Accounts Officers during different periods.
The petitioner was confirmed as Account Officer vide order dated 1061984 with effect from 161980.
3.
Petitioner in order to get redressal in respect of his claim, filed Civil Writ being No. 12894 of 1992 in this Court which was allowed vide order dated March 05, 1993.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed various representations but of no consequence.
Thus, the petitioner has been compelled to file the present writ petition claiming the afore-noticed reliefs.
4.
The petitioner, who had retired much earlier pursuing his representation, which was finally rejected and the case of the petitioner was filed by the Director, Treasuries and Accounts Finance Department, Haryana, Chandigarh vide their letter dated 8.4.1999 Annexure P-9 to this writ petition.
This order has been impugned in the present writ petition wherein the petitioner also prays for the above mentioned reliefs.
5.
The respondents upon notice filed the detailed written statement claiming that the present writ petition is not maintainable and similar writ petitions filed by the petitioner earlier have been dismissed.
It is stated that the claim of the petitioner seeking promotion as Senior Accounts Officer has already been denied by the High Court in two Writ petitions i.e. CWP Nos. 4111 of 1980 and 13882 of 1989.
As no fresh cause of action has arisen in favour of the petitioner, the present writ petition is barred.
It is also stated that the petitioner was not eligible for promotion to the post of Senior Accounts Officer because his service record was not good as required for promotion at the relevant time.
The petitioner stood at seniority No. 10 of the Assistant Accounts Officer and designated as Accounts Officer as per the list circulated on 1.1.1981 and S/Shri JP Sharma, Siri Ram and SS Dua, who stood at serial No. 12, 14 and 15 in the list, were promoted to the post vide order dated 4.9.1980, which was challenged by the petitioner and failed in Court.
6.
From the above narrated facts, it is clear that the petitioner retired from service in the year 1994 while working as Senior Accounts Officer.
He had filed writ petition being Civil Writ Petition No. 12894 of 1992 - Ravi Dutt Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, where the petitioner prayed for grant of selection grade as Accounts Officer with effect from 141980 to 121981.
The petitioner also prayed for promotion to the higher post in preference to his juniors.
He also prayed for refixation of salary.
This writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated March 03, 1993, which reads as under :-  "Concededly, the impugned instructions to the effect that selection grade can be granted to the only persons having of 50% reports as "good", were quashed vide order of this Court reported as Raj Kumar Sethi, Junior Engineer v. State of Haryana and another, 1991(1) SLR 21 : 1991(1) SCT 24 (P&H).
On facts there is no adverse report against the petitioner.
Average reports, if any even assumed to be taken against him, cannot be take note of as they were never conveyed to the petitioner.
In view of the observations made above, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant the petitioner, the selection grade from the date his juniors have been granted.
The arrears of the selection grade be calculated within six months from today and payments be made one month thereof.
Since the petition has been filed belatedly, therefore, the petitioner shall not be entitled to any costs of interest."
7.
The petitioner certainly did not claim the relief as prayed for in this petition specifically.
The reliefs claimed in the present writ petition were certainly available to the petitioner at that time if otherwise permissible in law.
Having abandoned the reliefs, the petitioner cannot claim the same very reliefs by filing a fresh writ petition.
The present petition on the applied principle of Order 2 Rule 2 CPC would be barred in law and the petitioner is dis-entitled from claiming such a relief.
8.
Another pertinent fact which must be noticed is that the petitioner had earlier filed Civil Writ No. 4111 of 1980 wherein the petitioner had prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote the petitioner in preference to the respondents, in that writ petition which has also been named in the present writ petition, to the post of Accounts Officer.
This writ petition was dismissed by the Division Bench in limine while observing as under :-  "We are wholly inclined to agree with the State's stand that in a promotional post, the suitability and the merit of the petitioner must inevitably enters into consideration and the right granted under the constitution is only to be considered for the said post.
This has been admittedly done.
The specific averments in paragraph-7 of the return make it obvious that the petitioner's record does not merit his promotion in accordance with the Government instructions as also on the larger grounds of suitability for the post.
9.
Thereafter, the petitioner again filed writ petition being Civil Writ No. 13883 of 1989 - Ravi Dutt Sharma v. State of Haryana, taking some other additional grounds and specifically averring that his record was good and ought to be treated as good and therefore, respondents should be directed to promote him as Accounts Officer with effect from 1091980.
By a detailed judgment, the learned Single Judge of this Court dismissed the writ petition and no costs were imposed upon the petitioner, as he has already retired from service.
The said judgment has been annexed by the respondents with their reply as Annexure R-2.
This judgment has already attained finality.
10.
Thus, we have no hesitation in observing that the present writ petition is an abuse of the process of court.
Relief which has been claimed have already been declined by the High Court twice and cannot be permitted to be agitated for the third time again.
Even otherwise, the petitioner did not claim this relief intentionally in the earlier writ petitions filed by him.
11.
We are also unable to appreciate this conduct of the petitioner, who is a retired person.
He is expected to exercise certain elements of constraint while filing writ petitions before the High Court.
12.
In the circumstances afore-noticed, we find no merit in this petition.
The same is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.