SS Saron, J - Post of Assistant Economist in the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the `respondent University'), was advertised in September 1997.
The petitioner applied for appointment to the said post.
Her application was initially rejected.
It appears the petitioner was not called for the interview in view of the fact that she did not have the requisite qualification of; "Second class B.Sc.
(Agriculture)/B.Sc.
(Home Science)/BA with Economics" as was advertised.
The petitioner was having the qualification of BA but not with Second class as was required.
She, therefore, made a representation dated 2121997 (Annexure R-1) to the Head Department of Economics and Sociology of the respondent University stating therein that she did her graduation from Punjab University, Chandigarh securing 49% marks.
However, she had later improved her qualifications upon the grade of graduation level from the University of California, Riverside USA in 1976.
The Head of the Department constituted a Committee of three Professors of the Department of Economics and Sociology of the respondent University.
The said Committee vide its report dated 12121997 (Annexure P-4) observed that the petitioner had covered more number of courses at the under graduate level and that her BA degree has no relevance now as she had improved upon this degree with first division.
The committee recommended that the petitioner may be called for interview.
2.
The petitioner vide memo.
dated 551998 (Annexure P-1) was called for interview on 1551998.
She was selected and was initially offered the said post of Assistant Economist on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
10.9.1998.
Thereafter, vide order dated 11.10.1999 (Annexure P-2) the services of the petitioner were regularised w.e.f.
23.6.1999 after the vacancy had become regular.
3.
While the petitioner was working she received a show cause notice dated 1452001 (Annexure P-3) from the Registrar of the respondent University to show cause as to why her services may not be terminated as she does not fulfill the essential qualifications for the post of Assistant Economist.
The show cause notice also contained a report of the Committee dated 12121997 (Annexure P-4), which was given by three Professors of the Department of Economics and Sociology of the respondent University at the time of her initial appointment, as also a report of the Committee dated 3042001 (Annexure P-5) on the subject of irregular appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Economist in the Department of Economics and Sociology.
The petitioner submitted her reply dated 28.5.2001 (Annexure P-6).
However, her services were terminated on 1262001 (Annexure P-9) and she was relieved on the same day vide Annexure P-7.
4.
The petitioner, thus, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks quashing of the order dated 1262001 (Annexure P-9) terminating her from service and also the order dated 1262001 (Annexure P-7) vide which she has been relieved from her duty.
Notice was issued to the respondents and respondent No. 2 on behalf of the both the respondents filed written statement.
The material particulars of the petition are admitted.
It is stated that the orders relating to the termination of the service of the petitioner were issued by the respondent University.
The petitioner did not possess II Class in BA, which was one of the requirements for the post of Assistant Economist advertised in September 1997.
It is also stated that an audit was conducted by the Deputy Controller (Local Audit) in March 2001 and an objection was raised that the petitioner does not have the necessary qualifications for the post of Assistant Economist.
The Director, Local Funds Account, Punjab is a statutory authority to conduct the audit of the accounts of the respondent University as provided under Section 34(4) of the Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act, 1970.
This authority, it is stated, is competent to raise objection on any matter of the University concerning financial involvement as and when it comes to its notice irrespective of the time limit.
The Deputy Controller (Local Audit) in March, 2001 pointed out that the petitioner did not possess essential qualifications of B.Sc.
(Agri)/BA with Economics in II Class as approved by the competent authority and, therefore, her appointment as Assistant Economist is irregular.
In view of the objection raised by the audit, the respondent No. 2 Vice Chancellor constituted a Committee to examine the appointment of the petitioner and the committee after going through the entire case observed that the petitioner was not eligible for the post of Assistant Economist in the University and that the audit objection was correct.
Even the Punjab University, Chandigarh, vide its letter dated 9112001 (Annexure R-2) stated that a candidate who passes BA Examination from the Panjab University in the third division could not be considered to have her division improved from third to second on passing one year course of study in Economics from the University of California.
Besides, the Punjab Government instructions dated 19101993 (Annexure R-3) in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case District Collector & Chairman Vizianagaram v M Tripura Sundari Devi 1990(4) SLR 237 provides that whenever it is found that a government servant who was not qualified or eligible in terms of the recruitment rules from initial recruitment/appointment in service or had furnished false information or produced false certificate in order to secure appointment he/she can be discharged from service.
Therefore, it is pleaded that the writ petition merits dismissal.
5.
The petitioner filed her replication to the written statement of the respondents in which she has reiterated her stand in the petition.
The respondent No. 2 on behalf of the respondents filed rejoinder to the replication of the petitioner.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
7.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner at the time of seeking appointment for the post of Assistant Economist had not made any concealment of her degrees and qualifications.
The petitioner in her application had clearly stated that she did not possess second class in her BA degree.
It was submitted that she had done one year regular course of study in Economics from the University of California (USA) in 1976 by securing 6532% marks in first division and, therefore, she could be considered for appointment to the post of Assistant Economist.
On this application, a Committee comprising of three renowned Economists was constituted by the Head of Economics and Sociology Department, which considered the application of the petitioner and recommended her case in relaxation of her qualification.
It is stated that the Punjab Agricultural University can relax the qualifications and hence the qualifications were relaxed in the case of the petitioner.
It is also contended that the petitioner had also submitted that the petitioner had undergone the one year course in the University of California as the said University did not admit BA pass students from India unless the said course is done and, therefore, she improved her graduation by spending one year for doing the course.
Besides, the petitioner had also given her qualification of MA (Economics) and she had obtained 74% marks in MA from the University of California (USA).
8.
Learned Senior Counsel for the respondents, however, contended that the petitioner did not have BA with second division which was one of the essential requirements and, therefore, she was not eligible for appointment.
This was rightly found by the audit to be an irregularity which was considered by the University by appointing a committee which met on 3042001 and it was of the view that the audit objection was correct.
Accordingly, the petitioner was issued a show cause notice and her services were terminated as she did not have the necessary qualifications.
9.
The question that requires consideration is whether the services of the petitioner who has been appointed as Assistant Economist after participating in the selection process by disclosing complete facts with regard to her qualifications can be terminated on the ground that she did not have the qualification of BA with II Class even though this fact was not suppressed or concealed by her at the time of her appointment.
10.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of the parties, the qualifications for the post of Assistant Economist as advertised in September 1997 may be noticed.
The same were as follows :-  "i) Second class B.Sc.
(Agri)/B.Sc.
(Home Science) BA with Economics.
ii) MA/M.Sc.
in Economics/Agril.
Economics preferably with specialisation in Farm Management with minimum OGPA of 320/400 or OCPA of 650/1000 & equivalent.
iii) Matric level certificate of Punjabi language.
(if not, the candidate is required to pass same within one year of appointment).
Note : A candidate who may not possess Master's degree in the relevant discipline but possesses PhD degree in the discipline required at Master's level, shall be eligible for the post.
Such a candidate must have obtained OGPA of 320/400 or OCPA of 6.50/10.00 basis or equivalent at Master's level in the allied field."
11.
The petitioner admittedly had done her BA from Panjab University, Chandigarh with 49% marks and, therefore, she did not have the requisite qualification of BA second class while applying for the post.
However, the application of the petitioner was initially rejected and she filed a representation against the same.
The Head of Department of Economics and Sociology of the respondent-University constituted a Committee comprising of Dr. KC Dhawan, Convener, Dr. Joginder Singh and Dr. PS Khattra to examine her case.
The committee gave its report, the material aspects of which are as follows :-  "The Committee met on 11121997 examined all the courses at undergraduate and post-graduate level she has cleared.
The Committee felt she has covered more No. of courses at undergraduate level.
Moreover, at undergraduate level, she obtained 326/400 which is equivalent to 6532% marks.
Her third division in Panjab University, Chandigarh BA degree has no relevance now she has improved upon this degree with first division.
Finally, the Committee recommended that she may be called for interview along with other applicants".
Accordingly, the petitioner was called for interview and was placed at serial No. 2 on the panel prepared by the Selection Committee.
The first candidate was appointed on regular basis.
The petitioner was subsequently offered the post on ad hoc basis from 10.9.1998 against a leave vacancy and she was made regular with effect from 23.6.1999 vide order dated 11.10.1999 (Annexure P-2) after the vacancy had become regular.
It is during audit which was conducted in March 2001 that the Deputy Controller (Local Audit) pointed out that the petitioner did not possess the essential qualifications of B.Sc.
(Agri)/BA with Economics with second division as approved by the competent authority and, therefore, her appointment was irregular.
In view of this objection, the Vice Chancellor of the respondent University constituted a committee to examine the appointment of the petitioner.
The Committee after going through the entire case, made the following observations :-  "The Committee met on 3042001 at 10.00 A.M. in the office of the Dean, College of Basic Sciences & Humanities and went through the entire case and decided that in view of the fact that the essential requirements for the said post was second class B.Sc.
(Agri.
)/BA with Economics while the candidate Mrs. Sarabjeet Kaur Dhaliwal is BA 3rd division 49% marks from Panjab University, Chandigarh, she was not eligible for the post of Assistant Economist in this University.
Her one year programme in United States in Limited Status of Economics from University of California (USA) cannot be equated with BA or B.Sc.
which are three years programmes in India.
In view of this, the audit objection is correct".
12.
It is not in dispute that at the time of the initial appointment of the petitioner, the respondents were apprised of the fact that the petitioner does not have second class in BA which was the minimum requirement for consideration for selection.
Rather the Head of the Department constituted a Committee which considered the application and observed that she was qualified.
Therefore, admittedly there is no misrepresentation on the part of the petitioner.
The objection that was pointed out by the audit is in March 2001.
After the initial appointment of the petitioner w.e.f.
1091988 the audit of the University must have been conducted even during the years 1999 and 2000.
However, no such objection was raised in these two years.
It is only in March 2001 that during audit, an objection was raised that the petitioner was not qualified for the post of Assistant Economist.
The contention of the University that the Director Local Funds Account is a statutory authority to conduct the audit of the accounts as provided under Section 34(4) of the Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act, 1970 may be noticed.
Section 34(4) of the said Act reads as under :-  "(4) The account and the balance-sheet shall be submitted by the Vice Chancellor through the Board to the appropriate Government which shall cause them to be audited by the Examiner, Local Fund Accounts".
13.
The perusal of the above Section 34(4) merely enjoins that the account and the balance-sheet is to be submitted by the Vice Chancellor of the respondent University through the Board to the appropriate Government which shall cause them to be audited by the Examiner, Local Fund Accounts.
The above provision provides for audit of the University accounts.
14.
The Courts have held that where there is no misrepresentation on the part of the candidate for seeking appointment to a post but the candidate is appointed despite his not having the requisite qualifications, his services are not liable to be dispensed with.
This Court in the case of Saudamini Prabha v. State of Punjab, 1999(3) Recent Services Judgments 499, held in para-5 as follows :-  "After considering the matter, I am of the view that this case can be disposed of on the short ground that though the petitioner may not have had the requisite qualification at the time of her initial appointment in the year 1976 but by efflux of time and the experience gained she should be deemed to have acquired the necessary expertise in the subject.
This has been so held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371."
15.
Besides, the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. MS Mudhol v. SD Halegkar, 1993(4) SCT.
226 : JT 1993(4) SC 143 considered the case of a Principal of a private aided school who was appointed due to the default of the Selection Committee in 1981, although he did not have the requisite qualification, but there was nothing on record to show that he projected qualification other than he possessed.
The Supreme Court held that it would be iniquitous to make his suffer for the same now after a period of 12 years.
The following observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India are apposite :-  "Since we find that it was the default on the part of the 2nd respondent, Director of Education in illegally approving the appointment of the first respondent in 1981 although he did not have the requisite academic qualifications as a result of which the 1st respondent has continued to hold the said post for the last 12 years now, it would be inadvisable to disturb him from the said post at this late stage particularly when he was not at fault when his selection was made.
There is nothing on record to show that he had at that time projected his qualifications other than what he possessed.
If, therefore, in spite of placing all his cards before the Selection Committee, the Selection Committee for some reason or the other had thought it fit to choose him for the post and the 2nd respondent had chosen to acquiesce in the appointment, it would be iniquitous to make him suffer for the same now.
Illegality, if any, was committed by the Selection Committee and the 2nd respondent.
They are alone to be blamed for the same".
16.
The respondents in their reply and also during the course of hearing have relied upon the instructions of the Punjab Government dated 19101993 (Annexure R-3) which have been issued on the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in District Collector & Chairman Vizianagaram v M Tripura Sundari Devi (supra).
However, the ratio of the said judgment is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the said case the minimum essential qualification required in the advertisement was second class degree in MA but the respondent therein held a third class degree in MA and was selected and appointed by mistake.
The appointment order, however, stated that her appointment was subject to the production of original certificates and to the compliance with the other necessary formalities.
When the respondent in the said case approached the authorities with the certificates, it was noticed the she was not qualified for the post and she was not allowed to join the service and was sent back.
The mistake, therefore, was discovered at the very initial stage at the time when the documents were scrutinized before the joining of the selected candidate.
Besides, it was observed that it is common knowledge that sometimes either by mistake or otherwise the notes put up before the Selection Committee contain erroneous data prepared by the office and some times the selection committee proceeds on the basis that all those whose appeared before it, are otherwise qualified.
However, when documents are scrutinized by higher authorities when the candidates had approached for resuming duties that the mistake was discovered and the respondent therein was not permitted to resume her duty.
In the present case, the petitioner was interviewed and was allowed to join after the selection.
The petitioner has worked from 10.9.1998 to 1262001.
Therefore, it is not a case where at the initial stage it was stated that the petitioner does not have the requisite qualifications.
17.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, contends that the petitioner is not entitled for any relief in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Smt. Ravinder Sharma and another v. State of Punjab, 1995(1) SCT.
48 : 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 195.
The appellant No. 1 in the said case was appointed as a Clerk in the Punjab Public Service Commission even though she was matriculate with III class and the rule required Matriculate Ist Class.
The said appellant did not possess the requisite qualification as required by the statutory rules.
It was contended before the High Court and also before the Supreme Court that the said appellant did not conceal her qualifications and that the Public Service Commission was conscious of the lack of qualification and yet it chose to appoint her.
The Supreme Court held that the appellant did not possess the qualification as required by the statutory rules applicable in the said case and, therefore, the appointment was held to be bad and no question of estoppel would ever arise.
Evidently it was a case of violation of statutory rules against which estoppel does not operate.
In the case in hand, it is not shown that the statutory rules governing the service of the petitioner require that she would have minimum qualification of BA with II class.
It is only a condition as advertised.
The Committee constituted by the Head, Department of Economics and Sociology did examine this aspect and in its report dated 12121997 (Annexure P-4) opined that the third division in BA of the petitioner had no relevance now as she had improved upon this degree with Ist Division.
18.
Another case cited by the learned Senior Counsel for the respondents is that of Bhanu Parshad Panda v. Chancellor Sambalpur, 2002(1) Service Cases Today 262.
The appellant therein was initially appointed as a Research Assistant in the Post Graduate Department of the University.
The University issued an advertisement inviting applications for certain posts of which Lecturer in Political Science was also one.
The said appellant was one of the applicants to the said posts and the selection committee found him suitable and recommended his only name for appointment as such.
He was appointed and joined the post.
One of the unsuccessful candidates made a representation to the Chancellor of the University that the appointment of the said appellant was irregular and in violation of the provisions of the Act and statutes.
The Chancellor issued a show cause notice as to why the appointment should not be cancelled.
The Chancellor found that the appellant was not eligible for the appointment in question as the said appellant lacked the minimum academic qualifications prescribed by the University Grants Commission, that he was awarded excess marks towards academic career and teaching experience and that the selection of the said appellant was made by ignoring the claim of qualified candidates.
The said appellant, it was held, did not have the minimum academic qualifications for appointment and his appointment was annulled.
The same is also not the position in the case in hand as the Committee had found that the petitioner had improved her qualifications.
19.
After considering the above facts and circumstances and the case law cited by the parties, we are of the view that in the case in hand there was no misrepresentation or concealment of any fact regarding qualifications on the part of the petitioner at the time of her initial ad hoc appointment w.e.f.
10.9.1998.
The case was in fact duly examined by a Committee comprising of three Professors of the Economic and Sociology Department on the asking of the Head of the Department.
The said Committee vide its report dated 12121997 (Annexure P-4) recommended that the petitioner may be called for interview along with others.
Besides, it also observed that she had improved her division and third division in BA had no relevance now.
Thereafter, the petitioner was also regularised in her service with effect from 23.6.1999 vide order dated 11.10.1999 (Annexure P-2).
The said order confers the status of a regular employee on the petitioner.
With regularisation of the services of the petitioner, she was not liable to be terminated by a simple notice as has been done by the respondents.
20.
In West Bengal State Electricity Board v. Desh Bandhu Ghosh, AIR 1985 SC 722, the first respondent therein was a permanent employee of the West Bengal State Electricity Board (Board - for short) and he filed a writ petition before the Calcutta High Court to quash an order passed by the Secretary of the Board terminating his services as Deputy Secretary with immediate effect on payment of three months' salary in lieu of three months' notice.
The said order was made under Regulation 34 of the Board's Regulations which enabled the Board to terminate the services of any permanent employee by serving three months' notice.
The High Court after considering the matter struck down first paragraph of Regulation 34 and as a consequence quashed the order terminating the services of the first respondent.
It was contended on behalf of the Board before the Supreme Court that Regulation 34 did not offend Article 14 of the Constitution and that the Electricity (Supply) Act laid down sufficient guidelines for the exercise of the power under Regulation 34 and in any case the power to terminate the services vested in high ranking officials and might be expected to be exercised in a reasonable way.
The Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "We are not impressed with the submission of the learned counsel for the Board.
On the face of it, the regulation is totally arbitrary and confers on the Board a power which is capable of vicious discrimination.
It is a naked `hire and fire' rule, the time for banishing which altogether from employer- employee "relationship is fast approaching.
Its only parallel is to be found in the Henry VIII class so familiar to administrative lawyers."
21.
The petitioner, as already noticed, has been a regular employee of the respondent University.
The circumstance leading to her termination is the audit objection raised on 2732001.
On this a Committee was constituted, which vide its report dated 3042001 (Annexure P-5), as reproduced above, found the aduit objection to be correct.
The petitioner was issued a show cause notice dated 1452001, to which the petitioner filed her reply dated 28.5.2001 (Annexure P-6).
The Vice Chancellor is stated to have considered the above circumstances and the impugned order dated 1262001 (Annexure P-9) has been passed by the Registrar of the respondent University.
The relevant part of the impugned order as conveyed by the Registrar to the petitioner reads as follows :-  "After careful consideration of the report of the committee, the Vice Chancellor came to the provisional conclusion to terminate the services of Mrs. Sarabjit Kaur Dhaliwal as she did not fulfill the essential requirement for appointment to the post of Assistant Economist.
Accordingly Mrs. Sarabjit Kaur was served with a notice vide this office No. Admn.III.Au.2001/10130-32 dated 1452001 to show cause as to why her services may not be terminated as she did not fulfill the essential qualifications for the post of Assistant Economist.
The reply dated 28.5.2001 submitted by Mrs. Sarabjit Kaur Dhaliwal to the show cause notice has been considered by the Vice Chancellor is pleased to terminate the services of Mrs. Sarabjit Kaur Dhaliwal, Assistant Economist with immediate effect."
22.
The above order is in violation of the rule laid down by the Supreme Court in West Bengal State Electricity Board v. Desh Bandhu Ghosh (supra).
Such an order ought not to have been passed in respect of a regular employee of the respondent University.
In fact it is not even shown as to whether the respondent University had any powers under the rules or regulations governing the service of the petitioner to pass such an order merely after serving a show cause notice.
Even otherwise the perusal of the impugned order shows that there has been no consideration of the reply filed by the petitioner to the show cause notice.
A mere bald assertion is made in the impugned order that; "the reply dated 28.5.2001 submitted by Mrs. Sarabjit Kaur Dhaliwal to the show cause notice has been considered by the Vice Chancellor---------."
The reasons of consideration have not been indicated.
This violates an essential facet of the principles of natural justice.
The giving of reasons in support of an order is an essential principle of natural justice.
A party has a right to know not only the result of the inquiry but also the reasons in support of the decision.
This has been found to be a very salutary rule and speaking orders are necessary if judicial review is to be effective.
It has been held that giving of reasons is one of the fundamentals of good administration.
The condition to record reasons introduces clarity and excludes arbitrariness and satisfies the party concerned against whom an order is passed.
The non-recording would also violate the test of reasonableness inasmuch as it is to be taken that the competent authority failed to take into consideration the relevant and necessary material on record.
23.
Another contention of the respondents that requires consideration is that the Panjab University, Chandigarh vide its reply dated 9112001 (Annexure R- 2) to letter dated 5112001 of the Registrar of the respondent-University while drawing the attention of the Registrar of the respondent University to an earlier letter dated 20.9.2001 informed that a candidate who has passed BA Examination from the Panjab University, Chandigarh in third division cannot be considered to have his division improved from third to second on passing one year course of study in Economics from the University of California.
The said letter of the Panjab University Chandigarh is quite inconsequential, for the reason that the services of the petitioner were terminated on 1262001 before the issuance of the said letter on 9112001 and even before issuance of an earlier letter dated 20.9.2001.
In fact before the letter of the Panjab University Chandigarh dated 9112001 (Annexure R-2) was issued, the respondents had already issued a show cause notice to the petitioner on 1452001.
The petitioner was supplied with the copy of the Committee report dated 12121997 (Annexure P-4) which considered her representation against rejection of her candidature for interview by the screening committee and also the proceedings of the Committee dated 3042001 (Annexure P-5) which considered the matter after the audit objection was raised.
Therefore, the letter dated 9112001 (Annexure R-2) of the Panjab University Chandigarh was, in any case, was not part of the consideration process while terminating the service of the petitioner and the same cannot be now considered to substantiate the decision already taken on the basis of a document which was not there when the impugned order was passed.
24.
The position, therefore, is that the petitioner has been working continuously in the respondent University w.e.f.
10.9.1998 till the audit raised an objection in March 2001 and her services were terminated on 1262001.
The continuation of the petitioner as Assistant Economist from the date of her initial appointment with effect from 10.9.1998 till the termination of her services vide order dated 1262001 is by itself a sufficient experience and therefore, even if she lacked the prescribed qualifications the experience gained would be sufficient for her continuation.
This is particularly so when it is not shown that there has been an infraction or violation of any rules or regulations governing the service conditions of the petitioner or for appointment and regularisation for the post of Assistant Economist.
Therefore, it was not proper on the part of the respondent University to terminate the services of the petitioner and that too without holding any departmental inquiry.
The petitioner was not liable to be removed except after an inquiry held in accordance with the statutory rules governing the conditions of her service.
The services of the petitioner were not liable to be terminated by an order after merely issuing a show cause notice and particularly when she is a regular employee of the respondent University.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 1262001 (Annexure P-9) terminating the service of the petitioner and the order dated 1262001 (Annexure P-7) relieving the petitioner from service are quashed and the petitioner shall be entitled to continue in service with all consequential benefits.
There shall however be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.