GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against order dated 2322000 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench (for short, `the Tribunal') dismissing the Original Application filed by him for quashing the order vide which he was discharged from service.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Safaiwala in the Indian Air Force Unit at Ambala on 2921984.
In the year 1989, he proceeded on leave and sought extension of the same on medical grounds.
Through letter dated 311990, he was warned to desist from continuing with the acts of indiscipline and was told that if such acts are repeated in future, he would be discharged from service under Rule 15(2)(k) of the Air Force Rules, 1969 (for short, `the Rules').
After one year and over three months, he was issued notice Annexure P2 dated 1641991 to show cause against his proposed discharge from service under Rule 15(2)(k) read with Rule 15(2) of the Rules.
Thereafter, he was administered warning vide memo dated 1871991 (Annexure P.3).
Another show cause notice dated 1231993 (Annexure P.4) was issued to him proposing his discharge from service.
He filed replies dated 2431993 (Annexures P6 and P7) and denied the allegation of absence from duty.
Thereafter, two notices dated 12.8.1993 (Annexures P.8) and 7121995 (Annexure P.9) were served upon him for taking action under Rule 15(2)(k) of the Rules.
Ultimately, he was discharged from service vide Annexure P11 dated 321996.
He submitted representation-cum-appeal dated 671996 (wrongly typed as 671997 in Annexure P.12) and sent reminders dated 2661997, 2071997, 571998, 1681999 and 24121999 but failed to get any response.
3.
After about 4 years from the date of discharge, he filed an application under section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short, `the Act') for quashing the order of discharge.
He also applied under Section 21(3) of the Act for condonation of delay in filing the application.
4.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 resisted the application by contending that it was barred by time and also on the ground that no illegality was committed by the competent authority in passing the order of discharge.
The Tribunal declined the petitioner's prayer for condonation of delay and dismissed the application as time-barred.
5.
Shri R.P.
Bali argued that dismissal of the Original Application filed by the petitioner as barred by limitation should be declared as vitiated by an error of law because the Tribunal did not consider the uncontroverted averments made by the departmental authorities who had deliberately refrained from giving reply to the representations and reminders sent by him.
Learned counsel submitted that the expression "sufficient cause" appearing in Section 21(3) of the Act should be liberally construed and if the Tribunal had kept in view the principles laid down by the Supreme Court for dealing with the application for condonation of delay, it could not have dismissed the application as time-barred.
He further argued that the petitioner was entitled to represent against the order of discharge and this should have been taken into consideration by the Tribunal for condoning the delay in filing of the Original Application.
6.
Shri Gurpreet Singh supported the impugned order and argued that the Tribunal did not commit any jurisdictional error or illegality by refusing to condone about 4 years delay in filing of the application.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments.
For deciding the question whether the Tribunal could have entertained the application filed by the petitioner after 4 years of the accrual of the cause of action, we may refer to the Preamble and Sections 3(b), (q), (r), 14(1), 19(1), 20 and 21 of the Act.
The same read as under :  "Preamble An Act to provide for the adjudication or trial by the Administrative Tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government in pursuance of Article 323A of the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx  3.
(b) "Application" means an application made under section 19; (q) "Service matters", in relation to a person, means all matters relating to the conditions of his service in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, as the case may be, of any corporation (or society) owned or controlled by the Government, as respects - (i) remuneration (including allowances), pension and other retirement benefits; (ii) tenure including confirmation, seniority, promotion, reversion, premature retirement and superannuation; (iii) leave of any kind; (iv) disciplinary matters; or (v) any other matters whatsoever,  (r) "Service rules as to redressal of grievances", in relation to any matter, means the rules, regulations, orders or other instruments or arrangements as in force for the time being with respect to redressal, otherwise than under this Act, of any grievances in relation to such matters.
14.
Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal -  (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to - (a) recruitment and matters concerning recruitment, to any All India Service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post under the Union or to a post connected with defence or in the defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a civilian; (b) all service matters concerning - (i) a member of any All-India Service; or (ii) a person [not being a member of an All India Service or a person referred to in clause (c)] appointed to any civil service of the Union or any civil post under the Union; or (iii) a civilian [not being a member of an All India Service or a person referred to in clause (c)] appointed to any defence services or a post connected with defence,  and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation [or society] owned or controlled by the Government.
(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the Union concerning a person appointed to any service or post referred to in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of clause (b), being a person whose services have been placed by a State Government or any local or other authority or any corporation [or society] or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government for such [Explanation.
- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that references to "Union" in this sub-section shall be construed as including references also to a Union territory].
19.
Applications to Tribunals.
- (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal may make an application to the Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section, "order" means an order made -  (a) by the Government or a local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or by any corporation (or society) owned or controlled by the Government; or  (b) by an officer, committee or other body or agency or the Government or a local or other authority or corporation referred to in clause (a).
20.
Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.
- (1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant rules as to redressal of grievances - (a) if a final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by the such person in connection with the grievance; or (b) where no final order has been by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired.
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), any remedy available to an applicant by way of submission of a memorial to the President or to the Governor of a State or to any other functionary shall not be deemed to be one of the remedies which are available unless the applicant had elected to submit such material.
21.
Limitation - (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an application - (a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause (a) of sub- section (2) of section 20 has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from the date on which such final order has been made; (b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 20 has been made and a period of six moths had expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expiry of the said period of six months.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where --- (a) the grievance in respect or which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order made at any time during the period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal exercisable under this Act in respect of the matter to which such order relates; and  (b) no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had been commenced before the said date before any High Court, the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is made within the period referred to in clause (a), or, as the case may be, clause (b), of sub- section (1) or within a period of six months from the said date, whichever period expires later.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub- section (2), an application may be admitted after the period of one year specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (I), or, as the case may be, the period of six months specified in sub-section (2), if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not making the application within such period."
A reading of the Preamble and the provisions quoted above shows that the main object behind the creation of special adjudicatory forum for resolution of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union etc. is to reduce the burden of regular Courts and thereby give them more time to deal with other cases expeditiously and also to provide speedy remedy to the persons having complaints in respect of recruitment, matters relating to recruitment and conditions of service.
For achieving this object, the Tribunals Act have been bestowed with the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable by all courts [except the Supreme Court] immediately before the date of enforcement of the Act in relation to all service matters including recruitment, promotion, pay, remuneration, pension etc. By virtue of the judgment of 7-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in L Chandra Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1997(2) SCT 423 (SC) : JT 1997(3) SC 589, the High Court can now entertain petitions under Article 26 of the Constitution of India against the orders of the Tribunal.
However, this does not, in any manner, detract from the fact that the Tribunals established under the Act have the exclusive jurisdiction to entertain and decide all disputes and complaints pertaining to service matters.
The factors, like prescription of shorter period of limitation, conferment of power upon the Tribunals to devise their own procedure, express exclusion of the jurisdiction of all other Courts except the Supreme Court (and now of the High Courts) and transfer of the pending suits and other proceedings to the Tribunals are clearly indicative of the Parliament's intention to create specialised forums having exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment, matters relating to recruitment as well as service conditions of the employees.
8.
Section 20(1) lays down that a Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
Sub-section (2) of Section 20 declares that for the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances if a final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection with the grievance and where no final order has been made by the Government etc., if a period of six months has elapsed from the date of filing of appeal or making of representation.
Section 21(1) declares that the Tribunal shall not admit an application against a final order as is mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 unless the same is made within one year from the date of such final order and in the case covered by clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 within a period of one year and six months from the date of filing of appeal or making of representation.
Sub-section (2) of Section 21 contains a non-obstante clause which was incorporated to obviate unnecessary objection of limitation in respect of order made immediately preceding the date on which power, jurisdiction and authority of the Tribunal became exercisable.
It lays down that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order made at any time during the period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercisable under the Act in respect of the matter to which such order relates and no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had been commenced before the said date before any High Court, the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is filed within the period specified in clause (a) of Section 21(1) of clause (b) thereof or within a period of six months from the said date.
Sub-section (3) of Section 21 also contains a non-obstante clause.
It empowers the Tribunal to admit an application after expiry of the period specified in clauses (a) or (b) of sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, the period of six months specified in sub-section (2) if the applicant satisfies that he had sufficient cause for not making the application within such period.
9.
The reason for prescription of a shorter period of limitation for filing an application under the Act as compared to the limitation prescribed for filing civil suits is not difficult to fathom.
This must have been done by the Parliament keeping in view the object sought to be achieved by enacting special legislation under Article 323-A of the Constitution of India to deal with service disputes and complaints of the employees and other aggrieved persons.
The main object behind the creation of special adjudicatory forum for resolution of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of union etc. was to provide speedy remedy to the aggrieved persons and also to reduce the burden of regular courts.
While doing so, the Legislature was alive to the fact that one of the major causes for declining the efficiency of services was the long pendency of litigation in the courts relating to service disputes.
Therefore, with a view to ensure that such complaints and disputes are adjudicated/resolved expeditiously, limitation of one year only came to be prescribed with provision for extended period of limitation of one year and six months for those cases in which the aggrieved employee may have made appeal/representation and the same may not have been decided by the concerned authority.
If the Legislature had retained the period of limitation prescribed for filing civil suits, the Tribunals constituted under the Act would have been reduced to the level of an ordinary forum for adjudication of service disputes and the purpose sought to be achieved by enacting the special legislation would have been frustrated.
10.
The ambit and scope of Section 21 of the Act was first considered by a 7- Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in SS Rathore v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1990 SC 10 in the backdrop of the dismissal of the appellant's suit as barred by time.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court referred to the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 and Sections 20 and 21 of the Act and held as under :  "We are of the view that the cause of action shall be taken to arise not from the date of the original adverse order but on the date when the order of the higher authority where a statutory remedy is provided entertaining the appeal or representation is made and where no such order is made, though the remedy has been availed of, a six months' period from the date of preferring of the appeal or making of the representation shall be taken to be the date when cause of action shall be taken to have first arisen.
We, however, make it clear that this principle may not be applicable when the remedy availed of has not been provided by law.
Repeated unsuccessful representations not provided by law are not governed by this principle.
It is appropriate to notice the provision regarding limitation under S. 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
Sub-section (1) has prescribed a period of one year for making of the application and power of condonation of delay of a total period of six months has been vested under sub-section (3).
The Civil Court's jurisdiction has been taken away by the Act and, therefore, as far as Government servants are concerned, Article 58 may not be invocable in view of the special limitation.
Yet, suits outside the purview of the Administrative Tribunals Act shall continue to be governed by Article 58.
It is proper that the position in such cases should be uniform.
Therefore, in every such case until the appeal or representation provided by a law is disposed of, accrual of cause of action for cause of action shall first arise only when the higher authority makes its order on appeal or representation and where such order is not made on the expiry of six months from the date when the appeal was filed or representation was made.
Submission of just a memorial or representation to the Head of the establishment shall not be taken into consideration in the matter of fixing limitation."
(Underlining is ours).
11.
In Secretary to Government of India and others v. Shivram Mahadu Gaikwad, 1995 Supp.
(3) SCC 231, the Supreme Court held that an application filed in the year 1990 questioning the order of discharge from service passed on 7.10.1986 was liable to be dismissed as barred by limitation.
Their Lordships further held that in the absence of an application for condonation of delay, the Tribunal cannot entertain the application filed after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed under Section 21(1) of the Act.
12.
In Central Hospital v. Savita S Bodke and others, (1995) Supp.
(3) SCC 439, the Supreme Court, while reversing the order of Bombay Bench of the Tribunal which had allowed on application filed by respondent No. 1 in the year 1982 for quashing the termination of his service brought about on 831982 observed as under :  "We fail to understand the Tribunal could have exercised jurisdiction in regard to an event which accrued long before it came into existence and how could it direct the payment of salary of Staff Nurse when she was not qualified to be appointed to the post."
13.
In Administrator of Union Territory of Daman and Diu and others v. RD Valand, 1995 Supp.
(4) SCC 593, their Lordships of the Supreme Court quashed the order passed by Bombay Bench of the Tribunal which had entertained the claim of the respondent for retrospective promotion and held as under :  "The Tribunal was not justified in entertaining the stale claim of the respondent.
He was promoted to the post of Junior Engineer in the year 1979 with effect from 2891972.
A cause of action, if any, had arisen to him at that time.
He slept over the matter till 1985 when he made representation to the Administration.
The said representation was rejected on 8.10.1986.
Thereafter, for four years the respondent did not approach any court and finally he filed the present application before the Tribunal in March, 1990.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, the Tribunal was not justified in putting the clock back by more than 15 years.
The Tribunal fell into patent error in brushing aside the question of limitation by observing that the respondent has been making representations from time to time and as such the limitation would not come in his way."
14.
In Dhala Ram v. Union of India, (1997) 11 SCC 201, the Supreme Court held that an application filed in 1993 questioning 1988 rejection of the claim for compassionate appointment was liable to be dismissed as barred by limitation.
15.
In Ramesh Chand Sharma v. Udham Singh Kamal, 1999(4) SCT 500 (SC) : 1999(4) RSJ 689, the Supreme Court held that the Tribunal did not have the jurisdiction to admit an application filed after 3 years of the rejection or representation in the matter of promotion.
16.
In Government of Andhra Pradesh v. Mohd.
Ghosh Mohinuddin, 2001(3) SCT 1147 (SC) : 2001(4) RSJ 477, the Supreme Court allowed the appeal filed by the Government of Andhra Pradesh against the order passed by Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal and held that an application filed after more than 15 years of the notification issued by the Government for re-organisation of the cadre was liable to be dismissed as barred by limitation.
17.
In Y Ramamohan and others v. Government of India and others, 2001(2) SCT 347 (SC) : (2001) 10 SCC 537, the Supreme Court held that disposal of repeated representations made by the employee would not justify condonation of delay in filing the application.
In that particular case, the appellant had approached the Tribunal in 1990 for quashing Common Gradation List which was communicated to him on 351983.
The Tribunal rejected the application as barred by time.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court upheld the order of the Tribunal and observed as under:  "In the case in hand, when the Tribunal has recorded a finding in the year earlier case that the gradation list had been duly communicated in the year 1983, we must assume that the applicants knew of the gradation list assigning them the year of allotment as 1976, in 1983, and therefore the so- called representation filed by the appellants to the Central Government after disposal of the earlier application filed by the direct recruits is nothing but a subterfuge to get a period of fresh limitation.
This method adopted by the appellants disentitles them to any relief.
That apart, the gradation list of the year 1983 allotting 1976 as the year of allotment to the appellants has almost settled the seniority list, which need not be disturbed after this length of time."
18.
In Director of Settlement and others v. D Ram Prakash, 2002(3) SCT 657 (SC) : 2002(2) RSJ 582, the Supreme Court reversed the order of Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal and held that the Tribunal should not have entertained the application ignoring the period of limitation.
The facts of that case were that seniority of the respondent in the cadre of Surveyor was determined taking his entry into service w.e.f.
121978.
In the year 1985, he filed representation claiming that the period of training from 1101971 to 121972 shall be counted for the purpose of fixation of seniority.
The same was rejected.
In 1996, he made fresh representation which was rejected on 17101998.
Thereafter, he filed an application before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal accepted the application and directed the non-applicants to count the period of training for the purpose of fixation of seniority of the respondent.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court reversed the order of the Tribunal and held that it should have rejected the claim on the ground of limitation as provided under Section 21 of the Act.
19.
The above analysis of the provisions of the Act and survey of judicial precedents leads to the following conclusions :  (i) The Tribunal established under the Act cannot entertain an application filed after expiry of the period of limitation prescribed under Section 21(1) unless the applicant satisfies it that he had sufficient cause for not filing the application within the prescribed period of limitation.
(ii) The rejection of successive representations cannot justify entertaining of an application filed after expiry of the period of limitation unless the relevant service rules as to the redressal of the grievances provide for such representations.
20.
We may now advert to the case in hand.
A recapitulation of the facts shows that the petitioner was discharged from service vide communication dated 321996.
He filed the Original Application on 722000, i.e., after more than 4 years of the issuance of the impugned order.
During the interregnum, he made representations dated 671996, 2661997, 2071997, 571998 and 1681999.
This shows that he had performed annual ritual of making representations against the order of discharge from service.
The petitioner did not plead before the Tribunal that the rules regulating the conditions of his service provide for representation against the order of discharge and he had availed the alternative remedy by making such representations.
Therefore, the Tribunal did not commit any illegality when it refused to condone the delay in filing of the application.
Before this Court also, the petitioner has not produced any rule, regulation or order under which he could make representation against the order of discharge from service.
Therefore, we do not find any valid ground to differ with the Tribunal and upset the impugned order.
21.
We are further of the view that repeated representations made by the petitioner did not constitute sufficient cause for condonation of delay in filing the Original Application.
In C.W.P.
No. 18472-CAT of 2002, Amrik Singh v. Union of India and others, decided on 21112002; C.W.P.
No. 18471-CAT of 2002-Sukked Singh (now Sushil Kumar) v. Union of India and others, decided on 21112002; and C.W.P.
No. 9691 of 2002, Union of India and another v. Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench and another, 2003(2) S.C.T.
863, decided on 9122002, this Court has, after exhaustively dealing with the issue of delay in filing the application under Section 19 of the Act, held that successive representations made by the employees cannot be made basis for condoning delay in filing the application.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.