SS Saron, J - This order will dispose of the above mentioned four writ petitions, filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for the issuance of writ, order or direction quashing the Award dated 792001 Annexure P-1 passed by respondent No. 1 Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Karnal, as common question of fact and law are involved in these petitions.
2.
The facts in CWP 1236 and 6081 of 2002 are that respondent No. 2 in the respective writ petitions i.e. Ms. Babita Arora and Neelam Kashyap were appointed as Staff Nurses vide appointment letter dated 2031992 attached as Annexure P-2.
The appointments were offered against temporary posts in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 at the Red Cross Maternity Charitable Hospital, Karnal (hereinafter to be referred to as the Society).
3.
In CWP No. 6347 of 2002 respondent No. 2 Ms. Champa Rani was appointed as ANM through Employment Exchange vide appointment letter dated 551980 appended as Annexure P-2 with the said petition.
She was also offered appointment against a temporary post in the pay scale of Rs. 130-5-150/5-200 in the Red Cross Maternity Hospital at Panipat, District Karnal.
4.
In CWP No. 6349 of 2002 respondent No. 2 Suresh Kumar was appointed as Sweeper against a temporary post on monthly wages of Rs. 1475/- vide office memo dated 7101988 in the said Hospital.
In the respective appointment letters, one of the terms and conditions provided that their service could be terminated by giving one month notice or pay in lieu thereof for the period by which the notice falls short of one month.
5.
Respondent No. 2 in the respective writ petitions raised an industrial dispute through demand notice and subsequently filed claim petitions.
The same were referred by the Government of Haryana under Section 10(1)(i) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, (for short, the Act).
The primary grievance of the workman in their respective petitions before the Labour Court was that they had worked continuously with the petitioner-Society and that their services had been dispensed with without following the procedure laid down under Sections 25-F, 25-G, 25-H of the Act.
Besides, it was pleaded that the petitioner-Society had not followed the principle of `last come first go' while terminating their services as persons junior to them have been retained in service.
It was also pleaded that there are many other schemes of the petitioner where they can easily be adjusted and termination of their services was a measure of punishment.
The management had adopted unfair labour practices in terminating their services.
The work against which they had been working was still existing and new persons have been appointed.
They requested for the reinstatement of their service.
6.
The petitioner-Society before respondent No. 1 learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, filed written statement taking the objection that it was not an industry within the meaning of the Act and, therefore, respondent No. 1 had no jurisdiction.
Besides, workmen are stopped from raising the dispute by their act and conduct.
On merits, it was admitted that the workmen in CWP Nos. 1236 and 6081 of 2002 were appointed as Staff Nurses in the Maternity Charitable Hospital of petitioner-Society on the dates mentioned by them.
They were required to execute a bond to serve the Society for a period of one year and that after completion of the said period their appointments could be terminable on one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof.
It was pleaded that the services of the workmen were terminated due to closure of Red Cross Society with effect from 30.9.1998 because Charitable Maternity Hospital was running on donations and not by the government.
Charitable Maternity Hospital had to be closed down due to financial constraints and heavy expenditure which could not be met.
7.
In the case of Ms. Champa Rani (CWP No. 6347 of 2002) it was admitted that she was appointed a ANM against a temporary post on 551980 and her services were terminated due to closing down of the Hospital.
8.
The position with regard to Suresh Kumar (CWP No. 6349 of 2002) being appointed as Sweeper against a temporary post in the Hospital on 7101988 was admitted.
His services were also dispensed with on account of closing down of the Hospital due to financial constraints.
As such there was no question of adopting procedure as prescribed.
9.
On the reference made to respondent No. 1, Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Karnal, the claim of the workmen was accepted and award was passed in their favour.
The workmen were held entitled for reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages from the date of their respective demand notices.
10.
Aggrieved against the said award, aforesaid four writ petitions have been filed by the petitioner-Society.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
11.
Dr. Balram K Gupta, learned Senior Counsel on behalf of the petitioner has contended that respondent-workmen were not entitled to be benefit of Sections 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Act as the Hospital was closed down and it being a case of closure, the concept of retrenchment was not involved but the services of the workmen were dispensed with.
Therefore, even if the provisions of the aforesaid Sections of the Act were not complied with, it would not entitle the workmen to reinstatement and continuity of service.
In support of his contention he relied upon the case of Pipraich Sugar Mills Ltd v. Pipraich Sugar Mills Mazdoor Union, AIR 1957 SC 95 and the case of Hariprashad Shivshanker Shukla v. AD Divelkar, AIR 1957 SC 121.
The learned counsel on the strength of the above said judgments, contended that where business had been closed and it is either admitted or found that the closure is bona fide, any dispute arising with reference thereto would fall outside the purview of the Act.
12.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents contended that there was no closure and in any case the alleged closure was not bona fide and was mere a paper transaction.
He referred to the statement of Brahm Dutt who appeared as MW-1 before the Labour Court.
In his cross-examination the said witness stated that he was getting salary from the Red Cross Society since August 1998 and was adjusted against a vacant post at the Nasha Mukti Kendra.
Besides, the learned counsel emphasised that the said witness has stated that he did not possess any record from which it could be shown that the Society was not receiving any donation and that three projects were run by the Red Cross Society.
Besides, Administrative office of all the three projects were the same and Deputy Commissioner Karnal was the President.
Still further the three projects were receiving grants from the Government.
He also admitted that no retrenchment compensation was given to the workmen at the time of their termination and neither was any compensation paid when the Hospital was closed.
The learned counsel for the respondents placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of Raj Hans Press v. Labour Court, Delhi, 1980(1) LLN 155 and on the strength of the same submitted that closing down of one of the units did not amount to closing down the department and that the closure was a mere sham and that artificial classification of closing down the unit could not be done.
In substance, the primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the termination of services of the workmen on closure of the Hospital is not retrenchment.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, contends that the closure is a mere sham to get rid of the respondents and in any case the same is not a bona fide action on the part of the petitioner-Society.
During the course of hearing we had asked the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner-Society that whether the Maternity Hospital had indeed been closed down and whether the respondents could be adjusted in the other works of the petitioner-Society.
In response to the same, the petitioner-Society has filed Civil Miscellaneous No. 26538 of 2002 to place on record Annexures P-12 and P-13.
On the strength of the same, it is contended that the Family Welfare Centre of the petitioner-society is being run on the Central Government grant which has imposed a cut of 50% of the grant for the year 2002-03 as per letter dated 2062002 Annexure P-12.
Besides, a notice was given to the members of the staff of the Family Welfare Centre on 1982002 Annexure P-13 informing that in view of the cut in the Central Government grant, they would be paid 50% of the salary with effect from 1.9.2002 and in the event the staff members are not willing to work on the 50% emoluments, the Centre may have to be closed.
In view of this, it is submitted that it is practically not feasible at all to adjust the respondents in the Family Welfare Centre.
It is equally impossible to adjust the respondents in any manner.
13.
We have considered the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
For the purpose of decision of these cases, we may notice the following definitions as contained in Section 2 of the Act :-  "2(cc) "closure" means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof;" 2(oo) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or (bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- health;"  14.
Having noticed the above-said two provisions of the Act, which define the `closure' and `retrenchment', it is to be seen whether it is a case of closure of the Maternity Hospital which is bona fide and if so whether in a case of closure, the respondent-workmen are not entitled to the benefit of Sections 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Act.
Besides, whether it is a case of closure of one of the units of the petitioner-Society only.
15.
The petitioner has placed on record the proceedings of an emergent meeting of the Executive Committee of District Red Cross Society, Karnal, held on 491998 under the Chairmanship of Deputy Commissioner-cum-President, District Red Cross Society, Karnal, as Annexure P-3.
Agenda item No. 6 relates to the closure of Maternity Hospital being run by the Society.
The discussion on the said agenda item primarily records that the Society was not having sufficient funds to run the Hospital.
The Civil Surgeon, Karnal, who was asked to conduct a study regarding the utility of the hospital, in his report dated 26.8.1998 observed that during 199-98 only 9589 OPD cases, 682 Indoor Patients came to the hospital and 276 delivery cases were conducted in the hospital; a total of 92 Tubectomy cases were done; and no gynae operation was conducted.
He further reported that the staff of one lady Doctor, two Staff Nurses, three ANMs, one trained Dai, two clerks, one Social Worker, two Ward Servants, three Sweepers, one Chowkidar was excessive keeping in view the work and the hospital would have been justified only if it was located in a slum area.
He suggested that if this hospital was closed, its work load would be easily and properly handled by the Civil Hospital, Karnal, as the hospital is located quite near to it.
The Committee considered the report of the Civil Surgeon and decided that there was no justification for continuing the maternity hospital and the same should be closed keeping in view its very little utility and heavy expenditure which was being met only out of donations from the public.
It was decided that services of the entire staff engaged in the hospital should be dispensed with in view of the terms and conditions of their appointment and a seniority list of the such staff be maintained and this staff should be adjusted wherever possible in the District Red Cross Society, Karnal, if they fulfil the qualifications for the existing vacancies or future vacancies.
16.
It is in consequence of this decision that termination notices were issued to the workmen by indicating that the Executive Committee of the petitioner-Society had decided to close down the hospital.
However, there is no mention of later part of the decision with regard to the staff being adjusted wherever possible in the District Red Cross Society, Karnal, if they fulfil the qualifications for the existing vacancies or future vacancies.
This evidently shows that there was work with the petitioner-Society and that Maternity Hospital was only one of its units.
Even from the persual of C.M.
26538 of 2002 which has been filed by the petitioner-Society, it would be seen that a reference has been made only regarding adjustment of the respondents at the Family Welfare Centre and that no reference has been made to other works like Nasha Mukti Kendra, Viklang Kendra and Family Planning Scheme of the petitioner-Society.
This probably is due to the reason that the petitioner- Society has been in a position to plead that a cut of 50% in the Central Government grant has been imposed.
17.
It is after the termination of the services of the workman in the respective petitions that the reference was made to respondent No. 1 Labour Court.
The Labour Court examined the witnesses.
In CWP 1236 of 2002 Ms. Babita Arora appeared as WW-1.
She stated in her statement that Maternity Hospital was still continuing and family planning Maternity and OPD are still working and slip of OPD was produced on record as Mark C Besides, she stated that Neelam Sharma and Sushma Arora was junior to her.
She also stated that under the Red Cross Society Nasha Mukti Kender, Viklang Kender and family planning schemes are still continuing.
She was given only notice pay but no compensation was given to her.
The statement of Brahm Dutt, who appeared as management witness, also admits the facts that in addition to the Maternity Hospital, the petitioner-Society was running the aforesaid three units and that these projects were receiving grants from the government separately.
The admitted case of the parties, therefore, is that the petitioner-Society is running three other projects i.e. Nasha Mukti Kendra, Viklang Kendra and Family Planning Scheme.
Besides, it is not denied by the petitioner-Society that Neelam Sharma and Sushma Arora junior to Ms. Babita Arora are still working.
Besides, it is admitted fact that no retrenchment compensation has been paid to the workmen.
The learned Labour Court in our view rightly observed that there was no evidence led by the management to show that the hospital was being run only by donations.
Besides, in view of the slip mark C, it was clear that Family Planning Scheme and OPD were working.
The said slip though has not been exhibited or proved but the same has not been specifically denied even by the petitioner-Society.
In C.M.
No. 26538 of 2002 a reference has been made to the slip mark C and it has been contended that the same was never proved and consequently could not be exhibited.
In other words, the factum of the slip is not specifically denied.
Even otherwise in proceedings before the Labour Court the rules of evidence are not strictly applicable and, therefore, even if the slip is not proved, the same does have probative value and goes to show the bent of mind of the petitioner-Society.
Therefore, in the circumstances and from the material on record, it can be safely concluded that the petitioner-Society was running other projects which are still continuing.
Besides, in the circumstances even the Family Welfare Centre/Maternity Hospital had not been closed.
It may also be mentioned that the petitioner-Society in terms of C.M.
No. 26538 of 2002 filed during the course of hearing does admit the fact that the Family Welfare Centre was being run on the grant given by the government, which has been reduced by 50%.
In these circumstances, the workmen completed more than 240 days preceding the date of termination of their respective services, therefore, they are entitled for retrenchment compensation which has not been paid by the petitioner- Society.
18.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on the cases of Pipraich Sugar Mills (supra) and Hariprasad (supra) are inapplicable as we have observed that there was no closure of the unit and that the unit is still continuing.
Besides, there are three other units of the petitioner- Society which are functioning.
Hariprasad's case (supra) followed the judgment in Pipraich Sugar Mill's case (supra).
In para 11 of Hariprasad's case it was held as follows :-  "There is no doubt that when the Act itself provides a dictionary for the words used, we must look into that dictionary first for an interpretation of the words used in the statute.
We are not concerned with any presumed intention of the legislature; our task is to get at the intention as expressed in the statute.
Therefore, we propose first to examine the language of the definition and see if the ordinary, accepted notion of retrenchment fits in, squarely and fairly, with the language used.
What is the ordinary, accepted notice of retrenchment in an industry ?
We have had occasion to consider this question in Pipraich Sugar Mills Ltd v. Pipraich Sugar Mills Mazdoor Union, CA No. 247, D/- 23101956 : (S) AIR 1957 SC 95(A), where we observed : "But retrenchment connotes in its ordinary acceptation that the business itself is being continued but that a portion of the staff or the labour force is discharged as surplusage and the termination of services of all the workmen as a result of the closure of the business cannot therefore be properly described as retrenchment."
It is true that these observations were made in connection with a case where the retrenchment took place in 1951, and we specially left open the question of the correct interpretation of the definition of `retrenchment' in S. 2(oo) of the Act.
But the observations do explain the meaning of retrenchment in its ordinary acceptation."
A persual of the above shows that in Pipraich Sugar Mills's case (supra), the correct interpretation of the definition of retrenchment as defined in section 2(oo) was left open.
In Hariprasad's case (supra) the expression "for any other reason whatsoever" as defined in section 2(oo) of the Act was considered and it was held as under :-  "What is being defined is retrenchment, and that is the context of the definition.
It is true that an artificial definition may include a meaning different from or in excess of the ordinary acceptation of the word which is the subject of definition; but there must then be compelling words to show that such a meaning different from or in excess of the ordinary meaning is intended.
Where, within the framework of the ordinary acceptation of th word, every single requirement of the definition clause is fulfilled, it would be wrong to take the definition as destroying the essential meaning of the word defined."
Besides, it was also observed that object of all labour legislation was firstly to ensure fair terms to the workmen, and secondly to prevent disputes between employers and employees so that production might not be adversely affected and the larger interest of the public might not suffer.
The definition clause relating to retrenchment was held to mean that it would include within the definition termination of service of all workmen by the employer when the business itself ceased to exist.
However, in the present case we have come to the conclusion that the Red Cross Society itself has not ceased to exist and its other units are functioning.
19.
In the case of Raj Hans Press (supra) referred to by the learned counsel for the respondent-workmen, the question which arose for determination was whether it was Section 25F or 25FFF of the Act which was attracted to the disputed termination of the services of the workmen in the said case.
M/s Raj Hans Press was running a printing press which was having a letter press, and an offset department.
The press decided to close down its letter press department as no work was being received in that department and it was running at a tremendous loss.
Accordingly services of its employees in that department were terminated.
The workmen contested the termination and claimed that it was not bonafide.
According to them, the management was carrying on the business of running a printing press as one establishment and had mala fide terminated their services.
A Division Bench of Hon'ble Delhi High Court considered the question as to whether letter press and offset pleaded by the workmen were separate and distinct or were functioning as part of one establishment.
It also took into account that ownership, control of business and finances etc. were indeed important factors as also the inter- changeability of workmen.
It was observed that the closure of the letter press, a part of the printing press, did not mean closure of the undertaking.
The Hon'ble Court took the view that the Labour Court had given certain findings of fact based on material and so in writ jurisdiction the High Court could not sit in judgment on those findings.
In the case in hand also, the Red Cross Society is running three other units which are under the same management.
Besides, the Labour Court after having referred to the statement of Brahm Dutt who appeared as management witness has come to the conclusion that they were under the petitioner-Society i.e. the same management in respect of which the Maternity Hospital has been closed down.
Besides, it also recorded a finding that the Red Cross Society was receiving grants from the government.
Therefore, in the exercise of writ jurisdiction of the High Court, it would be improper to disturb the finding returned by the learned Labour Court.
Resultantly, the writ petitions are dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.