Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents quashing the order dated 12.11.2002 enclosed with the writ petition as Annexure P/5 and further directing the respondents to refund the amount so deducted with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
All the petitioners are working in DAV Senior Secondary School for Girls, Ferozepur Cantt, which is affiliated and receives 95% grant-in-aid from Punjab Government.
To remove pay disparity between the employees of the aided schools and their counterparts working in Government Schools, the government issued instructions on 1421985 Annexure P/1 to the writ petition.
It was also decided that those employees who were not provided with the rent free accommodation and are posted within 16 kilometers of the range of international border were granted house rent allowance at the rate of 12% of their basic pay.
For different reliefs various writ petitions were filed in the High Court, which were allowed referring to these different policies of the government.
According to the petitioners, they were entitled to 5% of their basic pay in lieu of rent free accommodation.
The petitioners claim that they are also entitled to revised pay scales and consequently enhanced salary and arrears thereto in terms of the 4th Pay Commission with effect from 111996 and also that the deductions of the allowances received by them, which are being made by the respondents for the period of 111996 to 31.3.1996 are without any basis and consequently the order Annexure P/5 should be set aside.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed reply wherein they stated that such relief has been declined to the employees of management committee of privately managed recognised aided schools by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Om Parkash Kaushal and others, 1996(4) SCT 302 (SC) : Civil Appeal No. 9130-05 of 1996 (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 18502-03 of 1994) decided on 871996 and the stand taken by the Government has been up-held by the Apex Court.
According to the State it is the responsibility of the management of such private aided school to provide benefits, if any, to its employees and the Government is not under obligation to grant to the petitioners 5% of pay in lieu of rent free accommodation.
The policy decision of the Government is in consonance with the decision of Hon'ble Apex Court and as such the petitioners are not entitled to any relief.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioners at the very out-set conceded that the petitioners cannot be granted other reliefs in view of the instructions of the Government and the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Om Parkash Kaushal (supra), wherein it was held as under :-  "As mentioned above, the Act, came into force on Jan 23, 1981.
Section 7 of the Act granted parity to the private teachers in the matter of scales of pay and dearness allowance with the Govt. teachers.
Prior to that the Punjab Govt. had granted unified pay scale and dearness allowance to the private teacher at par with the Govt. teachers by the executive instructions w.e.f.
Dec 1, 1967.
The respondents were given parity under the executive instructions only in the respect of pay scales and dearness allowances.
The other conditions of service relating to the Govt. teachers were not extended to the respondents.
The incentive provided in the 1960 instructions in the shape of advance increments to the Govt. teachers who improved their educational qualification could not be automatically extended to the respondents.
This court, in the two Adhyapak Sangh cases from the State of Haryana allowed the benefits of Pay scales and dearness allowances to the private teachers and declined to go into other benefits like HOUSE RENT ALLOWANCE, CITY COMPENSATORY ALLOWANCE, LTC, BONUS ETC. We are, therefore, of the view that the High Court fell into patent error in directing the State of Punjab to grant the benefits under the 1960 instructions to the respondents.
We allow the appeals, set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and dismiss the writ petitions filed by the respondents before the High Court.
No costs."
4.
The only reliefs the petitioners are now pressing before us are with regard to the refund of recoveries made from the salaries of the petitioners, with interest.
In this regard the petitioners rely upon the judgment of Sahib Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 668 (SC) : 1994(5) S.L.R.
753.
It is an admitted case before us that the petitioners were granted the benefit by the Government as its own and in furtherance and upon interpretation of the instructions issued by it.
There was no misrepresentation made by the respondents at any stage.
They have received this benefit during the period of service and after discharging their obligations in terms of the instructions issued by the Government.
In these circumstances and in the light of the judgment of the Apex Court afore- referred, we are of the considered view that it will not be fair for the respondents to recover the amounts which have already been paid to the petitioners.
The petitioners might have incurred liabilities on grant of such relief and their position may be irreversible as of today.
5.
In view of the above discussion, we allow this writ petition limited to the extent that the amounts already paid for the above limited period will not be recovered from the petitioners and if recovered, would be refunded in instalments by the Government as it may deem fit and proper.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.