Sunil Kumar Garg, J - This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner on 30101991 against the respondents with the prayer that the recommendations of the Selection Committee in pursuance of the interviews held on 26101991 for the post of Assistant Professor of Botany be quashed in toto and the respondents be asked to hold fresh interviews and in that, the petitioner may also be called.
2.
It arises in the following circumstances :-  Certain posts of Assistant Professors in the Department of Botany in the University of Jodhpur were advertised through Annex.
1 on 1091991 in the newspaper "Hindustan Times".
The petitioner, who is M.Sc.
(Botany) and PhD from the recognized University, applied for the said post and submitted the application form.
The qualifications for the said post are mentioned in Annex2 and the same are as follows :- (a) A Doctorate's degree or research work of an equally high standard; and  (b) Good academic record with atleast second class (G in the seven point scale) Master's degree in a relevant subject from an Indian University or equivalent degree from a foreign University.
Having regard to the need for developing interdisciplinary programmes, the degrees in (a) and (b) above may be in relevant subject :  Provided that if the selection committee is of the view that the research work of a candidate as evident either from his thesis or from his published work is of a very high standard, it may relax any of qualifications prescribed in (b) above."
Since the petitioner has passed her M.Sc.
(Botany) from Rohilkhand University, Bareilly (UP) in 1986 and she also got the degree of PhD from the same University, therefore, in all respects, she was fulfilling all the requisite qualifications for the post of Assistant Professor.
The Constitution of the Selection Committee, the procedure of the Selection Committee and the disqualification for sitting as a Member are contained in Sections 4 to 6 of the Rajasthan University Teachers and Officers (Special) Conditions of Service) Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act of 1974") and the relevant clause contained in Section 5(3) of the Act of 1974 is reproduced hereinbelow :-  "Every Selection Committee shall be bound by the qualifications laid down in the relevant law of the University concerned for the post of a teacher or as the case may be, of an officer."
However, to the utter dismay of the petitioner, although she was fully qualified and eligible for the post of Assistant Professor (Lecturer), but she was not called for interview and she was illegally deprived for consideration of the said post, which was unfair and unjust.
Since thereafter recommendations made by the Selection Committee in pursuance of the interviews held on 26101991 were approved by the Syndicate for the post of Assistant professor in Botany, therefore, they may be quashed as the petitioner was not called for interview though she had requisite qualifications for the said post.
A reply to the writ petition was filed by the respondents on 14101998 and in the reply, the main contention of the respondents was that the petitioner was not founded eligible to be called for interview, as per the short listing methods.
No doubt the petitioner was having minimum qualifications for the said post, but as per short listing Rules, she was not called for interview.
Hence, this writ petition be dismissed.
3.
In this petition, the main submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that by not calling the petitioner for interview though she had minimum qualifications for the post of Assistant Professor, a discrimination has been made by the respondents against the petitioner, which violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and, therefore, the whole selection should be set aside and method of short listing is also contrary to rules.
4.
On the contrary, it has been submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the selection cannot be set aside as the persons, who were selected for the posts of Assistant Professors (Lecturers), have not been made parties to this writ petition and in their absence, their appointments cannot be set aside and apart from this, since in short listing, the case of the petitioner was not found favourable by the Selection Committee, therefore, in such matters, no interference should be made by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and the learned counsel appearing for the respondents and perused the materials available on record.
6.
Before proceeding further, it may be stated here that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various decisions including in MP Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar (1994(6) JT (SC) 302) and later on in Union of India and anr. v. T Sundararaman 1997 A.I.R. (SC) 2418 : 1997(2) S.C.T.
810 : (AIR 1997 SC 2418) has upheld the principles of short listing of the candidates.
7.
Therefore, in the present case, if the Selection Committee adopted the principles of short listing, it cannot be said that its action was irrational or improper or illegal or contrary to rules.
Position of law with respect to interference under writ jurisdiction of the High Court against the autonomous body like University.
8.
The Educational Authorities should be left without interference from the Court and other outside agencies in administering their disciplinary jurisdiction over the matters of examinations and appointments.
9.
The interference in matters of University through writ jurisdiction should be made only when :-  (1) That there is a patent and undoubted violation of a provision in the statute or regulation or ordinance governing the particular subject; (2) That this non-compliance or violation should have directly resulted in a substantial restriction of the service of benefit which a citizen is entitled to get from the University; and (3) That the direction or relief sought should be such that it should not add to the inconvenience suffered by the public at large, disproportionate to the injustice or inconvenience that is sought to be remedied.
10.
Apart from that, the High Court is not a court of appeal over the actions and deeds done by the University and its powers are confined only to seeing that the hedges of law are not over-stepped.
11.
In the present case, though the petitioner was having requisite qualifications for the post of Assistant Professor, but she was not found fit for calling for interview by the Selection Committee, as per short listing method.
The action of the respondents in not calling the petitioner for interview as per short listing method, cannot be said to be in contravention of the statutory or binding Rules, as the principles of short-listing have been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various decisions.
Apart from this, it is not necessary that every person having requisite minimum qualifications should be called for interview and if every person possessing requisite minimum qualifications is called for interview, the purpose of rule of short listing would be frustrated.
12.
When this being the position, I am clearly of the opinion that this Court should not interfere with the action of the respondent-University, especially when the interference would directly affect the rights of those persons, who were not made parties before this Court.
Thus, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief as sought for in this petition.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is liable to be dismissed and the same is dismissed.
The stay granted by this Court on 1111991 that the post of Assistant Professor in Botany shall be filled up only provisionally stands vacated.
Petition dismissed.