Pinaki Chandra Ghose, J - This is an application challenging the demand notices issued by the respondent authorities calling upon the petitioner No. 1 and its Director to make payment of a sum of Rs. 65,56,417/- on account of employer's contribution under the Employees' Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) and threatening to proceed against them under the provisions of section 8B to 8G of the said Act and further the thereat of attachment in respect of bank account of the petitioner No. 1.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the said notice inter alia on the ground that the petitioner No. 1 is a sick company within the meaning of section 3(i)(o) of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as SICA Act) and further according to the petitioner, under section 2(1) of the said SICA Act, 1985 when an inquiry under section 17 is under preparation or consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where an appeal under section 25 relating to an industrial company is pending, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law or the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the industrial company or any other instrument having effect under the said Act or other law, no proceedings for the winding up of the industrial company or for execution, distress or like against any of the property of the industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in respect thereof shall lie or be proceeded with further except with the consent of the Board or, as the case may be the Appellate Authority.
The petitioner is also bound to get direction under section 32 of the said SICA Act.
3.
It further contended that since the Employees' Provident Fund Act does not contain any non-obstante Clause and the SICA Act and the said Act are both special statutes and since SICA Act came into force later than that of the provident fund Act, in that case, it has been contended that the said Act must prevail over the same.
4.
The ground for challenging the said notice and the attachment that the respondent failed to consider the representation made by the petitioner company vide letter dated 15th November, 2000 and furthermore, the respondent did not consider that the petitioner has paid the entire employees' contribution and nothing was due and payable.
Therefore, the respondents cannot have authority to take coercive measure against the petitioners including the issuance of the said notice attaching the back account.
The entire business of the petitioner has come to standstill and further the scheme which has been placed by the petitioners before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (hereinafter referred to as BIFR) and the same is still pending.
Therefore, actions taken by the respondents against the petitioners are wrongful.
5.
Mr. Saha appearing on behalf of the petitioners drew my attention to the said section and further contended that In the case of "Maharashtra Tubes Limited v. S.I.I.C.
of Maharashtra," reported in (1993)2 SCC 144 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the meaning of the expression, "Proceeding for distress or the like" in section 22(1) has to be broadly construed so as not to confine it to "legal proceedings" and accordingly such proceedings are not restricted to proceedings before a Court or Tribunal and even a proceeding by a State Financial Corporation under section 29 of the State Financial Corporation Act is not permissible.
In "MV Damodaran v. Regr.
of Co-op Societies", reported in (1999)95 Comp.
Case 116, the company had deducted amounts from employees' wages for paying over to the Co-Op.
Credit Society but failed to do so according to the understanding.
It was held that section 22(1) bars recovery of such money from the company.
6.
He also submitted that section 22(1) has been judicially interpreted by Courts as imposing a restriction on even the recovery of statutory dues.
In support of such submission he relied upon the judgments reported In AIR 1990 SC 1017 (Gram Panchayat v. Shree Vallabh Glass Works), AIR 1988 All 170 (IFCI v Maharashtra Steel Limited), (1989) Comp.
Cases 124 (Comet Filaments (I) Ltd. v. Pradeshiya Industrial & Investment Corporation of UP Limited), (1993) 76 Comp.
Cases 281 (Cal.)
(Himalaya Rubber Products v. BIFR).
In a decision reported in 1997(7) JT 216 (Tata Davy Ltd etc. v. State of Orissa & Ors.) the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that arrears of sales tax cannot be recovered from a sick industry by coercive process.
In a case of "Reliance Ispat Industries" reported in (1993)77 Comp.
Cases 381 it has been held that even a notice containing a threat amounts to a coercive action.
7.
He further contended that with reference to non-obstante Clause contained in section 22(1) and the non-obstante provisions of section 32, it as been held in "Union of India v. Krishna Mills Limited" reported in 81 Comp.
Cases 150 (Raj) that the effect of the same is that whatever may be the other law or its effect, no proceeding against the property of a sick company would lie or be proceeded with.
In the said case it was held that the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 being a special statute in relation to Sick Industrial Companies and a later statute, it will prevail over the general provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and the non-obstante Clauses in sections 22 and 32 will prevail as against the non-obstante Clause in section 529A of the Companies Act.
8.
He also submitted that where there are two special statutes which contain non-obstante Clauses, the later statute must prevail.
In support of such submission he relied upon a judgment reported in (1997) 89 Comp.
Cases 547 (Bhoruka Steel Limited v. Fairgrowth Financial Services Limited).
9.
He further contended that section 22(1) amounts to statutory interdict to the realisation of provident fund dues and that by reason of the same no steps can be taken to realise such dues by taking recourse to oppressive measures.
In support of such contention he relied upon an unreported judgment of the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court in APOL 80 of 1999, GA 469 of 1999, WP No. 2137 of 1998 (Regional Provident Fund Commissioner v. Messrs Nuddea Industries Limited).
10.
He also submitted that in the case of "Poysha Industrial Company Limited v Union of India & Ors." reported in 1994(2) Cal LT 330 : 1995(1) SCT 499 (Calcutta) a learned single Judge of this Hon'ble Court was pleased to set aside the impugned order passed under section 14B of the Employees' Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 in view of the provisions of section 22(1) of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 and to refer the matter back to the appropriate authority for a fresh decision upon considering the said provision.
11.
He further contended that the Employees' Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 being a social Welfare legislation, no construction of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 can be given effect to which takes away or suspends the right of the provident fund authorities from realising the provident fund dues and damages.
In support of such contention he relied upon an unreported Divisions Bench Judgment of this Hon'ble Court reported in Appeal No. 591 of 1996, Matter No. 2254 of 1990 (Kusum Engineering Co Ltd v. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, West Bengal & Ors.).
Accordingly, he submitted that this application should be allowed.
12.
Mr. Binoy Mishra, learned Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent submitted that there is nothing illegal in the attachment of bank account under section 8B(a) of the said Act.
He further contended that the petition is not maintainable as the order passed under section 7A of the said Act and petitioner has a right of appeal under section 71 of the said Act.
The petitioner did not take any steps or exhausted the said remedy which has been given under the said statute.
Accordingly, he submitted that this application should be dismissed.
13.
He further contended that the Bombay High Court in an unreported judgment reported in WP No. 1688 of 2000 (Palliwolf Limited v. RPFC & Ors.) that section 22(1) of SICA Act, 1985 is of no assistance to the petitioner having regard to the nature of payments required to be made by way of provident fund and other contributions under the said Act.
14.
It is further contended that the appeal was preferred from the said judgment and the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to reject the said Special Leave Petition.
Accordingly, he submitted that the said judgment has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and thereby the view taken by the Bombay High Court has been approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the said point.
15.
He further submitted that the judgment delivered by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this High Court in Appeal No. 591 of 1990 (Kusum Engineering Co Ltd v. R..PFC & Ors.), the Hon'ble Division Bench held that it is a statutory liability and the Provident Fund Act is a piece of social welfare legislation enacted for the purpose of welfare of the labourers.
If the industry is to run the labour welfare legislation has to be given effect to and that construction of the said Act could be given which takes away or suspends the right of the Provident Fund Authorities from realising the Provident fund dues and/or damages.
16.
He further contended that in the judgment reported in 2001 CHN 476 (Vikram Poddar v. RPFC & Ors.) the Hon'ble High Court held that merely because the company is a sick company and it has been referred to BIFR is not an impediment in recovering the dues of Provident Fund.
He also relied upon a judgment reported in AIR 1997 SC 2027 (Deputy Commercial Tax Officer v. Corromondal Pharmaceuticals) and submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that section 22 was not meant to freed dishonesty nor can it be so operated as to encourage unfair practice.
The amount due to revenue and/or statutory liability cannot be withheld indefinitely and unreasonably and it is against the spirit of the statute.
17.
He further submitted that if there is any default in paying the amount under the said Act the defaulters are liable to be prosecuted under paragraph 76(a) of the scheme.
In support of such contention he relied upon a judgment reported in AIR 1974 SC 1183 (Inderjit & Parekh & Ors. v. BK Bhatt & Anr.).
In the facts and circumstances of this case this application should be dismissed.
18.
After considering the facts and circumstances of this case and the order passed by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction in respect of the petitioner No. 1 where the BIFR has specifically held that the company is sick under section 3(1)(o) of the SICA Act, 1985 appointed a special Director of the company to safeguard its financial and other interest.
It further appears that the Bench acceded to the request made on behalf of the petitioner to submit a rehabilitation scheme for the unit within 60 days.
Such order was passed by the BIFR on 9th February, 1990.
There is no whisper made in the petition that the BIFR has accepted the scheme or any scheme has been filed by the petitioner No. 1 for its rehabilitation before the BIFR.
It further appears that the scheme has not been approved or sanctioned by the BIFR.
It further appears that the scheme was not annexed to the petition nor placed before this Court.
But it appears from the statements made in the petition that the Bank and the operating agency deviated from one time settlement before the BIFR and the company filed a revisional application before this Court, but no documents have been produced before this Court to that extent.
In my opinion, those facts ought to have been brought before this Court and the subsequent orders if passed in the matter should have been brought on record which in my opinion purposefully has been suppressed by the petitioners from this Court.
It further appears that there is a provision under the said Act challenging the demand notice issued by the petitioner before the said authorities.
The petitioner did not take any step in the said matter nor filed any appeal.
The statute has given power to the petitioner to challenge the same under section 71 of the said Act.
The petitioner purposefully did not avail of the said chance and has come before this Court.
Accordingly, in my opinion the writ Court should not interfere in the matter when a specific right has been given to the petitioners under the said statute.
It is further to be noted here that the petitioner has specifically submitted that they have paid the employees' share but suppressed the facts that the amount to be paid to the Provident Fund Commissioner, being an employer share in respect of such provident fund.
19.
I further cannot accept the contention raised before me by Mr. Saha that the SICA Act must prevail over the Provident Fund Act, 1952.
It is a fact that the SICA Act came into operation in the year 1985, but it is also to be noted that the Employees' Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 was amended by the Act 33 of 1988.
Such amendment of 1988 expressly notices the position of the SICA Act of 1985 and, therefore, it cannot be said that the said SICA Act must prevail over the Employees' Provident Fund Act.
Section 14-B of the said Act was amended taking into consideration of an establishment which is a sick industrial company and in respect of which a scheme for rehabilitation has been sanctioned by the BIFR under the provisions of SICA Act, 1985 subject to the terms and conditions of the scheme.
Therefore, the amendment of the said Employees' Provident Fund Act, 1952 was enacted by the Act 33 of 1988 and the legislators were conscious of the existence of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.
Therefore, in no way it can be said as sought to be contended before me that the SICA Act, 1985 must prevail over the Provident Fund Act, 1952.
20.
Apart from that the further question arose whether a sick industrial company can claim the benefit of the provisions of section 22 in respect of the dues payable towards provident fund under the Employees' Provident Fund Act, 1952.
It further appears from the records that the matter was placed before BIFR in the year 1990.
The amount was to be paid by the petitioner company being the contributions of the employer which have not been paid by the employer and the same have been unlawfully retained by the employer.
21.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in "Deputy Commercial Tax Officer v. Corromondal Pharmaceuticals" reported in AIR 1997 SC 2027 that section 22(1) of the Act can apply only to such dues recognised or included in the sanctioned scheme and the amounts which have been collected by the Sick Industrial Company on account of sales tax etc. after the date of the sanctioned scheme legitimately belonging to the revenue, cannot be and could not have been intended to be covered within section 22 of the Act.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has specifically held that any other construction will be unreasonable and unfair and will lead to a state of affairs enabling the sick industrial unit to collect amounts due to the revenue and withhold it indefinitely and unreasonably.
Such a construction which is unfair, unreasonable and against spirit of the statute in a business sense, should be avoided.
22.
After considering the judgments cited before me I do not have any hesitation to hold that the company has no right to take shelter under section 22 in respect of statutory liabilities and the employees are entitled to have their statutory benefits under the Employees' Provident Fund Act and thereby any default on the part of the employer under the said Act cannot attract the said section or can get away taking an advantage out of the said section and accordingly, In my opinion the purpose and object of section 22 cannot be interpreted in a manner to give a shelter to the petitioners against the orders passed by the respondent authorities.
23.
Accordingly, I am of the view that section 22(1) of the SICA Act, 1985 would not be any assistance to the petitioner in the facts and circumstances of this case having regard to the nature of the payments required by way of Provident Fund and other contributions under the said Act and I do not find any substance in this application and the same is rejected.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Application rejected.