SB Sinha, J - In this application the petitioners herein have questioned an order of the Administrative Tribunal dated 772000 passed in OA No. 107/A&N/99, whereby and whereunder the application filed by the respondent herein was allowed, directing :  "Accordingly, we are of the view that the OA should be allowed.
We also take note of the fact that this petitioner has been unnecessarily harassed by the respondent authorities compelling him to approach this Tribunal once again in the matter of regularisation of his service without any lawful reason on the part of the respondent authorities for which the petitioner deserves exemplary cost."
2.
The fact of the matter lies in a narrow compass.
The petitioner was allegedly appointed through open selection on all India basis on 2391976.
The said appointment was made in terms of the Recruitment Rules, as obtaining at the relevant point of time.
The offer of appointment was made in favour of the respondent on purely temporary and ad hoc basis for one year or till regular appointee joins the duty, whichever is earlier.
The Vice-Chancellor, Panjab University, allegedly, approved his appointment as Lecturer in Chemistry.
He was further selected for undergoing training in NCC Naval Wing, Senior Division and upon successful completion thereof, he was commissioned as Sub-Lieutenant, NCC and assumed the charge of Senior Division Lecturer with effect from 3071978.
On 2631979 the Assistant Secretary (Dev) sent a signal of UPSC for issuing/calling respondent for interview.
The respondent herein submitted two applications for forwarding the same to the Union Public Service Commission, one for the post of Lecturer in Chemistry in the Government College, Port Blair and another for Master in Chemistry, but the same were forwarded only after six months.
His application for admission in MPhil.
course was forwarded by the Principal on 14111980.
In the said letter it is stated --  "Shri Rajinder Singh, Lecturer in Chemistry of this College joined this college on 2391976 on an ad hoc basis and since then has continued purely on an ad hoc basis on account of not possessing any research degree.
Shri Rajinder Singh was selected for his ad hoc appointment at Chandigarh with the assistance of Dr. Gurdev Singh and has served this college in times of difficulty.
The process of finding a Lecturer through the UPSC has been so long drawn out that no UPSC nominee has ever joined the College since the appointment of Shri Rajinder Singh and the UPSC is still struggling hard to find regular incumbents to man the post.
In view of the long services of Shri Rajinder Singh, I think a certain moral responsibility devolves on us to help Shri Rajinder Singh qualify himself to help get absorbed on regular basis as soon as he can.
Since a research degree is so very important for this, Shri Rajinder Singh is applying to the Panjab University, Department of Chemistry for admission to MPhil.
course.
I shall be grateful if his candidature is considered on special grounds.
I may mention here that Shri Raninder Singh has throughout had a meritorious career except at the M.Sc.
examination where he has failed to make a first class.
I shall be grateful for the help given by you in the admission of Shri Rajinder Singh."
3.
In the year 1978 the Recruitment Rules had been framed known as "Andaman and Nicobar Administration Government College, Port Blair (Lecturer) Recruitment Rules".
The essential qualifications for the post of Lecturer were :-  (i) A consistently good academic record with at least first or high second class (b) in the seventh point scale at a Master's degree of a recognised University or equivalent;  (ii) An MPhil.
degree of a recognised University or equivalent."
The said recuruitment Rules were again amended by a Notification dated 2nd September, 1985 wherein the essential qualifications were stated to be :-  "(a) An MPhil.
Degree or a Recognised degree beyond the Master's level or published work indicating the capacity of a candidate for independent research work; and  (b) Good academic record with at least second class (C in seven point Scale) Master's degree in a relevant subject from an Indian University or equivalent degree from a foreign University."
4.
The respondent's ad hoc appointment was extended by order No. 3768 dated 11th September, 1986.
The respondent filed an application, for regularisation of his services as also questioning his order or termination, before the Central Administrative Tribunal, which was marked as OA No. 11/A&B/87 and by an order dated 841987 the learned Tribunal passed an order of interim stay of the termination of the services of the petitioner.
Unfortunately, the petitioner had not been granted study leave and curiously he was asked to take his MPhil.
courses at Governament College at Port Blair for which there did not exist any infrastructure whatsoever.
Only on 2271991 he was granted study leave.
The petitioner acquired the said qualification in July, 1993.
He, thereafter, prayed for regularisation of his service.
It appears that as against the order passed by the learned Tribunal in OA No. 11/A&N/1987, a Special Leave Petition was filed, but despite requests by the respondents, no information with regard thereto was furnished to him.
5.
However, it now stands admitted that the application for grant of Special Leave was dismissed by the Supreme Court.
Exasperated with the conduct of the respondent, the petitioner allegedly, had sought for voluntary retirement.
He, thereafter, filed representation on 30th September, 1998, but getting no relief whatsoever, he filed 5 applications before the Central Administrative Tribunal, three of them being OA No. 77, 80 and 81 of 1988, were disposed of at the admission stage.
By reason of the order impugned before the learned Tribunal dated 1721999, the Secretary (Education) rejected the claim for pay scales and voluntary retirement, but conveyed that the Administration has taken the decision to regularise his ad hoc services.
The UPSC also conveyed approval of the prayer of the respondent relating to regularisation of his services on or about 27.7.1999.
His services were thereafter directed to be regularised with effect from 1231993.
6.
In the aforementioned situation the petitioner filed an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal praying for the following reliefs :-  "I.
An order be passed setting aside the impugned order No. 3050 dated 26th August, 1999 giving effect of regularisation from 1231993 that is the date of issue of mark-sheet of MPhil.
degree whereas study leave was not granted to the applicant as per the Hon'ble Tribunal's order in OA 11/AN/87.
II.
An order be passed directing the respondent authority to regularise the service of the applicant with effect from 23rd September, 1976 as your applicant was duly selected by duly constituted selection committee through an open selection on all India basis against a regular vacant post of Lecturer having requisite qualification for the post and uninterruptedly still continuing."
7.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, the learned Tribunal held that the petitioner was entitled to regularisation of his services with effect from the date of initial joining and not with effect from 1993.
8.
Mr. Bahadur, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that the petitioner having been appointed on ad hoc basis, could not have been granted the reliefs as was done by the Central Dministrative Tribunal.
In support of the said contention, reliance has been placed on Excise Commissioner, Karnataka and another v. V Sreekanta, 1993(3) SCT 186 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 1564.; Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1994(4) SCT 398 (SC) : AIR 1995 Supreme Court 962 and Dr. Anuradha Bodi and others etc. etc. v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi and others, 1998(3) SCT 322 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 2093.
9.
The respondent, who had appeared in person and argued his case very ably, submitted that he had been subjected to discrimination from the very beginning in so far as he was not appointed on regular basis despite his selection on the basis of the qualification he possessed.
It was submitted that having regard to the fact that even by reason of the subsequent amended Recruitment Rules, the qualification of MPhil.
could be relaxed and further in view of the fact that his study leave had not been granted for a long time, the order impugned in this writ application cannot be faulted.
10.
This case depicts a sordid state of affairs.
If the contention of the respondent is correct that he had the requisite qualification when the vacant post of Lecturer was sought to be filled up, there does not appear to be any reason as to why the Public Service Commission could not direct filling up of the said post in terms of the extant Recruitment Rules.
The petitioner, however, in this connection has relied upon a letter of the Public Service Commission dated 4th June, 1976 so as to buttress its reason for not filling up the post on a regular basis, but on a pre-revised scale of Rs. 700-1600.
The petitioner, who has obtained his M.Sc.
degree and obtained more than 50 per cent marks in an examination, applied for the said post pursuant to the advertisement made by the Administration.
Although, he probably was of the view that he would be taken in service permanently, but as noticed hereinbefore, he was appointed on a purely ad hoc basis in a temporary post.
He accepted the same without any demur whatsoever.
11.
In the meantime the Recruitment Rules came into being in terms whereof the educational qualification for recruitment in the said post was enhanced.
It is true, as has been submitted by the respondent, that the Administration should have granted him study leave at the earliest opportunity, but acted in a whimsical manner first by asking him to do his MPhil.
course at Port Blair itself, where for no facilities existed, and then withholding recommendations for his admission in the MPhil.
course for a period of 3 years.
12.
Despite the said acts of omissions and commissions on the part of the appellant, the question, which arises for consideration would be as to whether the Respondent was entitled to regularisation of services from the date of his initial appointment.
The answer to the said question must be rendered in negative having regard to the law laid down by the Apex Court in V Srinivasa Reddy v. State of Andhra pradesh and others, AIR 1995 SC 586.
It has clearly been held therein that the seniority of a person, who had earlier been appointed on an ad hoc basis would be reckoned from the date of his regularisation.
The situation might have been different if an advertisement had been made for filling up of the post on a regular basis and the petitioner had been selected upon compliance of the provisions of the Recruitment Rules.
V Srinivasa Reddy,(supra) has been followed in VP Shrivastava and others, The State of MP and others, 1996(2) SCT 192 (SC) : JT 1996(2) SC 374, and Dr. Sachidananda Banerjee and others v. State of West Bengal and others, 1998 LAB I.C.
1805.
Reference in this connection may also be made to State of West Bengal and others, 1998 LAB I.C.
1796. v. Ranjit Kumr Paul and another, (Calcutta).
But as indicated hereinbefore, not only the post was temporary, but the appointment of the respondent was on ad hoc basis.
In Excise Commissioner, Karnataka and another v. Sreekanta, reported in AIR 1993 Supreme Court 1564, it has been held -  "In our view, Mr. Narasimha Moorthy is justified in his submission that the respondent was not entitled to claim seniority from the date of his initial appointment on ad hoc basis but he was only entitled to claim seniority from the date of his subsequent appointment or regularisation under the said special rules or recruitment in 1970."
13.
In Masood Akhtar Khan and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh and others, reported in Supreme Court Service Rulings 247, the Apex Court held -  "Hence, in the advertisement and in the appointment letter, the Government had rightly stated that the said appointments were pending the regular selection by the Commission.
It is, therefore, clear, as held by the High Court that the appointments of the petitioner and others who were appointed along with them on October 25, 1972 were a stop-gap emergency arrangement pending the regular selection by the Commission.
Although the words "ad hoc" are not mentioned either in the advertisement or in the appointment letter, the word "temporary" is mentioned there and read with the rest of the contents they leave no doubt that the appointments were as and by way of stop-gap arrangement pending the regular selection by the Commission.
Mr. Ramamurthy's contention that the said rule 7 has to be read with the Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission (Limitation on Functions) Regulation, 1957 and if so read, it would show that the present posts were beyond the consultative jurisdiction of the Commission has no merit in it."
In the instant case, the appointment was on an ad hoc basis.
14.
Yet again, in Dr. Anuradha Bodi and others v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi and others, AIR 1998 Supreme Court 2093, the Apex Court followed its earlier decision in Dr. MA Haque v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 618 (SC) : 1993(2) SCC 213 and held -  "Under that Section no appointment to any category-A post shall be made except after consultation with the UPSC but under the proviso no such consultation shall be necessary in regard to the selection for appointment to any acting or temporary posts for a period not exceeding one year.
According to learned Counsel for the petitioners, the appointment of the petitioners was for the period of six months only and there was no necessity to consult the Commission.
Consequently, according to her the appointments were in accordance with the statutory provisions.
There is no merit in this contention.
If this contention is accepted in main provision contained in Section 96 prohibiting any appointment without consulting the Commission can be easily defeated.
Appointments can be made for periods lesser than one year and after continuing such appointments for some years, the appointees could be made permanent.
That will only lead to nepotism and anarchy.
The statute has not provided for such a situation.
In fact a note of warning has been issued by this Court in Dr. MA Haque v. Union of India (Supra) in following words :  "As against this, however, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the recruitment rules made under Article 309 of the Constitution have to be followed strictly and not in breach.
If a disregard of the rules and the by- passing of the Public Service Commissions are permitted, it will open a back door for illegal recruitment without limit.
With respect, we adopt that reasoning and reject the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioners."
15.
In this case also admittedly, the Commission had not been consulted.
The Apex Court in Dr. Anuradha Bodi(Supra) also considered the submission that the concerned employee having been enjoying the benefit of revised pay for such a long time, should be held to be entitled to get his seniority reckoned from the date of his initial appointment, but negatived such contention.
16.
The law in this regard appears to be clear.
An employee must be appointed upon compliance of the provisions of the Recruitment Rules.
When a particular status is conferred upon an employee, the same cannot be changed unless there exists any statutory provision therefor.
17.
A regular appointment can only be made in terms of the Recruitment Rules and subject to the candidate's possessing the requisite qualification and also subject to existence of any sanctioned post.
18.
An employee is borne in the cadre only when he is appointed upon fulfilling the requirement therefor in a sanctioned post.
19.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by this Court in several decisions.
See Swapan Kumar Banerjee v. Union of India and others, 2000(1) SCT 794 (Calcutta)(DB) : 2000 LAB I.C.
1255.
20.
In Tarak Chowdhury v. State of West Bengal, 2000(3) SCT 105 (Calcutta)(DB) : 2000 (Vol. 2) Administrative Total Judgments page 510 :  "It has not been disputed that the petitioner was appointed on an ad hoc basis.
At the time of his appointment recruitment rules framed in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India had not been followed.
The State while granting appointment to a person is not only bound to follow the recruitment rules made in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India but is also bound to give effect to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
No right far less any enforceable right flows from such illegal appointments.
The recruitment rules, inter alia, provide for grant of equal opportunity to be considered for appointment to all eligible candidates.
A person who is appointed through back-door cannot claim permanence only because he had been working for some time.
Reference in this connection may be made to the case of Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pragaonkar v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1995 SC 962. and several decisions of the Apex Court following the same.
It is further well known in view of several decisions of the Apex Court that only an irregular appointment can be regularised and not illegal appointments.
It is further well settled that regularisation cannot be made of recruitment.
(See RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmaiah, 1972(2) SCR 799 and BN Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka, 1979(3) SCR 937 which decisions had been considered by the Apex Court in V Sreenivasan Reddy v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1995 SC 586.
It is now also well settled in view of the recent decision of the Apex Court in State of M.P. v. Dharam Bir, 1998(3) SCT 301 (SC) : 1998(6) SCC 165 that the status of a person who was appointed on temporary or ad hoc basis, cannot claim the status of a permanent servant only because he had worked for some time.
The said decision along with other decisions had been considered by this Court in a large number of cases.
Reference in this connection, however, may be made to Bimon Ch.
Karmakar v. State of West Bengal, 1999(2) CHN 2189 and West Bengal Essential Commodities Supply Corporation Ltd. v. Md Sarif, 2000(1) CHN 2110."
21.
This aspect of the matter has also been considered in The Director of public instruction, West Bengal v. Dr. Krishna Prasad Ghosh and another 2000(2) CAL LT 141 (HC).
wherein this court relying upon various decisions including Smt. Debirani Bhattacharjee and another v. District Inspector of Schools (SE), Burdwan and others, 1996(2) CHN 415; Managing Committee, Dinhata High School v. Sri Ram Chandra Saha and others., 1997(1) CHN 105.
Director of Public Instructions of West Bengal and others v. Dr. Ashish Pal and others.
1998(2) CHN 241; Dr. Meera Massey v. Dr. SR Mehrotra, 1998(1) SCT 727 (SC) : 1998 SCC 88.
Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar, 1995(4) SCT 298 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 718 : AIR 1994 SC 2148; J & K Public Service Commission and others v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others, 1994(1) SCT 626 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 630; AIR 1994 SC 1808 : 1994(1) SLR 246 (SC); State of Uttar Pradesh and others v. Harish Chandra and others, 1996(2) SCT 712 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2173 ;Ram Saran Shastri v. State of West Bengal, 1995(1) CHN 419; State of Bengal and others v. Ashoke Ranjan Chandra and others, 1999(2) CHN 387 ;State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dharam Bir, 1998(6) SCC 165; The Calcutta Tramways Company 1978 Limited and others v. Ramesh and 17 others, 1999(1) CHN513 ;Ziaul Islam with 202 others v. State of West Bengal and others, 1999(1) Cal LT 509 (HC) ;Debra Dutta v. State of West Bengal, 1998(2) CLJ 1, held that any appointment made in contravention of West Bengal College Commission Act would be illegal and the mandatory provisions contained therein must be followed before a regular appointment is made.
22.
In view of the aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court and this Court although we cannot uphold the directions of the Tribunal, we are of the opinion that having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and particularly with regard to the provisions of relaxation contained in the Recruitment Rules, the matter may be considered afresh by the Union Public Service Commission.
We hope and trust that the Union Public Service Commission and the petitioner herein shall consider the case of the respondent sympathetically and pass an appropriate order granting him such relief to which he may be found entitled to in the facts and circumstances of this case.
We, however, having regard to the conduct of the appellants, hold that the costs as awarded by the learned Tribunal should be upheld with liberty to the respondents herein to file a suit for damages.
This appeal is disposed of with aforementioned directions, but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.