S Mohan, J - Leave granted.
2.
The first appellant is the State of Uttar Pradesh.
It issued an Order No. 2683/Section 14/Five-4/84 dated 1341993 in exercise of the powers under Sub-Section (5) of Section 28 of the U.P.
Universities Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
By this order, the Government laid down the policy and procedure to be followed in cases of migration or transfer of students studying in Bachelor of Dental Surgery Course (BDS in short) to and from Dental Faculty of the King George Medical College, Lucknow.
The same is as follows :  ``(1) Migration on transfer shall be allowed only within three months of passing the first professional examination.
(2) During any one year a maximum of five per cent students of the intake capacity of the Dental Faculty of the King George's Medical College, Lucknow may be allowed to migrate or transfer to and from an authority or institution subject to a maximum of five students in such year : Provided that no seat shall be created in the Dental Faculty of the King George's Medical College, Lucknow as a result of migration or transfer.
(3) Migration or transfer under paragraph (2) shall be allowed in the following order :-  (a) Students selected through all India entrance examination for admission to under-graduate medical/dental course conducted by Central Board of Secondary Education and studying in any authority or institution outside the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(b) Students selected through competitive examination and studying in any University or institution outside the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(c) BDS students other than those specified in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) studying in any authority or institution outside the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(4) Application for migration or transfer shall be made in writing addressed to the Director, Medical Education and Training, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow through the Principal of the concerned authority or Institution.
(5) Subject to the policy and guidelines laid down in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3), the Director, Medical Education and Training, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow shall decide the applications for migration or transfer strictly on merit to be determined on the basis of marks obtained in the first professional examination.
The decision of the Director shall be final and binding.
Explanation - In this order the expression ``or Institution'' means an authority or Institution in India, the dental qualifications granted by which are included in Part I of the Schedule to the Dentists Act, 1948.
By Order, Atul Chaturvedi, Secretary, Medical Education.''
3.
The respondents are students of BDS Course pursuing study outside the State of UP Praveen Kumar Sharma is a student of Bhudha Institute of Dental Science and Hospital, Gandhi Nagar, Kauberbagh, Patna.
That College is recognised by the Dental Council of India.
The other respondents Manoj Kumar Srivastva, Ajay Gupta, Rachana Batra, Satvinder Singh Kalra and Rajat Mehrotra are students of Budha Institute of Dental Science and Hospital, Patna which is also a recognised College.
Vijay Pandey is a student of Ramarao Adik Educational Societies, Dental Narul, New Bombay.
Sharat Chandra Pandey is a student of College of Dental Surgery Manipal.
Sharat Chandra Pandey applied for transfer from the Dental College, Manipal to the Dental Faculty of King George Medical College Lucknow, in the third year course of the BDS on November 12, 1992.
That transfer was not ordered.
As a result, Sharad Chandra Pandey continued his study at Manipal, completed his third year course of the BDS on November 12, 1992.
That transfer was not ordered.
As a result, Sharad Chandra Pandey continued his study at Manipal, completed his third year and went to the fourth year of study.
4.
The other respondents barring Sharad Chandra Pandey filed six writ petitions in the High Court at Lucknow Bench seeking transfer to the Dental College at Lucknow.
The learned Single Judge by his order dated 131993 allowed those writ petitions directed the transfer of the petitioners as also those whose application for transfer which were pending at that time, they were directed to be considered for transfer to the Dental Faculty of King George Medical College, Lucknow.
5.
Sharad Chandra Pandey though his application for fourth year class of BDS was not pending, yet applied for transfer to the fourth year of study.
In April, 1993, the results of third year BDS at Lucknow was declared.
The next sessions for the fourth year BDS commenced in May, 1993.
Therefore, the request of Sharad Chandra Pandey for transfer to fourth year at BDS at Lucknow was rejected by the State Government.
Aggrieved by the same, he filed WP 970 (M/s.) 93, it was contended by reason of judgment of the High Court dated 131993, the claims of the students for transfer were bound to be considered and failure to do so was bad.
An interim order was passed in WP 970/93 permitting Sharad Chandra Pandey for pursuing his study in Lucknow.
6.
In the meanwhile, the State preferred a writ appeal against the order dated 131993.
The writ petition filed by Sharad Chandra Pandey and other students praying for consideration of claims for transfer in the light of judgment dated 131993 was dismissed by a learned Single Judge on 51093.
Against this order, appeals were preferred by Sharad Chandra Pendey and other students.
By an order dated 1011994, it was directed that Sharad Chandra Pandey should continue his study as a bona fide student.
As far as other students were concerned, it was held that they will be given admission after their cases were considered by the State Government.
This was in Special Appeal No. 22/93, 27/93 and 30/93.
Against this order dated 1011994, present S.L.P.
(C) No. ........../94 (CC No. 25475) has been filed.
7.
Respondent Praveeen Kumar Sharma filed a separate writ petition No. 730 (M/S.) of 1994 in the High Court.
By order dated 1341994, learned Single Judge of High Court directed the appellant to admit the respondent Praveen Kumar Sharma to the third year course of Bachelor of Dental Surgery in the faculty of Dental Sciences, King George's Medical College, Lucknow within a period of two from the date of service of a certified copy of the said judgment.
It was further directed that he shall pay Rs. 1000 to the respondent.
S.L.P.
(C) No. 9239/94 has been filed against the order dated 1341994.
8.
It is submitted on behalf of the State that :  (i) The High Court erred in considering as though the judgment dated 131993 passed by the learned Single Judge was a Judgment in rem.
The writ petitions were not filed in representative capacity.
(ii) There is no right to seek transfer from one Medical College to another.
Merely because Sharad Chandra Pandey and other students applied for transfer, they were not entitled to transfer to BDS Course.
There was no equity in favour of the students because admittedly they failed to secure admission in BDS course at Lucknow through the competition.
(iii) The finding of the High Court that the Rules promulgated on 1341993 were prospective in nature and did not govern the case of Sharad Chandra Pandey and others is wrong.
Though Judgments of this Court were cited to hold against this proposition, they were not properly considered by the High Court.
The High Court failed to note that the Regulations made by the Medical Council of India were not made after consulting the State Government and as such they were not enforceable.
(iv) In the case of Sharad Chandra Pandey, the grant of interim order was not warranted.
It can counter to the ruling of this Court.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondent would urge that the State has been consistently and continuously disobeying the orders of the High Court.
In spite of the clear direction to consider the cases of transfer on merits, some technical objections or other were raised so as to deny the just claims of the respondents.
Once, there is an order of the High Court on 131993 directing consideration of the claims for transfer, that order having become final, the transfers ought to have been considered.
That order vested the respondents with right; that right cannot be defeated; thus no exception could be taken to the impugned judgment.
10.
On a careful consideration of the above arguments and impugned judgment, we are clearly of the view that it is totally unnecessary to go into the question whether the Notification dated 1341993 is retrospective in its operation.
Section 28(5) of the Act reads as follows :  ``Notwithstanding contained in any other provision of this Act, admission to medical and engineering college and to course of instruction for degrees in education or Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine (including the number of students to be admitted), shall be regulated by such orders (which if necessary may be with retrospective effect, but not effective prior to January 1, 1979) as the Sate Government may by notification, make in the behalf : Provided that no order regulating admission under this sub-section shall be inconsistent with the rights of minorities in the matter of establishing and administering educational institutions of their choice.''
11.
Therefore, any Regulation made in this regard could have effect more so in the absence of any Regulation made by the Dental Council.
The State Government has the power under Section 28(5) of the Act or regulate admission in medical institutions by issue of orders.
The Judgment dated 131993 directed consideration of applications for transfer in not only the cases of writ petitioners before the Court but also other pending applications.
Undoubtedly, this was not a judgment in rem.
The writ petitions were not filed in any representative capacity.
There were also orders by the High Court directing consideration of applications for transfer in the light of the statutory provisions.
The statutory provision which is relevant at this stage is Section 10(A) which came to be introduced in the Dentist Act, 1948 under Dentist Amendment Ordinance 1993.
That Section imposes a complete embargo that no institution could increase its capacity in any course of study and training except with the previous permission of the Central Government.
The representative of candidates seeking transfer came to be rejected on 15.4.1993.
By that time, the Notification dated 1341993 had come into force.
Another representation came to be decided on 351993.
By then the Dentist (Amendment) Ordinance, 1993 had come into force introducing Section 10-A, noted above.
Therefore, the applications for transfer will have to be considered in the light of this statutory provision read with the Notification dated 1341993.
In this view, we are unable to uphold the judgment of the Division Bench.
12.
Accordingly, a direction be issued that the cases of respondents for transfer shall be considered in the light of the Notification dated 1341993 on or before 30.9.1994 by passing reasoned orders.
The Civil Appeal is ordered in the above terms.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.