R Gururajan, J - The workman, BB Akkatangerihal has filed Writ Petition No. 25498/99 challenging the denial of backwages by the Labour Court in ID No. 26/1998  2.
The management of Karnataka Road Transport (for short the `Corporation') has challenged the very same award with regard to grant of reinstatement in Writ Petition No. 26943/1999.
3.
The Court at the time of admission has granted interim stay subject to the Corporation reinstating the workman within two months.
The facts in brief are as under :-  The Corporation initiated certain disciplinary proceedings against the workman for his failure to issue tickets on 791970.
The disciplinary proceedings ended against the workman.
His services were dispensed with by an order of dismissal by the management.
The workman filed a petition in the light of the amendment of the ID Act in terms of Section 10(4-A) of the ID Act before the Labour Court, Hubli in K.ID No. 26/88.
The said matter was contested.
The Labour Court framed four issues in para 4.
The enquiry has been held to be fair and proper by the Labour Court.
Thereafter, the Labour Court considered the matter and passed an award ordering reinstatement with continuity of service and a compensation of Rs. 5,000/- to the claimant in view of backwages.
4.
The Counsel for the Corporation attacks the award by contending that the Court, having held that the charges are proved, ought not to have granted reinstatement, whatsoever.
5.
Per contra, the Counsel for the workman states that the material facts warrant not only reinstatement, but also backwages.
6.
After hearing the learned Counsel on either side, I have perused the impugned award.
Admittedly, the facts reveal disciplinary proceedings against the workman.
Those proceedings ended by way of an order of dismissal.
The said dismissal was challenged in K.ID No. 26/88.
The Labour Court has ruled that the enquiry is fair and proper.
Thereafter, the Labour Court notices that the bus was checked and found that 12 passengers were not given tickets, despite collection.
The Labour Court also notices that the Reporting Officer himself has committed some mistakes in mentioning the number of passengers when he counted at the time of check.
The Reporting Officer, as per the findings of the Labour Court has admitted that he could not count the passengers correctly on account of hurry and heavy rush.
The Labour Court also notices that the workman has written the ticket numbers of 48 column in the records.
The Labour Court, after noticing all these discrepancies, has come to a right conclusion that the misconduct is not fully proved beyond doubt.
I am of the same view in the light of the findings of the Labour Court.
No material is placed before this Court to come to a different conclusion on the facts of this case.
The Labour Court on facts has found that the charges are not proved.
In fact, the Reporting Officer himself has not shown with regard to the incident.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the Labour Court has committed any error, whatsoever, in ordering reinstatement.
Moreover, the workman was reinstated two years before in terms of the interim order.
In these circumstances, the reinstatement awarded by the Labour Court is not disturbed by me, in the case on hand.
7.
Insofar as backwages is concerned, the Labour Court has noticed that the counsel for the workman has submitted that he is not pressing for backwages.
In the light of this submission, the Labour Court tought fit not to grant any backwages.
When Counsel for the respondent makes a statement before the Court, it is presumed that the said statement is to be accepted in toto.
No exception can be taken for denial of backwages in the light of the submissions as referred to by the Counsel in the award.
8.
Sri SV Shastry, learned Counsel, however, submits that the Labour Court has misconstrued the statement made by the counsel that he is not pressing for backwages inasmuch as what he has stated is that he would not press for full backwages.
This explanation of Sri SV Shastry, learned Counsel, in terms of ground No. 8 is not acceptable to me.
Admittedly, if that is what the Counsel for the workman made, then nothing prevented the petitioner (workman) to move the Court for review or recall of the order.
Nothing has been done.
Moreover, when a Court makes a finding in the light of the statement made by a responsible Counsel, I am not able to appreciate this sort of explanation of not pressing full backwages.
Therefore, the explanation in terms of para 8 cannot be accepted in the absence of any acceptable material on record.
9.
The Counsel for the workman relies on a judgment of the Madras High Court in the case of Arunachalam M v Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras, reported in 1999(3) Lab.
LJ (Supp.)
1229.
I have gone through the said case in detail.
In the said case, a memorandum came to be filed by the Counsel for the workman as stated in para 1 of the said judgment.
In para 11, the Madras High Court has ruled that the Labour Court should not have gone on the basis of memorandum filed by the Counsel alone.
In the reported said case, it was a specific contention of the workman that the Counsel has no authority to make up an endorsement giving up the claim of endorsement.
In the light of a specific cases against the Counsel with regard to his authority, the Madras High Court has made an observation that the Court ought to have insisted upon the parties to reduce the terms of compromise into writing and the compromise to be signed by the parties is of the more necessary, in the case of Industrial adjudication.
These observations were made in the light of a specific allegation of no authority with the advocate.
That is not the case here.
I carefully perused the writ averments made by the petitioner in W.P. No. 25498/1999.
What is stated in this petition is that a statement was made but the said statement has been misconstrued by the Court.
The facts of this case stands on an entirely different footing than the reported case.
Therefore the said reported judgment is not available to Sri Shastri, learned Counsel according to me.
Therefore, the contention in this regard in the light of the judgment of the Madras High Court is rejected.
10.
However, the Court has thought fit to grant a sum of Rs. 5,000/- and I do not think that the said grant of Rs. 5,000/- should be disturbed on the peculiar facts of this case particularly in the light of the various factors adverted to by the learned Judge in the case on hand.
11.
Sri Shastry, learned Counsel however states that the award is dated 20111998 and the workman was factually reinstated on 5111999.
He states that at lest for this period, he is entitled for these benefits.
He further states that his client has retired on 3172001 and the retiral benefits are not settled till date.
In the light of the submissions of Sri Shastry, learned Counsel, I am of the view that the Counsel is right that the workman is entitled for wages for the period 20111998 to 5111999 i.e., the actual date of reinstatement.
The Counsel is equally right that the workman in view of the retirement, is entitled for his retiral benefits.
12.
In these circumstances, these petitions are disposed of in the following manner :-  Writ Petition filed by the management is dismissed.
Writ Petition filed by the workman is partly allowed in as much as a direction is issued to the Corporation to pay the wages for the period between 20111998 to 5111999.
The Corporation is directed to settle all retiral benefits of the workman within eight weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order in accordance with law.
Parties to bear their respective costs.
Petition party allowed.