Swatanter Kumar, J - Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, issued prospectus for admission to the MBBS, BDS and B.Sc.
Nursing courses for the year 2001.
As per the prospectus, there were 50 seats in the MBBS course, out of which 7 seats were for general category of Punjab domicile candidates and 2 for general category under All India Quota.
The candidates were required to submit the certificates of Punjab residence and had to satisfy the eligibility conditions mentioned in the Government of Punjab letter dated 661996.
The last date for submission of such applications was 11.5.2001.
The entrance test was held on 362001 for MBBS and BDS courses.
The petitioner was issued Roll No. 2075 for taking the entrance test to both the examinations.
On 762001 a public notice was published by the College whereby it was stated that in terms of the policy of the Government, the candidates are required to submit proof of having passed 10+1 and 10+2 examination as a regular candidate from recognised institutions situated in Punjab.
Copy of the said public notice is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/3.
2.
The result of the entrance test was declared on 2962001.
Petitioner was successful in the entrance test.
The College sent a call letter dated 272001 to the petitioner stating that he could get seat in MBBS course and also for BDS course and required him to appear for the interview on 972001.
The interview call letter contained the condition published in the news paper.
According to the petitioner the condition requiring him to submit the proof or certificate having passed 10+1 and 10+2 from Punjab was not applicable to him as well as to the Christian Medical College, as it is a minority institution.
According to the petitioner he was not interviewed on 972001 and on enquiry he came to know that as per the requirement of Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, the eligibility condition as contained in the notice dated 25.5.2001 in relation to passing of examination from Punjab was to be strictly adhered to and as such the College was initiating for production of such proof.
3.
The petitioner was denied admission to the MBBS course and the candidate who was much lower in merit than him i.e. respondent No. 4, at Roll No. 6089 and was in the waiting list, has been granted admission in the said course.
Admission of said Geetika Bansal is bad in law as she is lower in merit.
The petitioner prays that respondents No. 2 and 3 could not insisted upon the condition imposed in the advertisement as it was not applicable to the College itself and secondly being higher in merit, the petitioner was entitled to a seat in the MBBS course.
Thus, the petitioner prays that admission of respondent No. 4 be cancelled and he be given the seat in the MBBS course in the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana.
4.
Upon notice, respondents No. 3 and 4 filed independent written statements.
According to the College, it is a minority institution and conducts its own entrance test in terms of the orders of Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In terms of the brochure, the admission to all courses is provisional and is subject to approval and confirmation by the Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot.
As per terms and conditions of the brochure, the University places reliance upon the following two clauses :-  "Domicile/residence certificate issued only by the appropriate state authority and accepted by the University with which this college is affiliated would be acceptable."
"The admission is provisional subject to approval and confirmation by the Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot."
5.
It is stated in the reply that the College was in a dilemma as to whether condition of the candidates of having passed 10+1 and 10+2 as regular students from schools/institutions in the State of Punjab was to be enforced by the College while granting admission to the MBBS course.
Thus, the College wrote to the Government as well as its affiliating University in that regard.
The Government in response to the letter of the College only sent the copy of the notification without giving specific instructions to the College in regard to the query raised.
6.
However, the University vide its letter dated 472001 required the College to adhere to the terms of the notification in letter and spirit while considering residents of Punjab category candidates for admission to MBBS/BDS courses.
Copy of the said letter is annexed to the reply as Annexure R-3/5.
In view of the discussion with the authorities, the College has issued the public notice requiring the students claiming seats under Punjab Category to furnish the required certificate of having passed 10+1 and 10+2 examination as a regular candidate from recognised institutions in Punjab only.
As the direction was given by the University to which the College is affiliated the college was duty bound to ask for such certificates before admission.
7.
As far as the question of interviewing the petitioner on the date of counselling, the College has a different story to say.
In order to refer the same in greater detail, it will be appropriate to refer to the relevant paragraphs of the reply itself, as under :-  "(vii) That on 972001 petitioner was called on his turn at 1240 PM.
He appeared before the scrutinizing Officer.
Since he was called in the Punjab Domicile Category, he was asked for a certificate satisfying the Punjab Domicile criteria.
He had submitted with his application a Punjab Residence Certificate, photostat copy of which is attached as Annexure R-3/6 to this written statement.
Surprisingly, this residence certificate is also appears to be improper as first of all it refers to the petitioner being resident of Chandigarh and then states that his father holds immovable property in Bathinda for the past 2001 year.
On his turn at 1240, the petitioner showed a certificate of August, 2000 from the Panjab University issuesd to his mother as proof of working in Panjab University.
He orally stated that he wanted to submit this certificate as an exemption certificate from Punjab Domicile.
Answering Respondent explained to the petitioner the entire correspondence with the University and also showed a note in the prospectus that the certificate acceptable by the University was to be tendered.
The petitioner was given a printed format, photostat copy of which is attached as Annexure R-3/7 to this written statement and told that in case his exemption certificate was found rejected or improper by the University, his admission would be cancelled.
Otherwise, the petitioner was told that the answering respondent Institute would have no objection in granting him admission provided he filled the certificate Annexure R-3/7.
The petitioner, however, neither submitted the exemption certificate shown by him nor did he tender the application Annexure R-3/7 but asked for 30 minutes time and he wanted to confirm from the Baba Farid University whether the certificate produced by him would be acceptable or not.
However, the petitioner did not come after half an hour.
(vii) That the petitioner was again called at 3.30 P.M.
The father of the petitioner came to the Registrar's office and requested for about 15 minutes time to bring the certificate from the car parked outside the office.
His father was requested to come back as quickly as possible because the wait list candidates were to be entertained after 5.00 P.M. when the petitioner or his father did not come, even upto 400 PM, his name was again announced for the third time at 410 PM At that time both the petitioner and the father came.
They stated that they were getting their certificate ready and would show the same to the scrutinizing officer after arranging the same.
They were given the proforma Annexure R-3/7 which could be filled and there-after, the petitioner would be granted admission and was asked to deposit the fee etc.
However, about 15 minutes time, the petitioner's father quietly slipped from the office without submitting any document and without any information or permission.
So much so that even the attendance sheet which was required to be signed by each candidate was not signed by the petitioner.
Photostat copy of the attendance sheet as filled is attached as Annexure R-3/8 to this written statement.
(ix) That it is submitted that even though normally the wait list is to be operated after 5.00 P.M., on that day, the wait list was not operated upto 10 minutes past 7.
The petitioner was again called at 615 PM and yet again called at 710 PM.
It is only when he was not present on both these times that the wait list was operated.
Respondent No. 4 Geetika Bansal was given admission at 750 PM."
8.
In view of the above facts, according to the respondents no fault is attributable to them and the entire admissions to the Colleges have been carried out on the basis of the above criteria and conditions.
As such to alter the same criteria at this stage would cause serious prejudice not only to the College, but to large number of candidates who have been granted admission.
The course has already commenced in July, 2001.
The last date for admission has long over closed and as such the College cannot change the admission of the petitioner who is already pursuing his BDS course from the same College.
He had applied under Punjab quota and as such he could not be treated as a candidate in the All India quota.
Under the terms of brochure change of category is prohibited.
According to the respondents, the petitioner has not come to the Court with true facts and as such is not entitled to any relief even in equity.
9.
The University did not file any written statement, but it supported the case of the College and admitted the fact that it had issued instructions which were confirmed vide Annexure R-3/5 to the reply of the College.
According to the University also, the petitioner is not entitled to sit in MBBS course as per the instructions issued by the University.
10.
The real dispute between the parties to this petition falls within a narrow compass.
It is not disputed that the brochure originally published by the Christian Medical College did not contain any clause with regard to the candidate claiming seats on the basis of Punjab domicile to furnish the certificate that the candidate had done his 10+1 and 10+2 from a recognised institution situated in the State of Punjab.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has heavily relied upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB) : 1993(4) S.L.R.
673 to contend that the brochure has the force of law and its terms and conditions cannot be altered subsequently.
The respondents could not have demanded the certificate and consequential denial of seats in MBBS course is bad in law.
11.
There are two basic factors which must be examined by the Court in order to determine the merit of this contention.
Firstly, it is an admitted case before us that the University to which Christian Medical College is affiliated, had required the College to enforce the instructions of the Government strictly in their true letter and spirit.
The University had placed substantial emphasis on such compliance vide its letter dated 472001.
The College had issued the publication in the leading news paper as back as in June, 2001, while the counselling for the MBBS/BDS course was held on 9/1172001.
The news paper has been annexed by the petitioner himself in this writ petition as Annexure P/3.
The candidates had sufficient time to comply with the requirement of furnishing the requisite certificate in terms of the advertisement.
The purpose of making allocation of seats to All India quota and Punjah State quota separately is primarily based upon the rationale of Punjab domicile and the students having passed 10+1 and 10+2 examinations from the schools/situated in Punjab.
This was the consistant policy of the State which was made applicable to all the professional institutions in the State of Punjab.
The terms and conditions of the notification were strictly not applicable to the Christian Medical College in view of the orders of Hon'ble the Supreme Court of India, but in the face of the instructions issued by the University for compliance of the terms of the said notification in regard to eligibility and, therefore, condition of Punjab domicile was binding upon the College.
The College is affiliated to the Baba Farid University and under the terms of the affiliation, it is required to comply with the instructions issued by the affiliating University.
In this regard we cannot find any error on the part of the College that it opted to comply with the instructions issued by the University rather than to contest the same on the ground that the instructions issued by the Government were not binding upon the College, it being a minority institution.
We do not consider it necessary to devolve upon this point any further.
12.
Subsequent corollary of the above argument is that the petitioner was denied admission to MBBS course on the date of counselling in an arbitrary manner.
No doubt, the petitioner was a candidate of higher merit and would have got admission in the MBBS course provided he would have applied as per the requirements of the College.
From the above noted paragraphs of the written statement, it is clear that the petitioner went for counselling and was actually given a chance to get admission in MBBS course.
However, the petitioner of his own accord avoided to take admission.
As the petitioner was admittedly not in possession of the requisite certificate as he had not done his 10+1 and 10+2 from the State of Punjab, still the College offered the seat to the petitioner on his furnishing an undertaking to the College that in the event of grant of admission, if the University finds the petitioner's admission to be irregular, the petitioner would have no claim upon the College.
Such kind of undertaking was taken from all such candidates and seats were given to those candidates who submitted such an undertaking.
The petitioner did not challenge the College authority to ask for such certificate and in fact took time on the date of counselling i.e. or 972001.
Time was granted to the petitioner and the College authorities waited for the petitioner till 700 PM and then the seat was allotted to the candidate on the waiting list i.e. respondent No. 4.
13.
We must notice that thereafter the petitioner participated in the counselling for the BDS course and actually took admission in the BDS course on a subsequent date.
The petitioner has already been admitted and is pursuing his BDS course in the same College.
Some of these facts have been disputed by the petitioner by filing replication.
But two material facts are not disputed that on 972001 the petitioner appeared before the authorities for allocation of a seat and was not given the seat for want of certificate.
The respondents have been filed the attendance seat of the counselling of 972001 as Annexure R-3/8, duly signed by the members of the Committee, where it is recorded that the Committee waited the petitioner till 710 P.M. and the candidate was absent.
We are not in a position to disbelieve the version of the College as it is duly supported by the documents which were maintained by the College in normal course of its business.
The petitioner had represented to the College thereafter, but the College had already granted admission to another student and, thus, could not reverse its decision without causing prejudice to rights of other candidates as well.
14.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the case of Dr. Vinay Rampal v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others, AIR 1983 Supreme Court 1199 to contend that the petitioner ought to have been granted admission as he satisfied the criteria in the brochure.
In this case, the Hon'ble Apex Court held the advertisement conditions being satisfied and other candidates having been given admission on the basis of the said criteria.
The petitioner in that case could not be denied admission.
These are not the facts in the present case.
The advertisement was issued much prior to the date of the counselling.
All the candidates who satisfied those conditions were given admission before that date.
On that date, the petitioner, as afore-noticed, failed to satisfy the requisite conditions.
He also did not furnish the required undertaking and as such he was declined admission.
Thus, the petitioner cannot derive any advantage from this case.
15.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(4) SCT 322 to contend that meritorious candidate, though belongs to reserve category, yet he is entitled to appointment in general vacancy instead of reserved quota.
This proposition of law can hardly be disputed.
The candidate of merit list must be given admission in the general category if he is entitled to as per merit list of the general category.
16.
The respondent College has produced the original record before us.
The petitioner filled up admission application form-A with Serial No. 000663.
In this form a candidate is required to claim the category under which he is applying.
The petitioner had applied under category "Pb.
Domicile - General".
In other words, the form of the petitioner was to be entertained under general category relating to Punjab domicile and not All India domicile i.e. non- Punjab domicile category.
A warning in this very form was issued to the students to put the students/applicants at caution in regard to the category they wanted to opt for.
The clause reads as under :-  "..Please put tick mark (-/) in the appropriate box for the Category chosen by you.
Remember that applicant is entitled to tick only one Category for each course as may be applicable."
17.
In terms of the above said caution and even under the terms and conditions of the brochure the candidates were not entitled to change category.
The Christian Medical College was, thus, required to entertain the application of the petitioner as per his choice i.e. only under the Punjab domicile category.
Having failed to furnish the certificate and even declined to give the undertaking as required by the College the petitioner cannot be permitted to take advantage of his irresponsible conduct.
The petitioner has already been given admission in the BDS course as no such condition was imposed on any candidate who took the admission in BDS seats.
The petitioner has taken admission and is pursuing that course.
The course was commenced on 1072001.
Considerable time has elapsed.
18.
As per the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court last date for admission for such professional Colleges is 30.9.2001 and we see no reason why the Court should grant admission to the petitioner beyond that date.
A Full Bench of Delhi High Court in the case of Dr. Sandhya Kabra and others v. The University of Delhi, 1993(1) SCT 362 (Delhi)(FB) : AIR 1993 Delhi 40 and Dr. Veena Gupta v. The University of Delhi, 1994(1) SCT 856 (Delhi)(FB) : AIR 1994 Delhi 108 had held that the candidate should not be permitted to change his option specially in mid-stream.
This view of the High Court has been approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Arvind Kumar Kankane v. The State of UP and others, 2001(3) SCT 1131 (SC) : JT 2001(6) Supreme Court 260.
19.
It is contended by the respondents that the petitioner has not disclosed true and correct facts in this petition.
The petitioner has also not disclosed the correct events which happened on 972001.
We may notice that the petitioner had earlier filed CWP No. 9444 of 2001 stating that the respondents are not calling the petitioner for counselling on 972001 without any justification.
While, in the present writ petition the petitioner has annexed the call letter which had been received by him prior to the date of the counselling.
That writ petition was disposed of by this Court keeping in view the fact that on the date of hearing, the petitioner had already received a fax message calling the petitioner for counselling on 972001.
The fax message was in addition to the call letter which has now been annexed by the petitioner in the present petition.
Petitioner was fully aware about the advertisement dated 762001 and the conditions imposed therein.
It was for the petitioner to exercise option and pursue the remedy in accordance with law.
20.
For the reasons afore-stated, we see no merit in this petition and more particularly for the reason that the petitioner is already admitted to BDS course and is pursuing the said course, we are of the considered view that it will not be just, fair and equitable at this stage to cancel the admission of respondent No. 4 to the MBBS course.
She made to misrepresentation and was given admission as per her own merit in the waiting list.
It was brought to the notice of the Court that said respondent No. 4 had secured very high rank in Punjab domicile quota in the PMET test meant for other professional Colleges, but as she had got admission with respondent No. 3, which is a College of high repute, she did not seek admission in the other Colleges.
Those seats have been given to other candidates.
She had been offered admission in A.F.M.C.
Pune also, but she did not and could not take admission as original certificates had already been deposited with respondent No. 3 and since July, she is pursuing her course in this College.
These are the other attendant circumstances which have persuaded the Court to decline relief to the petitioner and disturb the admission of respondent No. 4 at this stage now.
21.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.