GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal against the order of the learned Single Judge vide which he dismissed C.W.P.
No. 3782 of 1986 filed by the appellant for quashing order dated 281986 passed by the State Government removing him from service.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the appeal are that while he was posted as village Level Worker/Gram Sachiv in Block Sidhwan Bet, Tehsil Jagraon, District Ludhiana, the appellant proceed on two days casual leave i.e. from 2941980 to 3041980 for attending his ailing mother.
His application was duly sanctioned by the Block Development and Panchayat Officer.
He sought extension of leave some times on the ground of continued illness of his mother and on another occasion on account of illness of his wife.
After about 4 years and 7 months, he reported for duty on 21111984,. but was not allowed to join duty and the Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Sidhwan Bet asked him to wait for the posting till a decision was taken about the period of absence.
After some time, he was served with memo dated 2221985 for initiation of departmental enquiry under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short, the Rules) on the following charges :-  "1.
While Shri Jit Singh, Gram Sewak was working in Sidhwan he remained absent from duty from 151980 to 20111984.
He was addressed many times by Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Sidhwan Bet to resume his duties but all the letters were received back undelivered.
On those letters it was reported no person of this name was residing at the said address.
2.
Shri Jit Singh, Gram Sewak did not procure permission from the concerned authority for leaving headquarters.
He has neither submitted application for grant of leave nor has sent his residential address during the period of his absence.
In this way Sh. Jit Singh, Gram Sewak is guilty of remaining absent from duty for a long period without permission and violating the rules of leaving headquarters."
3.
The Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Ludhiana, who was appointed as Enquiry Officer, submitted report along with letter dated 21101985 with the suggestion that the period of absence may be treated as leave without pay and his annual increment may be stopped for the period of absence and further that his annual increments be stopped for two years.
The relevant extracts of the enquiry report are reproduced below :-  "Enquiry has been conducted into the charges levelled against this Gram Sewak.
Charge has been levelled against this Gram Sewak that he had remained absent from duty from 151980 to 30111984.
BDPO Sidhwan Bet and the Gram Sewak had been called in connection with this enquiry.
Shri Jit Singh stated that he had proceeded on casual leave for 2941970 and 3041980.
Thereafter he had sent leave application from his house from 151980 to 3061980.
He had been submitting applications and telegrams thereafter for extension of his leave from time to time.
Copies of the applications and receipts of the telegrams regarding these leave of the employees are in possession of the Gram Sewak.
BDPO Sidhwan Bet was questioned regarding above leave and telegrams of this employee.
BDPO has revealed in his statement that record of the leave of this employee of 2941980 and 3041980 is not available in his office and has stated that this employee had submitted applications for the grant of leave from 151980 to 3061980 from his house vide office letter No. 875 dated 1451980 this employee was advised to submit leave on the prescribed proforma but the employee did not respond to this letter.
This employee had sent telegrams for extension of leave from time to time upto 1641982.
Notice No. 495 dated 2931982 regarding his absence was sent to this employee through messenger but the same could not be served upon him as Sh. Jit Singh was not available there.
Thereafter another notice No. 824 dated 2561982 was sent through office messenger.
Thereafter another notice was sent per registered post at his house address, which had been received un-delivered in the office with the report that this employee was out of station.
From the enquiry made in this case, it looks that this employee had submitted his earned leave application from 151980 to 3061980 per registered post, receipt of which has been furnished by the employee whereafter the employee had been submitting telegrams for extension of his leave from time to time.
In case service of the employee could not be effected at his house address then notice should have been got published regarding his absence in some newspapers.
Under Rule 36 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I, duty was cast on the employee to have informed the office about the change of his house address.
From 151980 this employee had been continuously absent from duty.
In case he had not received any information from the office regarding extension of his leave or had not been received any reply in that regard.
It was also his duty that he should have visited the office and enquired in this regard and had submitted his application in person by presenting himself before Block Development and Panchayat Officer.
But the employee did not take any trouble in this regard.
The employee has also not disclosed any reason for seeking extension of his leave.
In view of the above facts I recommend that leave of the above employee for the period of his absence from duty he sanctioned without pay under Leave Rules of Punjab Civil Services Volume and under Para 4 of Part III of Appendix 14 of Civil Services Rules his increment of the period he remained absent from duty and annual increments of two years be stopped."
(Emphasis supplied) 4.
On receipt of the enquiry report, the State Government passed order dated 241985 removing the appellant from service.
The extracts of that order are also reproduced below :-  "Shri Jit Singh, Gram Sewak, Block Sidhwan Bet was charge-sheeted under Rule 8 of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 vide this office registered letter No. 6/51/83/I-RDE-II/11412 dated 2221985 for remaining absent from duty from 151980 to 20111984 and leaving headquarter without permission therefor.
His reply dated 431985 to the charge-sheet was not found to be satisfactory and vide this office order dated 2751985 contained in Edst.
No. 6/51/85/1 RDE-11/31857 dated 2461985 passed under Rule 8(2) of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, District Development and Panchayat Officer, Ludhiana was entrusted to hold regular enquiry.
On perusal of the enquiry report received vide DO letter No. 7765 dated 21101985, the documents and in the light of witnesses and the reply received to the charges levelled against Shri Jit Singh, Gram Sewak, stand proved.
Since this official has wilfully breached the discipline and did not care for the official duty, hence, it is not in public interest to keep him in service.
Under Rule 5(viii) of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 Governor of Punjab is pleased to award punishment of removal from service of Shri Jit Singh, Gram Sewak, Sidhwan Bet (Absence from duty).
This order will come into force at once."
5-6.
The representation made by the appellant for re-consideration of the punishment was rejected by the State Government vide letter No. 6/51/85/i-RDE-11/37841 dated 27101987.
7.
The appellant challenged the order of punishment on the grounds of violation of Article 311 of the Constitution of India, the provisions of the Rules, violation of the principles of natural justice, arbitrariness and non- application of mind.
The respondent justified the order of punishment by asserting that the same was passed after holding enquiry in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
8.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by a rather cryptic order.
He held that in view of the amendment made in Rule 9(4) of the Rules vide notification dated 911985, it was not necessary to give copy of enquiry report or opportunity of hearing to the delinquent.
He further observed that the appellant had put forward contradictory versions about the illness of his mother and, therefore, he was not entitled to any relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
9.
Although no one has appeared on behalf of the appellant, after hearing Shri NDS Mann, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab and perusing the record, we are convinced that the order of the learned Single Judge as well as the order of punishment are liable to be set aside/quashed with a direction for reinstatement of the appellant.
10.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition of the appellant on the sole ground that amended Rule 9(4) of the Rules does not cast a duty on the disciplinary authority to hear the delinquent before inflicting punishment.
This is clearly borne out from the following extracts of the order under challenge :-  "The learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the punishing authority did not comply with the provisions of Rule 9(4)(i)(a) of the Rules.
The Rule enjoins that if the punishing authority forms an opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee, it has to furnish to the Government employee a copy of the report of the inquiry held by it and its findings on each article of charge or where the inquiry had been held by an inquiring authority, a copy of the report of such authority and the statement of its findings on each article of charge together with brief reasons for its disagreement with the findings of the inquiry authority.
This condition having been violated by the punishing authority, the order passed by it is rendered invalid.
The respondent maintains that rule 9(4) of the Rules was substituted by notification dated January 9, 1985, and the same reads thus :- If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charges and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the enquiry, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5 should be imposed on Government employee, it should make an order imposing such penalty and it shall not be necessary to give the Government employee any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed."
The substituted rule proves that if the punishing authority is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5 should be imposed on Government employee, it can make an order imposing such a penalty and it will not be necessary to give the Government employee an opportunity of being heard before the infliction of the punishment.
The punishing authority in the instant case found that the charge levelled against the petitioner stood proved and disagreed with the finding of the Inquiry Officer and imposed punishment of termination from service.
The action of the respondent is in conformity with the rules.
The respondent in the written statement has submitted that the ground for which the petitioner allegedly remained absent from duty is contrary to the one stated by him in the joining report.
In the joining report, he had stated that his wife suffered from a heart attack and her illness had prevented him from attending the duties.
In the writ petition, he has stated that his mother suffered a heart attack and for this reason he could not join duty after the expiry of the leave.
It appears that the petitioner had been shifting his stand to suit his convenience.
He was not clear whether he was prevented from joining duty because of his mother's illness or wife's illness.
The conduct of the petitioner disentitles him from claiming indulgence of this Court under Articles 226/277 of the Constitution of India.
The order of removal from service is in conformity with the statutory rules and unexceptional."
11.
Shri NDS Mann supported the impugned order and argued that the appellant cannot seek invalidation of the order of punishment merely because the State Government did not record reasons for disagreeing with the enquiry report.
12.
We have given serious thought to the entire matter.
Rules 5, 8(23), 9(1), (2) and (4) (unamended and amended) which have bearing on the decision of the appeal read as under :-  "5.
Penalties :- The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on Government employees, namely :- Minor Penalties (i) Censure; (ii) withholding of his promotions; (iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Government by negligence or breach of orders; (iv) withholding of increments of pay; Major Penalties (v) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments if any during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay; (vi) reduction to a lower time-scale of pay, grade, post or service which shall ordinarily be a bar to the promotion of the Government employee to the time-scale of pay, grade, post or service from which he was reduced, with or without further directions regarding conditions of restorating to the grade or post or service from which the Government employee was reduced and his seniority and pay on such restoration to that grade, post or service; (vii) compulsory retirement; (viii) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for future employment under the Government; (ix) dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment under the Government."
8.
1 to 22 xxx xxx xxx xxx 23.
(i) After the conclusion of the inquiry, a report shall be prepared and it shall contain :- (a) the articles of charge and the statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour; (b) the defence of the Government employee in respect of each article of charge; (c) an assessment of the evidence in respect of each article of charge; (d) the findings on each article of charge and the reasons therefor.
Explanation.
- If in the opinion of inquiring authority the proceedings of the inquiry establish any article of charge different from the original articles of the charge, it may record its findings on such article of charge : Provided that the findings on such article of charge shall not be recorded unless the Government employee has either admitted the facts on which such article of charge is based or has had a reasonable opportunity of defending himself against such article of charge.
(ii) The inquiring authority where it is not itself the punishing authority shall forward to the punishing authority the records of inquiry which shall include :- (a) the report prepared by it under clause (i); (b) the written statement of defence, if any, submitted by the Government employee; (c) the oral and documentary evidence produced in the course of the inquiry; (d) written briefs, if any, filed by the Presenting Officer, or the Government employee or both during the course of the inquiry; and  (e) the orders, if any, made by the punishing authority and the inquiring authority in regard to the inquiry.
9.
Action on the inquiry report.
- (1) The Punishing Inquiring Authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of rule 8 as far as may be.
(2) The Punishing Authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the Inquiring Authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx (unamended) (4)(i) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee, it shall :- (a) furnish to the Government employee a copy of the report of the inquiry held by it and its findings on each article of charge or where the inquiry had been held by an inquiry authority, appointed by it, a copy of the report of such authority and a statement of its findings on each article of charge together with brief reasons for its disagreement, if any, with the findings of the inquiring authority; (b) give the Government employee a notice stating the penalty proposed to be imposed on him and calling him to submit within fifteen days of receipt of the notice or such further time not exceeding fifteen days, as may be allowed, such representations as he may wish to make on the proposed penalty on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry held under rule 8; (ii)(a) In every case in which it is necessary to consult the commission the record of the inquiry, together with a copy of the notice given under clause (i) and the representation made in pursuance of such notice, if any shall be forwarded by the Punishing Authority to the Commission for its advice.
(b) The Punishing Authority shall after considering the representations any made by the Government employee, and the advice given by the Commission determine what penalty, if any, should be imposed on the Government employee and make such order as it may deem fit.
(iii) Where it is not necessary to consult the Commission the Punishing Authority shall consider the representation, if any, made by the Government employee in pursuing of the notice given to him under clause (i) and determine what penalty, if any, should be imposed on him and make such order as it may deem fit.
[amended sub-rule (4)]  4.
If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee, it shall make an order imposing such penalty and it shall not be necessary to give the Government employee any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed : Provided that in every case where it is necessary to consult the Commission, the record of the inquiry shall be forwarded by the punishing authority to the Commission for its advice and such advice shall be taken into consideration before making an order imposing any such penalty on the Government employee."
A conjoint reading of the rules reproduced above shows that the punishing authority can, after holding an enquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed under Rules 8 and 9 and recording good and sufficient reasons, inflict upon a Government employee any of the penalties specified in rule 5.
In other words, the punishing authority is under an obligation not only to comply with the procedural provisions contained in Rules 8 and 9, but also record reasons which must be good as well as sufficient.
Rule 8(23) enumerates the steps to be taken at the conclusion of the enquiry.
It imposes a duty on the inquiring authority to prepare a report, which shall contain articles of charge and the statement of imputations of mis-conduct or misbehaviour, defence of the delinquent, the assessment of evidence in respect of each article of charge and the findings on the charges together with reasons.
Rule 9(1), (2) and (4) postulates steps to be taken by the punishing authority on receipt of enquiry report.
It can, for reasons to be recorded in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further enquiry and report.
If it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, then the punishing authority is required to record reasons for such disagreement and also record its findings on such charge if the evidence available on record is sufficient for that purpose.
[Rule 9(2)].
Under unamended Rule 9(4), the punishing authority was required to furnish to the Government employee a copy of the enquiry report and its findings on each article of charge together with brief reasons for its disagreement, if any, with the findings of the enquiring authority and give him notice of the proposed penalty.
These requirements have been dispensed with by amending Rule 9(4) under which the punishing authority can, having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the enquiry, impose any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Rule 5.
This amendment has been made keeping in view 42nd Constitution Amendment Act vide which Article 311 was amended and the requirement of second show-cause notice was expressly dispensed with.
However, there is nothing in the language of the amended Rule 9(4) from which it can be inferred that the requirement of recording of reasons by the punishing authority in case of disagreement with the enquiring authority, as embodied in Rule 9(2) has been done away with.
Therefore, it must be held that even after the amendment of Rule 9(4), the punishing authority is duty- bound to consider the enquiry report and record reasons if it does not agree with the findings of the enquiring authority on any article of charge and also record its own finding on such charge.
This requirement has to be read as implicit in the exercise of quasi-judicial function by the punishing authority, more-so because Rule 5 contemplates imposition of punishment for good and sufficient reasons.
13.
The requirement of recording of reasons and communication thereof has been read as an integral part of the concept of fair procedure.
The necessity of giving reasons flows from the concept of rule of law which constitutes one of the corner stones of our constitutional set up.
The administrative authorities charged with the duty to act judicially cannot decide the matters on considerations of policy or expediency.
The requirement of recording of reasons by such authorities is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the rule of law.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and minimises arbitrariness in the decision making process.
Another reason which makes it imperative for the quasi- judicial authorities to give reasons is that their orders are not only subject to the right of the aggrieved persons to challenge the same by filing statutory appeal and revision but also by filing writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Such decisions can also be challenged by way of appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
The High Courts have the powers to issue writ of certiorari to quash the orders passed by a quasi judicial authority/Tribunal.
Likewise, in appeal the Apex Court can nullify such order/decision.
This power of judicial review can be effectively exercised by the Superior Courts only if the order under challenge contains reasons.
If such order is cryptic and devoid of reasons, the Courts cannot effectively exercise the power of judicial review and we cannot countenance a situation in which the administrative authorities vested with the power to decide the rights of the parties may stultify the powers of the Court simply by not recording reasons in support of their decisions or by refraining from communiting such reasons to the affected person.
This is the reason why the Courts have insisted on rigorous compliance of the requirement of recording of reasons and communication thereof by every quasi-judicial authority.
Some of the judicial precedents, which can appropriately be cited to support the above mentioned proposition, are :-  1.
Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited v. Shyam Sunder Jhunjhunwala, AIR 1961 SC 1669; 2.
Bhagat Raja v Union of India and others, AIR 1967 SC 1606; 3.
Travancor Rayon Ltd v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 862; 4.
Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar v. State of UP, AIR 1970 SC 1302; 5.
Woolcombers of India Limited v. Woolcombers Workers Union, AIR 1973 SC 2758; 6.
M/s. Ajantha Industries and others v. Central Board of Direct Taxes, New Delhi and others, AIR 1976 SC 437; 7.
Siemens Engineering and Manufacturing Company of India Limited v Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1785; 8.
SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 241 (SC) : AIR 1990 SC 1984; 9.
Shanti Prasad Agarwalla v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 814; 10.
Krishna Swami v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1407; and 11.
ML Jaggi v. Mahanagar Telephones Nigam Ltd, 1996(1) RRR 646 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2476.
14.
In Testeels Ltd v. NM Desai, Conciliation Officer and another, AIR 1970 Gujarat 1, a Full Bench of the Gujarat High Court made an extremely lucid enunciation of law on the subject and we can do no better than to extract some of the observations made in that decision.
The same read as under :-  "The necessity of giving reasons flows as a necessary corollary from the rule of law which constitutes one of the basic principles of the Indian Constitutional set up.
The administrative authorities having a duty to act judicially cannot therefore decide on considerations of policy or expediency.
They must decide the matter solely on the facts of the particular case, solely on the material before them and apart from any extraneous considerations by applying pre-existing legal norms to factual situations.
Now the necessity of giving reasons is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the duty to act judicially.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and excludes or, at any rate, minimises arbitrariness in the decision-making process.
Another reason which compels making of such an order is based on the power of judicial review which is possessed by the High Court under Article 226 and the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution.
These Courts have the power under the said provisions to quash by certiorari a quasi-judicial order made by an Administrative Officer and this power of review can be effectively exercised only if the order is a speaking order.
In the absence of any reasons in support of the order, the said courts cannot examine the correctness of the order under review.
The High Court and the Supreme Court would be powerless to interfere so as to keep the administrative officer within the limits of the law.
The result would be that the power of judicial review would be stultified and no redress being available to the citizen, there would be insidious encouragement to arbitrariness and caprice.
If this requirement is insisted upon, then, they will be subject to judicial scrutiny and correction."
In M/s. Brij Bassi Hitech Udyog Ltd v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) P.L.R.
538, a Division Bench of this Court dealt with an issue whether, while exercising appellate/revisional powers under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, the Sales Tax Tribunal is required to record reasons and communicate the same to the affected party.
After making reference to the judicial precedents, referred to hereinabove, this Court held that the Tribunal is not only bound to record reasons in support of its decision but also communicate the same to the affected person.
15.
If the impugned order is examined in the light of the above discussion, we do not find any difficulty in holding that the dismissal of the writ petition is vitiated by an error of law.
The main reason assigned by the learned Single Judge for rejecting the appellant's plea for invalidation of the order of punishment is that in view of the amended Rule 9(4), the punishing authority can impose any of the major penalties without giving the Government employee an opportunity of being heard.
There is no quarrel with the proposition that after amendment of Rule 9(4), the punishing authority is not required to furnish a copy of the enquiry report and give notice of the proposed punishment to the delinquent employee, but this has nothing to do with the duty cast upon the punishing authority under Rule 9(2) to record reasons if it does not agree with the enquiring authority and also record findings on the particular article of charge and as already observed above, the requirement of recording of reasons for disagreement and communication thereof to the delinquent employee is a part of the scheme of Rule 5 read with Rules 8(23) and 9(2).
Even as a general proposition of law, it must be held that if the punishing authority does not agree with the findings of enquiring authority, then it must record reasons for disagreement and communicate the same to the delinquent employee so as to enable him to controvert the same or at least challenge the order of punishment before the appellate or revisional authority or before a Court of law by showing that the reasons assigned by the punishing authority are legally unsustainable.
This view of ours is based on the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Madras v. AR Siriniwasan, AIR 1966 SC 1827; Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Bihari Mishra, 1998(3) SCT 833 (SC) : 1998(3) SCC 84; State of Rajasthan v. MC Saxena, 1998(2) SCT 502 (SC) : 1998(3) SCC 385 and Yogi Nath D Bagde v. State of Maharashtra, 1999(4) SCT 403 (SC) : 1999(7) SCC 739.
16.
In the present case, the enquiring authority did not record any specific finding on the charges levelled against the appellant.
Instead, it made a recommendation that the leave of the appellant be sanctioned without pay and his increment for the period of absence from duty and annual increments for two years be stopped and the State Government passed the order of punishment by recoding a bald conclusion that the charges levelled against the appellant had been proved.
A careful reading of order dated 241985 leaves no room for doubt that the concerned authority did not even bother to go through the enquiry report, else it could not have, ignoring the fact that the enquiring authority did not record any specific findings on charges levelled against the appellant, held that the same stand proved.
17.
During the course of arguments, we asked the learned Deputy Advocate General to show any other record from which it can be inferred that the punishing authority had applied mind to the record of the case and recorded its own findings on the two charges levelled against the appellant, but he could not produce any such record.
Rather, he half-heartedly conceded that the punishing authority had recorded only one line conclusion that the charge levelled against the appellant have been proved.
18.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
Order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Order Annexure P8 passed by the State Government is declared illegal and quashed with the direction that the appellant be reinstated in service.
He shall be entitled to wages from the date he reports for duty.
As regards the intervening period, we direct that the appellant shall be entitled to 50% of the back wages from the date of removal i.e. 241986 to the date of this order.
It is, however, made clear that he shall not be entitled to any monetary benefit for the period of absence from duty.
We also give liberty to the State Government to hold fresh enquiry and pass appropriate order in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
Appeal allowed.