M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The instant writ applications were heard analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment and order.
2.
In the instant writ applications, the relief claimed by the respective writ petitioners is with respect to and/or in relation to the extension of service after attaining the age of 60 years in the post of Assistant Teacher in the Khalsa High School.
3.
Both the writ petitioners respectively attained the age of 60 years and in the instant writ applications seek extension of services on year to year basis up to the age of 65 years.
It must be stated here that when the matter was taken up for hearing both the writ petitioners had attained the age of 65 yeas.
It must also be placed on record that pursuant to orders of court obtained by the respective writ petitioners they had respectively been granted one first extension of service.
The said orders according to the school authorities had to be implemented and were implemented though the same were passed without the school authorities having been heard in the matter.
4.
By orders of court, the matter was required to be considered in the case or respective writ petitioners by the Director of School Education.
The school authorities, it must be stated, rejected the request of the petitioners for extension on the basis that they were not medically fit.
5.
In the case of Baidya Nath Prosad, the Director of School Education passed orders dated 15592, being annexure `F' to the writ application CO No. 14924(W) of 1992, rejected the request of the petitioner, Baidyanath Prosad, for the following reasons :  "On an examination of the matter, it is found that the petitioner had been suffering from various ailments including having heart problems.
A series of Medical Certificates starting from the year 1980 shows that he had been suffering from heart disease, diabetes, jaundice and hyperpepxia.
In the circumstances, the two medical certificates giving him a clean bill of health can hardly be taken to be reliable, and it is, therefore, held that the petitioner has failed to prove adequately that he is physically fit, although his mental alterness has not been seriously challenged."
6.
However, insofar as Sir Damodar Prosad Sinha, writ petitioner in the other set of writ petitions is concerned, the Director was of the view that he is not the authority competent to pass orders and it is the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education that has the power to grant or refuse extension.
The reason therefore have been stated in his order dated 21.4.93 (Annexure `J' to the writ application CO 12052(W) of 1993) in the following terms :  "I have carefully gone through the above submissions and the records produced by the school authorities and writ petitioner Sri Damodar Prosad Singh today.
I am not convinced that this school comes within the ambit of the Minority Community but the office records and uncontested submissions of the school authorities as regards audit report produced for the above orders show that this is a non-Govt. unaided school for last one decade or so and as such the sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non-Govt. Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969, as amended from time to time are applicable here and so the competent authority according to these extant rules in the matter of grant or refusal of extension to any teacher of the school is the domain of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and not the Director of School Education, West Bengal."
7.
CO No. 18825(W) of 1992, CO No. 3928(W) of 1993 and CO No. 3711(W) of 1994 have been filed by Damodar Prosad Sinha, seeking directions for extension for the third term, 4th term and 5th term respectively and for consequential direction for payment of arrears of salaries.
8.
CO No. 12052(W) of 1993 is filed by Damodar Prosad Sinha challenging the order of the Director of School Education.
9.
Similarly, Baidyanath Prosad, the other writ petitioner has filed CO No. 14924(W) of 1992 challenging the order of the Director of School Education dated 15592.
CO No. 3928(W) of 1993 and CO No. 1457(W) of 1994 has filed for grant of extension respectively for the third and fourth years.
10.
The case of the petitioners as urged before Court by their learned advocate Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya, is that by virtue of the G.O.
No. 81-Edn(B) dated 31st March, 1986 Government have directed that employees of Government and Non-Government Primary and Secondary Schools will retire at the age of 60 years but they will be allowed extension of service on year to year basis up to the age of 65 years subject to the condition that they are physically fit and mentally alert.
11.
By separate circular letters being No. 194-Edn(B) and No. 195-Edn(B) both dated 27th April, 1992, it was clarified that the teachers of educational institution mentioned in Memo No. 372-Edn(B) dated 31.7.81 who were in service on 31.3.81 and had not opted for revised scales of pay introduced from 1481 in order to enjoy the benefits of extension up to the age of 65 years on year to year basis would also be permitted to exercise the option within 90 days.
These who opted for revised pay scales introduced with the effect from 1481 were allowed the benefit of extension of service up to the age of 65 years on year to year basis subject to fulfilment of other conditions.
12.
It was, therefore, contended that the petitioners are entitled to the grant of extension of service on year to year basis up to the age of 65 years and denial thereof is arbitrary besides being illegal.
13.
On behalf of the school authorities, the learned counsel contended that the writ petitions filed for the relief as prayed for are not maintainable.
The institution is question is a private though recognised institution.
The institution in question is a minority institution and the said circulars relied upon by the petitioners, referred to supra, have no application to such institution.
If the said circulars are sought to be applied to the minority institution such as the respondents, a minority institution, it would be violating the fundamental right of the minority community as enshrined in Article 30 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel further contended that the institution in question is an unaided institution.
No assistance or financial help of any sort or kind has been granted or obtained by the institution.
The institution in question is neither admitted in grant- in-aid nor has received even Dearness Allowances from the State Government.
In short, the school in question is a minority institution and an unaided institution.
14.
On the merits of the claim of the petitioners for grant of extension, it was submitted that insofar as Baidyanath Prosad is concerned, he was found lacking in physical and mental fitness.
The medical certificates furnished from a Private Doctor were not considered as genuine.
The Managing Committee considered the case and found Baidyanath Prosad inefficient.
The Director of School Education upheld the said orders of the Managing Committee and, therefore, the said petitioner Baidyanath Prosad is not entitled to any of the reliefs as prayed for in the various writ applications.
15.
The aforesaid contention merits consideration.
This Court sitting in its writ jurisdiction can only consider the decision making process in exercise of its jurisdiction of judicial review.
It cannot embark upon an enquiry on the disputed question of acts.
Its role is limited to ascertaining whether the decision has been arrived at taking into account relevant factors.
16.
The reasons for rejection of the claim of Baidyanath Prosad have been stated in the impugned order of the Director of School Education and the same has been extracted supra.
The material on record placed before Director of School Education supports the said conclusions arrived at by him and in my view, therefore, there is no warrant for interference with the said order.
The Director of School Education found that the petitioner Baidyanath Prosad is suffering from various ailments including heart problem.
The two medical certificates relied on by the petitioner were disbelieved as unreliable.
17.
In the circumstances, on this short ground alone, the writ applications filed by the petitioner are liable to be dismissed.
For the said reason, it is not necessary to consider the various other contentions of law urged before Court by the learned counsel of either parties.
18.
Insofar as Damodar Prosad Sinha is concerned, the Director of School Education, as noticed supra, has not come to any conclusions or finding of fact on the ground that he has no jurisdiction in the matter.
The Director of School Education, however, upheld the claim of the respondent-school authorities that the school is a minority school and is a Non-Government Unaided School.
19.
By this said order, the Director of School Education also held that sub- rules (4), (5) and (6) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969 are applicable to the institution in question and therefore, it is the Board that has the jurisdiction in the matter.
20.
Under sub-rule (4), the Committee of an unaided institution has been conferred the power subject to the approval of the Board to extend the services of teachers beyond the date of superannuation and approval for such extension is to be sought from the Board within a week from the date of decision of the Committee.
21.
Sub-rule (6) stipulates that where the Committee does not recommend extension of a service of a teacher under Clause II of sub-rule (4), it shall record specific reason therefor and the person concerned may make his representation to the Board and the decision of the Board in the matter shall be final so far as the Committee is concerned.
22.
In view of the aforesaid rule position, no infirmity can be found with the order of the Director of School Education.
In the instant case, the Managing Committee of the respondent school rejected the request of the petitioner for extension of service.
The petitioner in terms of Rule 6 thereof was required to make a representation to the Board and the decision of the Board in the matter would have been final in so far as the Committee is concerned.
The petitioner did not avail of the said statutory remedy open to him in law.
The findings of fact that could have been arrived at by the Board are thus lacking in the instant case.
The judicial review, therefore, would be limited to the decision arrived at by the Managing Committee insofar as the facts are concerned.
This Court in its writ jurisdiction and keeping in view the limited ambit and scope of judicial review can only consider the validity of the orders passed by the Managing Committee.
23.
The Managing Committee rejected the prayer of the petitioner Damodar Prosad Sinha on the ground that the medical certificates produced by the petitioner before the school authorities from time to time indicated that he was suffering from high blood pressure (hypertension along with cerebral encephalogy) and frequent attacks of Typhoid.
The petitioner was a patient of Bronchitis.
The petitioner's attendance was shown to be very poor.
24.
Further, it has been noticed by the Managing Committee that the petitioner Damodar Prosad Sinha, in its opinion, is not fit for granting extension.
25.
In my considered opinion, the decision of the Managing Committee is supported by the evidence and material placed before it.
If the petitioner disputed the said facts and the evidence upon which the school authorizes based their decision, it was open for him to have raised the question before the Board.
Having chosen not to avail of the said remedy, this Court in its writ jurisdiction cannot consider such disputed question of facts.
This Court has merely to see whether there was material/evidence before the Managing Committee to come to the conclusion which it did.
In the instant case, there was material on record before the Managing Committee and the same supports the conclusion arrived at by the Managing Committee.
The decision, therefore, cannot be said to be either perverse or arbitrary.
26.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ applications filed by the petitioner for grant of extension of service beyond the age of superannuation and/or for consequential benefits on account of rejection of the same deserves to be rejected and accordingly, the writ petitions praying for such reliefs are liable to be dismissed.
27.
It may be placed on record that I have not considered it necessary to go into various other contentions of law raised by the learned counsel for the respondent school authorities, as in my view, the matter on merits could have been considered, as above.
This is for the reason that a Division Bench of this Court in Appeal from Original No. 1278 of 1987, Mrs. Subhalakshmi Seshadri v. The State of West Bengal, dated 18th September, 1989 considered the question of the applicability of the circulars relating to extension of service after attaining the age of superannuation in relation to the minority institution and held as under :  ".....Under these circumstances, grant of dearness allowance to such an institution under the management of a minority based on language cannot make it a Government institution or a Government aided institution.
Under these circumstances, the mere fact of receipt of the dearness allowance does not make the respondents institution a Government aided institution.
In the Circular itself dated 31st March, 1986 it has been indicated that the teachers will retire at the age of 60 years.
But they will be allowed extension of service on year to year basis up to the age of 65 years subject to the condition that they are physically fit and mentally alert.
As indicated above the circular itself has no application to an institution like the respondents Nos. 5 and 6."
The circular was thus held to be inapplicable to the minority institution though receiving D.A.
from the Government.
28.
Another Division Bench in FMA No. 835 of 1987 by its order dated 19th April, 1986, National High School v. Broj @ Brij Bhusan Misra, noticed the said judgment in Subhalakhmi Seshadri's case and observed as under :  ".....However, in Mrs. Subhalakshmi Seshadri's case (supra) the Division Bench did not take into consideration the effect of the management rules vis-a-vis the status of the school as a recognised aided institution.
Thus the observation of the Bench to the effect the grant of D.A.
to such institution under the Management of minority community cannot make it a Government institution or a Government aided institution must be held to have been rendered per incurium.
Furthermore, in that case the Court was concerned with the question of extension of service."
29.
Reference has also been made to the judgment of Rup Narayan Chowdhury and others v. State of West Bengal and others, Matter No. 2276 of 1997, wherein it, was held that Rules framed for extension of service of teachers would apply also to teachers employed by a private and unaided school.
In the said matter, it was noted that the school was described as an unaided school.
It received dearness allowance to its teachers.
The learned Judge in that case took into account the note to sub-rule (9) of Rule 28 and held that the enforcement of the said Rule 28 will not in any (sic) interfere with the right of linguistic minority to run a school in their own interest or in the manner they like.
The contention that no writ will lie as against the school, was also negatived.
The institution, it was held, was bound to follow Rule 28 of the Management Rules.
30.
The apparent conflict as regards the applicability of the said circular can be said to have been resolved by the latter judgment dated 19.4.96 of the Division Bench in FMA No. 835 of 1987.
However, this Court has not gone into the aforesaid contentions advanced before this court by the learned Advocate for respondent school leaving the same open as it was not considered necessary by this Court when the matter could be decided on its own merits and in the facts and circumstances of the case.
31.
CO No. 5007(W) of 1993 is filed jointly by Shri Damodar Prosad Sinha and Baidyanath Prosad seeking a direction to the school authorities for taking appropriate steps commanding them to send grant-in-aid application for the dues to the approved staff of the school and to make arrangements for payment of the arrears.
The petitioners claimed arrears of pay and allowances from April, 1981 to March, 1990 in terms of the pay scales as applicable to the employees of aided institution.
The petitioners are in effect seeking a direction to the school authorities to apply for grant-in-aid to the school in question and after procuring the grants to pay the approved staff including the petitioners such pay and allowances as are admissible to the teachers of institutions who are receiving aid from the Government.
32.
As already noticed, the institution in question is a minority institution.
The Director of School Education in the orders referred to supra has held that the respondent institution is a minority institution and an unaided institution.
It is, therefore, in the discretion of such minority institution either to apply for financial assistance from the Government under any of its schemes such as the grant-in-aid code or not.
Such institution cannot, in my considered opinion, be compelled by the staff including the petitioners herein to seek financial assistance.
Much less can the petitioners seek a writ commanding the private unaided minority institutions to apply for grant-in-aid from the Government when the institution itself is not interested in obtaining any such financial assistance from the Government.
33.
On this short ground alone, the writ application CO No. 5007(W) of 1993 is liable to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.