VK Barde J :- The petitioner who had obtained the degree of BA In First Class, MA in Second Class, and who had also passed B.Ed.
Examination, had applied for the post of Lecturer in Marathi, in the respondent No. 1 College which is run by the respondent No. 2 Institute.
The petitioner has contended that as per the qualifications prescribed by the University Grants Commission, the petitioner was having the requisite qualifications for that post.
He was called for interview along with other candidates.
He belongs to Scheduled Caste.
The advertisement published by the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 indicated that the post was reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Denotified Tribes/Nomadic Tribes, and the advertisement further mentioned that, in case, qualified and suitable candidates from reserved category were not available, candidates from open category will be considered for appointment.
The petitioner was under impression that he having all the necessary qualifications, he would be selected.
However, the petitioner was not selected and three persons were selected by the Selection Committee.
They were all from open category.
2.
The petitioner has contended that the Selection Committee consisted of the Chairman of Governing Council of the Institute respondent No. 2; the expert in the subject appointed by the Marathwada University, now renamed as Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad respondent No. 4; Principal of Balbhim Arts, Science and Commerce College, Beed respondent No, 1, and the Head of the Department of Marathi of Balbhim Arts, Science and Commerce College, Beed.
As per the rules, the Selection Committee ought to have consisted of besides these persons, a nominee of the Director of Higher Education, and the nominee of Vice-Chancellor of the University respondent No. 4.
But only the four persons named earlier were present for taking interviews of the candidates called for selection.
As the Chairman of the institute was one of the members the other two members, the Principal and the Head of the Department, practically had no voice because they could not go against the wishes of the Chairman and, is such circumstances, the formation of the Selection Committee itself was not proper and, therefore, the resultant selection was also not proper.
3.
The respondent No. 3.
Shri Patangankar, was ultimately given appointment on the post of Lecturer in Marathi subject in the respondent No. 1 College.
The petitioner, therefore, has challenged this appointment and he has contended that the respondent No. 3 comes from open category.
He couldn't have been selected.
The petitioner himself belongs to Scheduled Caste category.
He ought to have been selected.
So, the order of selection be cancelled and the writ of mandamus be issued against the respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 4, to appoint the petitioner as Lecturer in Marathi  4.
The respondent No. 3 who was appointed as Lecturer in Marathi subject, filed Writ Petition No. 952/1988 because his services were terminated by the respondents Nos. 1 and 2, as per the order dated 1651988.
He challenged the order of termination and in that Writ Petition, has also prayed for interim relief, that the operation of the order of termination dated 1651988 be stayed till the final disposal of the Writ Petition.
In the said Writ Petition, interim relief as prayed, was granted and the respondent No. 3 continued to be Lecturer in the college.
However, on 2371996, the respondent No. 3 withdrew the Writ Petition No. 952/1988 and thereafter on 3071966, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 passed an order contending that in view of the compromise made before the Hon'ble High Court, in Writ Petition No. 952/1988, the respondent No. 3 was continued as Lecturer in Marathi since 811989 and the earlier order of termination dated 1651988 was cancelled.
5.
Being aggrieved by this further development, the petitioner amended his petition and challenged the order passed by the respondents Nos. 1 and 2, dated 3071996, and he has prayed that that order also be cancelled because the seat was reserved for backward class community and the respondent No. 3 who comes from open category, could not have been given permanent appointment and confirmation on that post.
6.
The respondent No. 1 has filed the affidavit in reply and has admitted that the advertisement was given indicating that the post was reserved for SC/ST/DNT/NT.
However, the Selection Committee did not find any candidate from this category suitable for the appointment, on the post and, therefore, the Selection Committee selected the three persons from open category and from those three persons, the University gave approval for the appointment of the respondent No. 3 and, therefore, the respondent No. 3 was appointed as Lecturer.
7.
The respondent No. 1 has also contended that the Selection Committee was formed as per the rules and regulations of the University.
The expert in the subject was present at the time of interviews and there was full quorum.
Therefore, the process of selection carried out by the Selection Committee is quite legal and proper.
The respondent No. 1, therefore, has prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
8.
The respondent No. 3. in his affidavit in reply, has contended that he was having the qualification of MA Second Class in Marathi and M Phil.
Therefore, he was qualified to be selected on the post of Lecturer in Marathi As against this, the petitioner was not having the M Phil.
qualification and, therefore, he was not fit for selection.
In the advertisement itself, it was mentioned that M Phil.
qualification was necessary and therefore, the petitioner cannot contend that he ought to have been selected and he ought to have been appointed on the post.
As there was no candidate from reserved category suitable for the post, the Selection Committee had to select a candidate from open category, as mentioned in the advertisement itself.
So, the Selection Committee which was properly formed had selected him and the University has given approval for his appointment.
So, the Writ Petition is without any basis and it be dismissed.
9.
The respondent No. 4 University has filed affidavit in reply but at very late stage.
The respondent No. 4 has contended that the norms for reservation for backward classes prescribed by the Government of Maharashtra are adopted by the University for the appointment of staff in the University and colleges affiliated to the University.
All these circulars were sent to the respondent No. 1 College from time to time.
The post of Lecturer in Marathi was reserved for SC/ST/DNT/NT and, therefore, while giving appointment on that post, the rules prescribed for appointment against the reserved post ought to have been followed by the College.
However, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 have failed to follow the rules.
10.
It is also admitted by the respondent No. 4, that the petitioner had put his grievance before the University by filing a written representation.
However, for one reason or the other, it was not looked into by the University till 3rd March, 1998 and 8th July, 1998.
However, in view of the reply received from the College, that the matter was subjudice because of the present petition pending in the Court, no action was taken in the matter.
The respondent No. 4 has produced on record all the relevant correspondence as well as the Government Resolutions which are made applicable for employment in University and colleges and which were communicated to the Colleges from time to time.
11.
The petitioner has challenged that the Selection Committee was not properly formed and, therefore, the whole process of selection is bad, However, there are statutes under the Marathwada University Act, 1974, and the said statute provides for formation of Selection Committee for the selection of teachers in the colleges.
As per the Clause 219 of this statute, copy of which is on record, the Selection Committee for the selection of teacher in the colleges, is formed by inclusion of the following persons :  1) The Chairman, Governing Body of the College or his nominee to be the Chairman of the Selection Committee; 2) A nominee of the Vice-Chancellor; 3) One expert nominated by the University; 4) One nominee of the Director of Higher Education; 5) The Principal of the College; and  6) The concerned Head of the Department in the College.
The Principal of the College shall be the Secretary of the Selection Committee.
This clause further provides in Sub-clause "C" under heading "Procedure" :  "The quorum to constitute a meeting of every Selection Committee shall be four members.
No selection shall be valid unless the expert nominated by the University is present."
12.
From the statements made by the petitioner himself in the petition and the statement made by the respondents in their respective affidavits, and the report of the Selection Committee which is produced on record by the petitioner himself, it is indicated that there were four members for the meeting of selection and the expert of the University was present along with the other three members.
So, the Committee which held meeting for selection of Lecturer in Marathi, in December, 1986, was properly and legally formed and there is no substance in the contention of the petitioner, that for want of the other two members at the time of the meeting, the nominee of the Vice- Chancellor and the nominee of the Director of Higher Education, the selection is bad, cannot be accepted.
13.
There is also no substance in the contention of the petitioner that the selection was with mala fides because besides making this statement, the petitioner has not shown how there were mala fides against him.
The report of the Committee which is at Exhibit P5, page 19 in the compilation, gives the details regarding how the selection proceeded.
It is specifically mentioned that no candidate who belonged to reserved category could answer a single question and, therefore, was not found suitable.
No doubt, the petitioner has contended that he had answered all questions to the satisfaction of the Selection Committee.
But that is his own assessment.
The Selection Committee is the best judge and the Selection Committee has made these observations.
So, the opinion given by the Selection Committee must be given due weight.
The petitioner, therefore, cannot challenge the selection made by the Selection Committee on the ground of mala fide or on the ground that his performance was satisfactory.
14.
So far as the contention of the petitioner, that he was having the requisite qualifications and, therefore, he ought to have been selected, is also not proper.
The advertisement published by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 indicated that the qualifications of M Phil.
was necessary.
The petitioner was not having the M Phil.
qualification at the time of his selection.
No doubt, the regulations which are quoted by the petitioner as framed by the University Grants Commission indicate that the relaxation with respect to M Phil.
qualification can be given, However, that relaxation is to be given only if the candidate having M Phil is not available.
Here, the respondent No. 3 who is selected was having the M Phil.
qualification and, therefore, there was no question of giving any relaxation with respect to M Phil.
qualification.
The respondent No. 3 was better qualified than the petitioner.
He was having the requisite qualifications and, therefore, his selection cannot be challenged on that ground.
15.
In such circumstances, the only ground on which the petitioner can challenge the selection of the respondent No. 3, is that the post was reserved for reserved category and the petitioner who was coming from open category was selected for that post.
However, here it also has to be noted that if the candidate from reserved category was not available, then the Selection Committee was at liberty to select the candidate from open category.
So, the challenge to the selection of the respondent No. 3 on the ground that he did not belong to the reserved category cannot be proper.
He could have been selected because no suitable candidate from reserved category was available.
16.
The further question then arises, with respect to the appointment of the respondent No. 3 on the post of Lecturer in Marathi This appointment ought to be of a candidate from open category as against a reserved post.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner has argued that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had no authority to give appointment on permanent basis to the respondent No. 3.
The appointment could have been made on temporary basis or on ad hoc basis till the candidate from reserved category was available, or till the post was dereserved as per the rules.
17.
Both the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have taken the stand that the University gave approval for the appointment of the respondent No. 3 and, therefore, the respondent was appointed.
The letter of approval is filed on record by the respondent No. 4 as Exhibit R4 at page 79.
18.
It is true that in this letter, there is no mention that the approval was given for appointment on ad hoc basis or temporary basis.
The letter states :  "I am directed to inform you that the Vice Chancellor is pleased to accord his approval to the appointment of Shri VJ Patangankar as Lecturer in Marathi" But can it be said by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 or for that matter respondent No. 4, were not knowing that once the post was advertised as post for reserved category, the appointment could not have been given appointing the person from open category on permanent basis.
The respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 4 were fully aware about rules and regulations regarding such appointments.
Either of them cannot plead ignorance about these rules.
So, even if the approval was there for appointment of the respondent No. 3, it ought to be considered that approval as per the rules prescribed.
So, when the post was reserved for reserved category candidate, then the approval has to be considered on that basis, that means when the reserved category candidate was not available, then the appointment should be either temporary or ad hoc.
19.
The respondent No. 4 University has produced on record, the Government Resolution dated 27th June, 1974 which was adopted by the University and was made applicable for appointments in the University as well as in the affiliated colleges, and copy of this Government Resolution was sent to the respondent No. 1 as per the statement made in the affidavit by the respondent No. 4.
This Government Resolution provides that the vacancies reserved for particular section of backward classes should be filled in by appointing candidates of only those sections of backward class for whom they have been reserved.
In case, vacancies cannot be filled in the case of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Denotified Tribes and Nomadic Tribes, those should be kept unfilled and carried forward till they are filled by members of the particular section for whom they are reserved up to a period of five years.
20.
Thus, the aforesaid rule makes it clear that the vacancy of Lecturer in Marathi which was reserved for SC/ST/DNT/NT could have been filled in by candidate from these reserved categories only.
If the candidate from reserved category was not available, then that vacancy ought to be kept unfilled for a period of five years.
Only thing is that to avoid the further consequence of not filling the post of Lecturer, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 could have appointed a person from other category, but only for limited period, that is, till the candidate from reserved category was available.
So, such appointment of person from other category has to be made as temporary or ad hoc.
21.
It is worth noting that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were fully aware of this position and, therefore, by the order dated 1651988, the services of the respondent No. 3 were terminated.
The copy of the order at Exhibit P8 on page 25A which mentions that the appointment of the respondent No. 3 was against a reserved post and therefore, his services were being terminated.
The respondent No. 3 also was fully aware that the post was advertised for reserved category and he being candidate from open category, his appointment was as per the rules against the reserved category.
Once the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had admitted this position, they cannot back out from that.
It has to be held that the appointment of the respondent No. 3 was against reserved post and that was for temporary period or of ad hoc nature.
22.
It is nowhere disputed by the petitioners and the respondents that once such appointment is made against a reserved post, then the institute has to advertise five times in five years, the post again for reserved category and if in spite of such efforts no candidate from reserved category is available, then only the institute can take steps for getting the post dereserved by approaching the State Government.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2, therefore, ought to have followed this procedure.
23.
The learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have argued that when the services of the respondent No. 3 were terminated, he filed Writ Petition No. 952/1988 and in that Writ Petition, the Court was pleased to stay the operation of the order of termination.
Therefore, the respondent No. 3 continued on the post and because of this, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 could not take any steps for filling the post from the reserved category as per the rules.
There is some substance in this contention of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Because of the stay order given by this Court, in Writ Petition No. 952/1988, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 could not remove the respondent No. 3 from services and could not appoint anybody in his place.
However, once the Writ Petition No. 952/1988 was withdrawn by the respondent No. 3, and the Court had vacated the interim stay, then the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were free to act as per the rules prescribed for filling the reserved posts.
24.
The writ petition was withdrawn on 2371996, The respondent No. 4 has produced on record the circular issued by the Government of Maharashtra, dated 2541996, which was communicated to the respondent No. 1 College.
The Circular mentions that if as per the Government decision dated 2511990, any person from unreserved category is appointed against a reserved post then for five years, attempt should be made to appoint the person from reserved category on that post and if no such persons were available, then in the sixth year, the post can be dereserved.
But only the State has powers to deserve that post.
25.
So, when the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 issued the order dated 3071996, they were fully aware that the post of Lecturer in Marathi was originally reserved for SC/ST/DNT/NT.
In the year 1986, no candidate was available from reserved category and, therefore, respondent No. 3 was appointed.
So, his appointment was of temporary nature.
He continued on the post only because of the stay order issued by the Court.
When the Writ Petition was withdrawn and the interim relief order was vacated, then the post again revived for the reserved category.
The respondents Nos. 1 and 2 ought to have followed the procedure prescribed by advertising the post again for reserved category.
The respondents Nos. 1 and 2 had no authority to issue order dated 3071996 where by the respondent No. 3 was continued in his service as per his original appointment order and was confirmed in his service with effect from 811989 treating that on that day, he completed his probation period.
This order dated 3071996 is definitely faulting the rules regarding appointment against the reserved category.
26.
Here, other circumstances must be taken into consideration.
The order dated 3071996 issued by the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 indicates in the first portion : "In pursuance of the compromise made before the Hon'ble High Court of Judicature of Bombay, at Aurangabad, in Writ Petition No. 952/1988........"  The record and proceedings of Writ Petition No. 952/1988 is called and it is seen that no compromise was filed before the Court in the said proceeding.
The petitioner, present respondent No. 3 sought leave to withdraw the petition and the leave was granted and the interim relief was vacated.
So, there was no compromise filed before the Court and no order was passed by the Court in pursuance of the compromise between present respondent No. 3 and respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Altogether false statement is made in the order issued on 3071996.
27.
The learned counsel for respondent No. 3 has argued that the Chairman of the respondent No. 2 Institute assured that, in case, the petition was withdrawn, he would be made permanent and, therefore, he withdrew the petition.
The affidavit of Shir Kautikrao Thale, the then President of the respondent No, 2 Institute, was filed in Writ Petition No. 952/1988 and in that affidavit, such statement is found.
But that does not mean that a compromise had taken place before the Court.
The parties have settled the matter out of the Court and, therefore, the President of the Institute had filed the affidavit.
The Court was not concerned with what compromise had taken place between the parties outside the Court.
The Court was not expected to pass any order in terms of the compromise.
There was only a request seeking leave of the Court to withdraw the petition and that leave was granted.
28.
Whatever may to be the understanding between the respondent No. 3 and the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 outside the Court when the Writ Petition No. 952/1988 was pending, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 had no authority to give permanent appointment to the respondent No. 3 on that post because the post was reserved for reserved category.
So, even if there had been any compromise between the respondent No. 3 and the respondent No. 1 and 2 outside the Court, it had no legal basis.
It could have been entered into to give go-by to the rules providing for filling the posts against reserved category.
29.
The learned Counsel for respondents Nos. 1 and 2 has argued that there were directions issued by the Government on 26th September 1989, that if anybody from open category is appointed against a reserved category post, then his services should not be terminated only on the ground that he was appointed against a reserved category post.
In support of this, the respondent No. 3 has filed on record, the extract from a publication of Government of Maharashtra, General Administration Department.
The original publication of Government is also produced for verification.
30.
On going through the direction issued by the Government, two things are borne out that the Government had issued a direction in July, 1989, that while filling the backlog of reserved categories, the services of the persons appointed against reserved post from unreserved category be terminated and this direction was withdrawn by the State Government on 26th Sept 1989.
31.
This direction was issued for the special drive for filling the backlog of reserved category post.
So, while filling the backlog, it was directed that the services of open category person appointed against the reserved posts be not terminated.
The respondents Nos. 1 and 2 were not engaged in the drive for filling the backlog when the order dated 3071996 was issued.
Thus, the directions issued were specific only for the purpose of the special drive for filling the backlog which was taken up in the year 1989.
32.
Furthermore the services of the respondent No. 3 were terminated by the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 as per the order dated 1651988 long before the directions issued by the State Government on 26th Sept 1989.
The operation of the order dated 1651988 was stayed by the Court because of the interim order passed in Writ Petition No. 952/1988.
The order itself was not cancelled or set aside by the Court.
The termination order was in suspension till the pendency of Writ Petition No. 952/1988.
33.
The respondent No. 3 had filled Writ Petition No. 952/1988 and had challenged the order dated 9.5.1988.
But no sooner he withdrew the Writ Petition, challenge to the order was also withdrawn and the Court further directed that the interim relief was vacated.
That means, immediately on withdrawal of the Writ Petition the order of termination dated 1651988 revived.
The unconditional withdrawal of the Writ Petition by the respondent No. 3 resulted in admiting the illegality of the order of termination dated 1651988 and, in such circumstances, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 cannot take the stand that in view of the directions issued by the State Government on 26th Sept 1989, the services of the respondent No. 3 could not be terminated.
The order of termination of service on withdrawal of the Writ Petition, on 2371996, related back to the date 1651988 when the order itself was issued.
34.
So, if all these circumstances are taken into consideration with reference to the rules prescribed by the State Government as well as the University, for appointment of teachers against a reserved category, it will be clear that the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 had no authority to issue the order dated 3071996 indicating that the order of termination of service issued earlier was cancelled and that his services were confirmed with effect from 811989.
The respondents Nos. 1 and 2 ought to have advertised the post again indicating that it was reserved for SC/ST/DNT/NT and then ought to have proceeded with selection as per the rules for that post.
Here, it is worth noting that the respondents Nos. 1 to 4 nowhere state that approval of the University was sought for the order dated 3071996 and that the University had granted approval to that order.
35.
For all legal and practical purposes, the order dated 3071996 has to be treated as fresh order for appointment because the services of the petitioner stood terminated as per the order dated 1651988.
It appears that the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 never communicated all these facts to the University.
On the contrary, when the enquiries were made with the University, only thing which was communicated to the University was that there was government direction dated 26th Sept 1989 and the matter was subjudice because of the pendency of Writ Petition No. 1089/1987.
The University had also not cared to see exactly what had happened.
The University had not filed any affidavit in reply in the present Writ Petition till 2862000 and this is filed only because the Court directed the University to file affidavit to explain all the situations.
36.
The respondent No. 3 could not have been appointed on permanent basis as Lecturer in Marathi which was the post reserved for SC/ST/DNT/NT unless and until the procedure prescribed by the rules had been followed completely.
There is nothing on record to indicate that this post is deserved by the Government or by the University.
There is also nothing on record that since withdrawal of Writ Petition No. 985/1988, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 have taken any efforts for advertising the post again for reserved category and to ask for dereservation of the post on the ground that suitable candidate from the reserved category is not available.
37.
The respondent No. 3 has filed additional affidavit on record and has produced various documents indicating his achievements in teaching field as well as in literature.
No doubt, the respondent No. 3 is highly qualified.
No doubt, he has his own mark in the teaching field and the field of literature.
However, that cannot be a ground to continue the respondent No. 3 on this post when the post is reserved for reserved category.
38.
The learned Counsel for respondent No. 3 has argued that the respondent No. 3 had worked as Lecturer in Senior College, during the period from 1980 to 1987, at Mangalwedha, and thereafter he was appointed as Lecturer in the respondent No. 1 Institute.
Thus, he has put in total service of 20 years.
So, at least, on the point of equity, his services should not be terminated and even if there is irregularity in the appointment, he be continued in the service.
In support of these contentions, the learned Counsel for respondent No. 3 has relied upon rulings of the Court, in the case of Roshni Devi v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) SCT 337 (SC) : 1998(8) SCC 59 : (AIR 1998 SC 3268), and in the case of CM Singh v. H.P.
Krishi Vishva Vidyalaya, 1999(9) SCC 40 : (AIR 2000 SC 3638).
However, it has to be noted that in both these matters the Supreme Court has observed that the High Court could not have given such order while considering the Writ Petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India.
But only Supreme Court can give such an order under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, both these rulings are not applicable to the present case.
39.
Here, it is also argued by the learned Counsel for the respondent No. 3 that the petitioner was not having necessary qualification of M Phil.
The respondent No. 3 was having qualification of M Phil.
Therefore, the petitioner could not be appointed on the post.
So he cannot challenge the appointment of respondent No. 3.
Here, the question is not with respect to the educational qualifications of the petitioner and the respondent No. 3.
The question is with respect to appointment of the respondent No. 3 who comes from open category against a post reserved for reserved category.
So, it is to be seen whether the respondent No. 3 could have been legally appointed against that post.
The petition cannot be thrown out merely on the ground that the petitioner was not having the necessary educational qualification for appointment on that post especially when the Selection committee had the powers to relax the educational qualification of M Phil.
in certain circumstances.
40.
In this respect, we would like to refer to the ruling of the Apex Court, in the case of Sanjay Krishnanath Phatte v. State of Goa, (1999) 9 SCC 239.
The Apex Court has observed that when the dispute is raised with respect to the competency of the respondent for appointment on the post, then the High Court must decide that issue also and should not dismiss the petition merely on the ground that the petitioner was called for interview but did not qualify as against the respondent.
So, even if the stand taken by the respondent No. 3 is accepted, that as the petitioner was not having M Phil.
qualification while the respondent No. 3 was having M Phil.
qualification, the petitioner could not have been appointed on that post, the question will have to be decided as to whether the respondent No. 3 could have been appointed permanently on that post and the answer must be "No" because the respondent No. 3 was not from reserved category and he was appointed against a post reserved for reserved category.
41.
Here is not the question of relaxation of some educational qualifications.
The question is more basic, as to whether a person not belonging to the reserved category can be appointed on a post reserved for reserved category as a permanent employee.
Neither the Selection Committee nor the respondents Nos. 1 and 2, and for that respondent No. 4, had any authority to appoint the respondent No. 3 permanently on the post reserved for reserved category, either in the year 1986 or in the year 1996.
So, even otherwise, the grounds on which the Apex Court had not disturbed the appointments which were made irregularly, in the present case, those grounds cannot be availed of by the respondent No. 3.
42.
The learned counsel for respondents Nos. 1 and 2 has argued that the respondent No. 2 Institute is running more than one college and the posts for teaching and non-teaching staff of all colleges are taken into consideration for fixation of reservation as per the Government rules and roster.
So, at present, there is no backlog of Scheduled Caste candidates in teaching staff.
There may be backlog with respect of ST/NDT/NT.
The Institute is taking steps to fill in the backlog.
43.
However, it has to noted that when this particular post was reserved for reserved category, then the dereservation is possible only with the approval of the Government.
The institute by itself cannot change the reservation.
There is nothing on record to show that the post is dereserved by the approval of the State Government.
The institute may take steps for filling the backlog.
But under that garb, the institute cannot say, now this post of Lecturer in Marathi in respondent No. 1 College be treated as dereserved and the respondent No. 3 be allowed to continue on that post.
Specific directions or orders will have to be sought in this respect from the State Government as per the circular dated 25th April 1996 filed at page 48 in this petition.
So, now the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 are going to take steps to fill in the backlog of the reserved category post, the respondent No. 3 cannot be continued on his post as per the order dated 30th July, 1996.
44.
Hence, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 will have to take steps as per the rules laid down by the State Government and approved by the University respondent No. 4 to fill in post from backward classes for which the post is reserved.
The appointment of the respondent No. 3 has to be considered as only temporary or ad hoc appointment till the post is filled in by appointing a candidate from reserved category or till the post is dereserved as per the rules.
However, the Court cannot direct that the petitioner be appointed on the post of Lecturer in Marathi in respondent No. 1 Institute on the basis of the contentions raised by him in this petition.
Only the order dated 3071996 has to be set aside with direction that it should be treated as fresh appointment on the post of Lecturer in Marathi, in the respondent No. 1 College, on ad hoc or temporary basis and the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to take steps to fill in the post from amongst the reserved category candidates as per the rules or to take steps for dereservation of the post as per the rules.
The respondent No. 3 cannot be considered as permanently appointed on that post and cannot be considered as confirmed on that post.
45.
Rule made absolute as per these directions.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.