Satya Brata Sinha, J - These three applications are directed against the judgment and order dated 2961999 passed by the West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 6901/98, OA No. 6902/98 and OA No. 7024/98 whereby and whereunder their applications for a direction upon the respondent herein to regularise their services were rejected on the ground that the same were barred by the principle of res-judicata.
2.
According to the petitioners, they had been working as DDT Spray workers having been appointed on diverse dates from 1967 to 1972.
The petitioners have contended that by reason of the Memoranda dated 3rd August, 1979, 28th August, 1980 and 13th March, 1996 as contained in annexures `B', `C' and `D' to the application they were entitled to the reliefs prayed for before the learned Tribunal.
3.
The learned Tribunal in its order dated 2961999 impugned before this court held :  "The petitioners did not state their actual status.
They mentioned that they were engaged as field workers/spray workers under Chief Medical Officer of Health, but from the engagement letter/s enclosed it is found that the petitioners were engaged as field workers and not as DDT spray workers with a fixed monthly renumeration.
Such being the case, the petitioners cannot be described as casual workers."
The learned Tribunal further held : "Secondly, the Deptt.
of Health issued an order for considering the DDT Spray workers as seasonal workers thereby making them entitled to be considerated for absorption along with others sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
(Circulated dated 1891991).
In this background, the petitioners have come before this tribunal.
In addition, the statement of yearwise days/period of engagement is an unsigned paper (page 7 of the Supplementary Affidavit) and the same cannot be relied upon.
It is further found that in terms of a judgment by the Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta passed in CO No 14978 (W) of 1990, the petitioners appeared in interview/medical examination, but they have not disclosed anything regarding the result (pgs.
74, 111, 112, 113 etc.).
If they were unsuccessful, the petitioners cannot come to the Tribunal claiming their absorption.
In any case, had the petitioners any grievance regarding the interview, they could have taken redress from the court.
In view of such position as above, this application is barred by res judicata and hence rejected."
4.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, inter alia, submits that the learned Tribunal committed serious error in so far as it failed to take into consideration the aforementioned circulars issued by the State of West Bengal in their proper perspective.
According to the learned counsel, as the self-same question has been decided by a Division Bench of this Court presided over by Ruma Pal, J (as Her Lordship then was) in the case of State of West Bengal and others v. Prasanta Kumar Saha and others, (WPST No. 260 of 1998) disposed of on 1351999, the said decision ought to have been followed.
The question which arises for consideration in these applications is as to whether the said notification issued by the State is valid.
It is not in dispute that the Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal issued a circular letter dated 17th October, 1977 wherein inter alia it was stated that all recruitments should be made through the Employment Exchange with a view to providing equal opportunity to all in the State in the matter of employment.
It was further directed that all recruitments in the posts under the Government should be made strictly according to the procedures laid down therein.
Clause (1) of the said Memorandum reads thus :  "All vacancies arising in State Government establishments, State Government Undertakings, Quasi-Government establishments and Local Bodies where recruitment is not made through Public Service Commission, or by way of normal promotion, or by absorption of personnel declared surplus by the Government shall as a rule, be filled up through the Employment Exchanges.
For this purpose, and also as required by the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, all employing authorities under the State Government including the State Government undertakings and Quasi- Government establishments, Local Bodies shall notify to the appropriate Employment Exchanges all vacancies that may occur in their establishments from time to time."
5.
By reason of the aforementioned circular letters dated 2881980 and 13.3.1996, the Circular letter dated 17.10.1977 has not been rescinded.
It has been stated that the said Circular having been issued in terms of the direction of the State must be held to have been issued either by way of rule in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India or an executive instruction issued under the provisions of Article 162 of the Constitution of India.
The Memorandum issued by the Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal as contained in Annexures `B', `C' and `D' to the application must be considered in that background.
6.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the State in the matter of grant of employment must comply substantially with the underlying principles laid down under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
As would appear from the Memorandum dated 3rd August, 1979 that the same has been issued by the State while considering the question of discontinuance of employment of casual and such other categories of workers in perennial type of work.
The question as to whether the petitioners herein had been engaged in perennial type of work or not has not been proved nor any averment in that regard had been made before the learned Tribunal.
Furthermore, clause (2) of the said Memorandum dated 3rd August, 1979 clearly stated that no ad hoc appointment could be made for a period not exceeding 15 days to meet any situation of emergent nature.
It has been laid down that all recruitments of casual employees would be made by the Employing authority only through the Employment Exchange.
Clause (5) of the said Memorandum on which reliance has been placed must be read in the context of Clause (2) aforementioned.
Casual worker has been defined in Clause (8) in the following terms :  "Casual and such other categories of workers would mean casual workers, daily rated workers, muster-roll workers and such other categories of persons as may be specified from time to time by Government."
The Memorandum dated 28th August, 1980 was issued only by way of clarification.
7.
By reason of the said Memorandum the earlier Memorandum had not been rescinded.
No right as such has been created in the respondents.
The casual employees who seek regularisation of their services are required to comply with the directions contained in the earlier Memorandum.
The Memorandum dated 1331998 lays down the principle for engagement of such workers in exceptional cases which as noticed hereinbefore, would only be made for 15 days and in other cases only upon notifying the vacancy to the proper Employment Exchange.
It appears from the said Memorandum that engagement of casual workers has also been prohibited in terms of Memo No. 401(75)-Emp.
dated 9121991.
Clause (5) of the said Memo reads thus :  "Henceforth, no appointing authority in any establishment of the State Govt. shall engage any Seasonal or casual worker, whatever it may called, daily- rated workers, Master-roll workers, etc. without the prior concurrence of the Labour Department and Finance Department for a period succeeding (exceeding ?)
15 days either intermittently or continuously.
Any violation of these instructions will render disciplinary action against the delinquent appointing authority and also summary dismissal of the casual worker(s)".
From the order passed by the learned Tribunal it is evident that the petitioners did not fulfil the conditions laid down in the Circular letters and also has failed to show they had been engaged in any perennial nature of job.
8.
The decision rendered by a Division Bench of this in the case of State of West Bengal and others v. Prasanta Kumar Saha and others, WPST No. 260 of 1998 does not help the petitioners in the instant case.
The applicants there had filed a writ application before this Court praying for their absorption and the said writ application was disposed of by an order dated 8121994 holding that they deserved permanent status of employment.
No appeal was preferred from the said order and thus it became final between the parties.
The decision of the Division Bench of this Court must be considered in the aforementioned context.
We may further notice that Ruma Pal, J (as Her Lordship then was) later on herself having regard to the several decisions of the Supreme Court held that such regularisation is not permissible in law.
(See 2000(1) CHN 240).
9.
We may notice that a three Judges Bench of the Apex Court in the case of BN Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka reported in AIR 1979 SC 1676 :  "Apart from repelling the contention that regularisation connotes permanence, these observations furnish the second reason for rejection of the argument advanced on behalf of the promotees and that reason is that when rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India are in force, no regularisation is permissible in exercise of the executive powers of the Government under Article 162 thereof in contravention of the rules."
10.
Yet again the Apex Court recently in the case of State of M.P. v. Dharam Bir reported in 1998(3) SCT 301 (SC) : 1998(6) SCC 165 held :  "Whether a person holds a particular post in a substantive capacity or is only temporary or ad hoc is a question which directly relates to his status.
It all depends upon the terms of appointment.
It is not open to any government employee to claim automatic alteration of status unless that result is specifically envisaged by some provision in the statutory rules.
Unless, therefore, there is a provision in the statutory rules for alteration of status in a particular situation it is not open to any government employee to claim a status different than that which was conferred upon him at the initial or any subsequent stage of service."
11.
In Managing Committee, Dinhata High School v. Sri Ram Chandra Saha and others reported in 1997(1) CHN 105, a Division Bench of this Court upon taking into consideration a large number of decisions held that any appointment made in violation of the statutory provisions would be ultra vires.
It was further held that a continuous service by itself does not give rise to a claim of regularisation.
12.
In Director of Public Instructions of WB and others v. Dr. Ashish Pal and others reported in 1998(2) CHN 241 this Court upon taking into consideration the provisions of Sections 7 and 8 of the 1978 Act as also provision of Clause 101-A of the Calcutta University First Statute, inter alia held :  1.
Regularisation cannot be a made (mode ?)
of recruitment 2.
High Court has no jurisdiction to issue an order directing regularisation of service contrary to mandatory provisions of the relevant statute.
3.
An appointment made in violation of recruitment rules is illegal and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
This aspect of the matter has also been considered by a Division Bench recently in State of West Bengal and others v. Ashok Ranjan Chandra and others reported in 1999(2) CHN 387 wherein strong reliance had been placed on J & K Public Service Commission and others v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others reported in 1994(2) SCC 630 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dharam Bir reported in 1998(6) SCC 165.
Similar view has also been taken in the Calcutta Tramways Company (1978) Limited and others v. Ramesh and 17 others reported in 1999(1) CHN 513, Ziaul Islam with 202 others v. State of West Bengal and others reported in Cal.
LT 1999(1) HC 509 and a Full Bench decision of this Court in Debasish Dutta v. State of West Bengal reported in 1998(2) CLJ 1.
13.
In State of UP and others v. Harish Chandra and others reported in 1996(2) SCT 712 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2173, the Apex Court has clearly held that no mandamus can be issued to direct Government to refrain from enforcing the provisions of law or to do something contrary to law.
14.
A Division Bench of this Court comprising of AK Mathur, CJ and one of us (SB Sinha, J) in Sairindhri Douli v. State of West Bengal and others reported in 2000(2) SCT 441 (Calcutta)(DB) : 2000(1) S.L.R.
803, inter alia, distinguished a decision of the Apex Court in Arun Kumar Routh v. State of Bihar reported in 1998(1) SCT 331 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 1477 stating :  "In Arun Kumar Routh v. State of Bihar reported in 1998(1) SCT 331 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 1477, the Apex Court held : "Although in the matter of getting appointment in the Government Service, the procedure required to the followed for such appointments cannot be by-passed and if the initial appointment was illegal on account of not following the procedure for appointment, the incumbent obtaining appointment without following due procedure cannot claim as a matter of right to be regularised.
This Court, however, has looked with sympathy when question of regularisation came for consideration in cases of temporary or ad hoc appointments, even made improperly, if the incumbents had been allowed to continue for a long time because of the human problem involved in such continued service."
15.
In the said decision the Apex Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India has directed that the 50 per cent of the sanctioned posts which were held by these appellants should be filled from amongst the appellants on the basis of their inter se merit position by taking into account their academic qualifications by waiving question of age bar if any and usual procedures for such appointment.
Thus, illegal appointments even in that case had not been and could not be set aside evidently in view of the decision of the Apex Court in various decisions as for example in Ashwani Kumar and others v. State of Bihar and others reported in 1997(1) SCT 573 (SC) : 1997(2) SCC 1, Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra and others reported in 1994(4) SCT 398 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 962, State of West Bengal and others v. Tapan Kumar Saha reported in 1999(2) CHN 519, J and K Public Service Commission and others v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others, reported in 1994(2) SCC 630, State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dharam Bir reported in 1998(6) SCC 165 and Dr. Surinder Singh and another v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others reported in 1996(4) SCT 60 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2775.
Arun Kumar Routh (supra) has also been distinguished by a Division Bench of this Court in Swapan Kumar Banerjee v. Union of India reported in 2000(1) SCT 794 (Calcutta)(DB) : 1999(5) SLR 807.
16.
In Tarak Chowdhury v. State of West Bengal and others reported in 2000(3) SCT 105 (Calcutta)(DB) : 2000(2) SLR 445, this court noticed :  "It has not been disputed that the petitioner was appointed on an ad hoc basis.
At the time of his appointment recruitment rules framed in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India had not been followed.
The State while granting appointment to a person is not only bound to follow the recruitment rules made in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India but is also bound to give effect to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
No right far less any enforceable right flows from such illegal appointment.
The recruitment rules, inter alia, provide for grant of equal opportunity to be considered for appointment to all eligible candidates.
A person who is appointed through back-door cannot claim permanence only because he had been working for sometime.
Reference in this connection may be made to the case of Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra and others reported in AIR 1995 SC 962 and several decisions of the Apex Court following the same.
It is further well known in view of several decisions of the Apex Court that only an irregular appointment can be regularised and not an illegal appointment.
It is further well settled that regularisation cannot be a mode of recruitment.
(See RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmiah reported in 1972(2) SCR 799 and BN Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka reported in 1979(3) SCR 937 which decisions have been considered by the Apex Court in V Sreenivasa Reddy and others v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and others reported in 1995(1) SCT 353 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 586).
It is now also well settled in view of the recent decisions of the Apex Court in State of M.P. and others v. Dharam Bir reported in 1998(6) SCC 165 that the status of a person cannot be changed with the passage of time.
A person who was appointed on temporry or ad hoc basis, thus, cannot claim the status of a permanent servant only because he had worked for sometime.
The said decision along with other decisions had been considered by this Court in a large number of cases.
Reference in this connection, however, may be made to Biman Ch.
Karmakar v. State of West Bengal reported in 1999(2) CHN 289 and West Bengal Essential Commodities Supply Corporation Ltd. v. Md Sarif reported in 2000(1) CHN 240.
The aforementioned circular letter dated 3rd August, 1979 is not a statute.
Even a policy decision cannot be adopted in derogation of a statutory rule.
Even the said purported memorandum dated 3rd August, 1979 is not an executive instruction within the meaning of Article 162 of the Constitution of India."
17.
In Rajendra and others v. State of Rajasthan and others reported in 1999(2) SCT 439 (Rajasthan) : 2000(1) All India Service Law Journal 119 it is stated :  "In our opinion, when the posts temporarily created for fulfilling the needs of a particular project or scheme limited in its duration come to an end on account of the need for the project itself having come to an end either because the project was fulfilled or had to be abandoned wholly or partially for want of funds, the employer cannot by a writ of mandamus be directed to continue employing such employees as have been dislodged because such a direction would amount to requisition for creation of posts though not required by the employer and finding (funding ?)
such posts though the employer did not have the funds available for the purpose.
The decision taken by the respondent-State to abolish the posts was a bona fide decision taken after due application of mind by appointing an Expert Committee which went deep into all relevant considerations and made recommendations in the interests of nationalisation.
The decision is based on administrative and financial considerations.
There is nothing wrong in the societies having acted on the policy decision of the State Government.
Really speaking there was hardly anything left to be done by the DRDA societies at their own end.
Inasmuch as the Societies did not have any funds of their own independent of those made available by the State Government how could the societies have continued with the posts and the incumbents thereon though they were left with no means to pay salaries attaching with the posts."
Reference in this connection may be made to Rama Dutta and another v. State of West Bengal reported in 2000 CWN 671.
18.
Yet again in Suraj Prakash Gupta v. State of J and K reported in 2000(3) SCT 34 (SC) : 2000(4) SLR 486, it has been held :-  "Recent trend of cases : Recruitment Rules cannot be relaxed.
The decisions of this Court have recently been requiring strict conformity with the Recruitment Rules for both direct recruits and promotees.
The view is that there can be no relaxation of the basic or fundamental Rules of Recruitment.
In Keshav Chandra Joshi v Union of India, 1993 Suppl.
1 SCC 272 the Rule permitted relaxation of conditions of service and it was held by the three-Judge Bench that the Rule did not permit relaxation of Recruitment Rules.
The words `may consult the PSC' were, it was observed, to be read as `shall consult PSC' and the Rule was treated mandatory.
In Syed Khalid Rizvi v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 236 (SC) : 1993(3) (Suppl) SCC 575 at 603, decided by a three-Judge Bench, a similar strict principle was laid down.
The relevant Rule - Rule 3 of the Residuary Rules (see P. 603) (para 33) in that case did permit relaxation of "Rules".
Even so, this Court refused to imply relaxation of Recruitment Rule and observed : "The condition precedent, therefore, is that there should be appointment to the service in accordance with Rules and by operation of the Rule, undue hardship has been caused,.....
It is already held that conditions of recruitment and conditions of service are distinct and the latter is preceded by an appointment according to Rules.
The former cannot be relaxed."
19.
Similarly, in State of Orissa v. Sukanti Mohapatra, 1993(3) SCT 178 (SC) : 1993(2) SCC 486, it was held that though the power of relaxation stated in the Rule was in regard to any of the provisions of the Rules this did not permit relaxation of the Rule of direct recruitment without consulting the Commission and the entire ad hoc service of direct recruit could not be treated as regular service.
Similarly, in Dr. MA Haque v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 618 (SC) : 1993(2) SCC 213 it was held that for direct recruitment, the Rules relating to recruitment through the Public Service Commission could not be relaxed.
In Jammu and Kashmir Public Service Commission v. Dr. Narinder Mohan, 1994(2) SCC 630 it was held that the provisions of the J & K Medical Recruitment Rules could not be relaxed for direct recruitment.
Back-door direct recruitment, could not be permitted.
See also Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra (supra).
In Dr. Surinder Singh Jamwal and another v. State of J and K., 1996(9) SCC 619, this Court directed the direct recruits to go before the Public Service Commission.
20.
The applicants-respondents herein were said to have been employed for performing the job on Spray Operators, but it had not been specifically stated to be in the offer of appointment.
The work of Spray Operation might have been for a particular period.
Having regard to the fact that they had been appointed as Field Operator it may be that apart from the work of spraying DDT's other words also were also being taken from them.
Such other works may or may not be perennial in nature.
The question as to whether the job is perennial in nature or not is within the exclusive domain of the employer.
In a particular area, spraying operation may be necessary in one year, it may not be in another.
21.
We have also to bear in mind having regard to the provision of Section 57 of the Indian Evidence Act that but for the last few years, Malaria was said to have been completely eradicated in the State of West Bengal as was also observed by World Health Organisation.
Thus, upon eradication of Malaria, the question of appointment of the applicants-respondents for the purpose of spraying of DDT did not arise.
The applicants themselves have stated that their work was identical to the works allotted to Group D staff.
22.
The word `appointment' is of wide amplitude but it is immaterial in service jurisprudence whether a person engaged for a particular purpose is in law appointed or not.
Service jurisprudence envisages an appointment by the State to be one which is done upon complying with the statutory rules or executive instructions having force of law laid down therefor.
23.
The circular letter issued by State which is not a statutory rule and the same has to be construed in the light of the provision contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Back-door appointment is not encouraged.
Recruitment upon compliance of the provisions of the statutory rules would be in conformity with the underlying objects of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Clause (2) of Article 16 of the Constitution of India in no uncertain terms states that no citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
Only in relation to certain matters like appointment of compassionate ground granted in favour of the widow, son or unmarried daughter has been held to be an exception to the aforementioned provision on the ground that the State being a welfare State should protect those who had become destitute by reason of sudden death of the bread-winners of the family.
24.
Furthermore, when a recruitment rule is framed in terms of the provision prohibited under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the same must strictly be complied with.
Any appointment may be (made ?)
in violation of such a statutory duty rule would be void.
See Dr. Meera Massey v. Dr. SR Malhotra reported in 1998(1) SCT 727 (SC) : 1998(3) SCC 88.
25.
If a person is engaged by an officer of the State through back-door without following the procedures laid down for a recruitment in a government service, the same cannot be encouraged.
This aspect of the matter has been considered in State of UP and others v. UP State of Law Officers Asson.
and others reported in 1994(1) SCT 863 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 204 when the Apex Court held that those who come by back-door must go by that door.
26.
The Courts of law dispensing justice cannot also shut its eyes as regard growing unemployment in the country.
Those who are favoured fews can get an entry in service through the handiwork of some officers either as and ad hoc employee or daily-rated employee and after sometime claim themselves to be entitled to a regular appointment.
It is now well recognised that recruitment to unwanted persons are given by some officers of the State on irrelevant and extraneous considerations including money consideration.
The resolution of the State should be viewed having regard to the aforementioned question.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in these applications which are dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of these cases there will be no order as to costs.
Applications dismissed.