Satyabrata Sinha, J - This application is directed against the judgment and order dated 18.3.98 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal whereby and whereunder the application filed by the respondent herein questioning the order of removal dated 25490 issued by the petitioner herein was allowed.
2.
Bereft of all unnecessary details the fact of the matter is as follows :-  The respondent No. 1 joined the Department of Customs as an Appraiser and was posted as an Appraiser (Metal Expert) in the Customs House, Calcutta.
His service was requisitioned by the then Assistant Collector of Appraising Group to examine 75 packages of second quality stainless steel.
On or about 26380 a report was filed by a group of officers including the Assistant Commissioner wherein pass-out order was passed.
However at the direction of the Assistant Commissioner, the first respondent re-examined the full quantity of the goods and found that the 75% of it was damaged to the extent of 15%.
The first respondent along with the Shed Appraiser and Examining Officer stated that since pass-out order had already been made no refund is permissible but despite the same the Assistant Commissioner directed payment of refund.
It may be noticed that re-examination was made at the instance of the importer.
Departmental proceedings was initiated against the petitioner in relation to the following articles of charges : "Shri Shyamal Das Gupta while functioning as Appraiser (Metal Expert), Collector of Customs, Calcutta Customs during February to October, 1980 committed gross misconduct and failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion of duty inasmuch as he in collusion with S/Shri Barindra Kumar Biswas, Assistant Collector of Customs, Nalini Ranjan Pal, the then Examining Officer, Anupam Chakraborty and Shri CR Agarwal, Director of M/s. Sibco Industries Pvt. Ltd., P-3, New CIT Road, Calcutta, fabricated false examination report dated 2631980 under signature of S/Shri BK Biswas, S Dasgupta, NB Pal and A. Chakraborty during the examination of the materials showing that 75% of material i.e. 75 packages of second quality stainless still valued for Rs. 6,21,05393 vide Bill of Entry No. 1-1001 dated 1831980, per Annexure "C".
On 1271988, the petitioner was served with an order of removal from service issued in the name of the President of India dated 30.6.1988 along with the copy of the enquiry report and the report of the UPSC, vide Annexure "D".
It is stated that although the Collector of Customs, the respondent No. 4 is the appointing authority of the petitioner but as common proceeding was drawn up, the President of India was made the disciplinary authority and the petitioner was debarred from preferring any statutory appeal against the aforesaid order of removal."
An enquiry proceeding was commenced wherein it was held that the Assistant Commissioner had interpolated the re-examination report made in terms of Section 22 of the Customs Act.
In the said report the Enquiry Officer, inter alia, held :  "312.
The two arguments by the charged officer in his brief were :- (a) The re-examination was done by him only under the order of his senior officer-Assistant Collector (Docks) and hence he had nothing to say about the jurisdiction for second inspection.
(b) As Metal Expert he had nothing to do with the recommendation of refund of duty as because the re-examination report prepared by Sri NR Paul originally did not suggest refund of duty.
The Charged Officer argued that this report of Sri Paul was first seen and countersigned by Sri A Chakarborty then by him and then by the Assistant Collector (Docks) Sri Biswas.
Hence the addition of the suggestion of refund made by Sri Biswas was, according to the charged officer, definitely done at a later stage after he signed the report.
313 Both the above arguments of the charged officer are acceptable.
It is proved from the re-examination report (page 2/c of Ex.S.1) that the order of re-examination was given by the Assistant Collector (Docks) and not by the charged officer.
It is also probable that Assistant Collector (Docks) added his remarks suggesting refund after the charged officer signed below the re- examination report of Sri NR Paul."
Thereafter the order of removal dated 30th June, 1988 was passed.
An original application was filed by the petitioner before the learned Tribunal which was marked as OA No. 626 of 1989 and by an order dated 5th May, 1989 the said application was allowed with a direction to complete the disciplinary proceeding within 3 months from the date of receipt of the order after giving an opportunity to the first respondent to represent against the enquiry report.
Upon compliance with the aforementioned direction of the learned Tribunal, the order of removal was passed.
The respondent No. 1 filed an application before the learned Tribunal and by an order dated 7th May, 1990 the petitioner was allowed to join his service and ultimately the order of removal was quashed by the learned Tribunal by an order dated 16th July, 1993.
A Special Leave Application was filed by the petitioner herein against the aforementioned order and the Apex Court by a judgment and order dated 19.4.96 remitted the matter back to the learned Tribunal.
Thereafter the impugned order dated 18.8.98 has been passed.
The learned Tribunal in its impugned order, inter alia, held that the charges against the petitioner could not be said to have been proved as the re-examination report dated 26.3.90 has not been produced.
The learned Tribunal having regard to the materials on record arrived at a finding of fact that the report of the enquiry officer was perverse.
The learned Tribunal further noticed that the persons who were charge-sheeted along with the petitioner were allowed to superannuate on normal basis.
3.
Mr. Pal, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioner herein, inter alia, submits that the learned Tribunal committed an error in passing the impugned judgment and order in so far as it fails to take into consideration that the petitioner being posted as Appraiser (Metal Expert) could not have given two different reports on the same day.
4.
Mr. Dutta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1 on the other hand submits that from a bare perusal of the report made by the enquiry officer it would be clear that the main allegation forgery was made against the Assistant Commissioner, Sri BK Biswas and thus no charge can be said to have been proved against his client.
The learned counsel contends that having regard to the fact that other persons who were proceeded against, having been exonerated the question of his client being found guilty does not and cannot arise.
Strong reliance in this connection has been placed on 1998(7) SLR 535, Dhirendra Nath Halder v. Union of India and Ors.  5.
The question which arises for consideration before this Court is as to whether in the fact and circumstances of this case the first respondent can be said to be guilty of commission of any mis-conduct.
6.
What is misconduct has been considered by one of us in the case of Probodh Chandra Bhowmik v. University of Calcutta & Ors, reported in 1994(2) CLJ 457, wherein, inter alia, it has been observed that the word "misconduct" which is a generic term, except in certain cases must bear element of ill-motive.
In Dhirendra Nath Halder (supra) this court took notice of the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Union of India v. J Ahmed, reported in AIR 1979 SC 1022, wherein it has been held :  "It is, however, difficult to believe that lack of efficiency or attainment of highest standards in discharge of duty attached to public officer would ipso facto constitute misconduct.
There may be negligence in performance of duty and lapse in performance of duty or error of judgment in evaluating the developing situation may be negligence in discharge of duty would not constitute misconduct unless the consequences directly attributable negligence would be such as to be irreparable or the resultant damages would be so heavy that the degree of culpability would be very high ."
The question as to whether the respondent No. 1 committed misconduct or not was proved based upon the re-examination reported dated 26380 issued under Section 28 of the Customs Act.
The learned Tribunal gave several opportunities to the petitioner to produce the said report but the said report has not been produced.
Thus, the petitioner having failed or neglected to bring the record on the basis upon which the charge of misconduct was based, in our opinion, cannot now turn round and contend that the guilt of the petitioner or the purported misconduct on the part of the petitioner should be upheld on the basis of presumptive evidence.
As indicated hereinbefore, the question as to whether misconduct has been committed by the petitioner or not could have been judged on the basis of second report, inasmuch as, even assuming that there had been certain negligence on the part of the petitioner, having regard to the decision of the Apex Court in J Ahmed (supra) the same would not constitute a misconduct.
Furthermore, as indicated hereinbefore, the petitioner had allowed the persons similarly situated to reach the age of superannuation and thus there is no absolutely no reason as to why the respondent No. 1 should be held to be guilty of misconduct.
In Dhirendra Nath Halder's case, this Court, inter alia, held that even the appellate authority in a situation of this nature ought to have considered as to whether the charge of guilty against the delinquent officer has been proved keeping in view the nature of charges and whether the punishment imposed upon him is commensurate with the alleged misconduct particularly in view of the fact that other persons similarly situated have not only been exonerated but also have been granted promotion.
7.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the scope of judicial review in such a matter in limited.
However the Court in exercise of its power of judicial review is entitled to interfere with the order of punishment when it is found that the said order is perverse in nature.
Reference in this connection may be made to 1999(1) SCT 642 (SC) : 1999(1) SCC 759, Apparel Export Promotion Council v. AK Chopra, wherein it was held :  "16.
The High Court appears to have overlooked the settled position that the departmental proceeding the disciplinary authority is the sole judge of facts and in case an appeal is presented to the appellate authority, the appellate authority has also the power and jurisdiction to reappreciate the evidence and come to its own conclusion, on facts, being the sole fact-finding authorities.
Once findings of fact, based on appreciation of evidence are recorded, the High Court in writ jurisdiction may not normally interfere with those factual findings unless it finds that the recorded findings were based either on no evidence or that the findings were wholly perverse and/or legally untenable."
Reliance may also be placed on the decision reported in AIR 1999 SC 677, Kuldeep Singh v. Commissioner of Police, wherein it has been held :  "9.
Normally the High Court and this Court would not interfere with the findings of fact recorded at the domestic enquiry but if the findings of "guilt" is based on no evidence, it would be a perverse finding and would be amenable to judicial scrutiny.
10.
A broad distinction has, therefore, to be maintained between the decisions which are perverse and those which are not.
If a decision is arrived at on no evidence or evidence which is thoroughly unreliable and no reasonable person would act upon it, the order would be perverse.
But if there is some evidence on record which is acceptable and which could be relied upon, howsoever compendious it may be, the conclusions would not be treated as perverse and the findings would not be interfered with."
For the reason aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this application which is accordingly dismissed.
Application dismissed.