Tejinder Singh Doabia, J - "I call a complete and generous education," said Milton, "that which fits a man to perform justly, skillfully and magnanimously all the offices, both private and public, of peace and war."
Herein lies the importance of education.
Our studies should be neither "a couch on which to rest; nor a cloister in which to promenade; nor a tower from which to look down on other; nor a fortress we may resist them; nor a workshop for gain and merchandise; but a rich armoury and treasury for the glory of the creator and the ennoblement of life."
These words are attributed to Bacon'.
In the noble words of Epictetus, "you will do the greatest service to the State, if you shall raise, not the roofs of the houses, but the souls of the citizens: for it is better that great souls should dwell in small houses rather than for mean slaves to lurk in great houses."
It is herein lies the importance of education.
The question is whether the present system of education is the one best calculated to fulfil these objects.
Does it really give that love of learning which is better than learning itself?
Does all the study of the classics to which our children devote so many hours give any appreciation of them; or do they not on leaving colleges too often what was said by Byron - "Then farewell, Horace; whom I hated so".
For evolving a perfect system, the men who are associated with the system i.e. teacher must also be dedicated to the job.
The dedication is one aspect of the matter.
He should be learned also.
This is not a new complaint.
`Locke complained that "schools fit us for the University rather than for the world".
Commissioners after commissions, committees after committees, have reiterated the same complaint.
It is in the light of above, the subject matter in issue in this appeal is being examined.
2.
The appellant possess a Masters Degree from Jammu University.
She also possesses a B.Ed.
degree.
This she cleared in the year 1994.
Armed with these qualifications, she applied for the post of teacher.
This was in pursuance of an advertisement notice No. 3 of 1996, dt. 24th of Dec. '96.
The appellant remained unsuccessful.
She alongwith other candidates challenged her non-selection.
On mathematical counts, she was found to be low in merit.
She was not selected.
In this selection process, more weightage was given to the basic qualification i.e. 10+2.
The criteria which was adopted is as under :  10+2 : 50 points Graduation : 10 Addl.
points for Ist Div.
8 Addl.
points for 2nd Divn.
6 Addl.
points for 3rd Divn.
Post Graduation : 10 Addl.
points for Ist Divn.
8 Addl.
points for 2nd Divn.
6 Addl.
points for 3rd Div.
B.Ed.
: 5 Addl.
points M.Ed.
: 5 Addl.
points Viva-voce : 20 points Total : 100 points 3.
The basic argument which has been raised is that the criteria which has been adopted by the respondent is hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
What is urged is that the basic qualification i.e. 10+2 has no relevancy for the purpose of making assessment.
This qualification as per the appellant does not deal with that discipline which is ultimately useful for imparting education to the children.
What is sought to be urged is that by giving undue benefit to the 10+2 qualification, the scales have been tilted in favour of those candidates who do not possess Graduate and Post-Graduate qualification in the discipline of education i.e. B.Ed and M.Ed.
The question arises as to whether this criteria is hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that the object of any process of selection for entering into a public service is to secure the best and most suitable person for job avoiding patronage and favouritism.
The selection based on merit tested impartially and objectively is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
Open competitive examination was suggested as one of the methods and was described by the Supreme Court of India in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777 as "universally accepted gateway to public service".
United Nations Handbook on Civil Service Laws and Practice was quoted.
The relevant para is 4.
It is being quoted again:  "Selection based on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
So, open competitive examination has come to be almost universally as the gateway to public services, with unfairness."
United Nations handbook on Civil Service Laws and Practice; Competitive examinations were the answer to the twin problems represented by democracy and the requirement of good administration.
They were the means by which equality of opportunity was to be united with efficiency.......By this means favouritism was to be excluded and the goal of securing the best man for every job was to be achieved."
Public Personnel Administration by O Glenn Stahl.
"Open Competitive examinations are a peculiarly democratic institution.
Any qualified person may come forward.
His relative competence for appointment is determined by a neutral disinterested body on the basis of objective evidence supplied by the candidate himself.
No one has "pull" everyone stands on his own feet.
The system is not only highly democratic, it is fair and equitable to every competitor.
The same rules govern, the same procedures apply, the same yardstick is used to test competence."
Introduction to the Study of Public Administration by Leonard White."
After taking note of the above, reference was made to the `Kothari Committee on Recruitment Policy and Selection Methods.
That report so quoted in Lila Dhar's case, is being quoted again :  "A system of recruitment almost totally dependent on assessment of a person's academic knowledge and skills, as distinct from ability to deal with pressing problems of economic and social development with people, and with novel situations cannot serve the need of today, much less of tomorrow......We venture to suggest that our recruitment procedures should be such that we can select candidates who cannot only assimilate knowledge and sift material to understand the ramifications of a situation or a problem but have the potential to develop an original or innovate approach to the solution of problems."
4.
The advantages of written test and oral interviews were also appreciated.
Reference was again made to the United Nations Handbook on Civil Services Laws and Practice.
What is said in this report in this regard is again being quoted :  "............the written papers permit an assessment of culture and intellectual competence.
The interview permits an assessment of qualities of character which written papers ignore; it attempts to assess the man himself and not his intellectual abilities."
After taking note of the aforementioned Handbooks prepared by the United Nations and the Kothari Committee report, it was observed that "the written examination assesses the man's intellect and the interview test the man himself and "the twain shall meet" for a proper selection."
5.
In the present case, there was no written examination.
Whatever merit one had obtained in 10+2 examination was given due weightage.
The interviews were held.
It was in this matter, an attempt was made to judge "man's intellect" and also "the man himself".
Does giving undue weightage to 10+2 examination and giving insignificant consideration to the candidates possessing Graduate and Post Graduate qualification in the discipline of education is a proper criteria, is required to give a detailed look.
6.
It be seen that whenever posts are to be filled with regard to a specialised subject, then it is the attainment of the qualification in that particular discipline which is given importance.
For appointment in the medical discipline, it is the MBBS degree which is taken into consideration.
Similarly the posts relating to the discipline of Engineering, Architecture and the like are filled by looking into the candidature of those candidates who possess requisite degrees in these disciplines.
Is the `Education' such an insignificant discipline that a person possessing 10+2 qualification can handle the job even if he is not trained; would a trained teacher be less suitable for the job?
Kothari Commission's report was referred to in Lila Dhar's case (supra) for the purpose of judging the suitability of a person for entrance into public service.
Kothari Commission has dealt with this subject again :  "The destiny of India is now being shared in her class rooms.
This, we believe is no more rhetoric.
In a world based on science and technology, it is education that determines the level of prosperity, welfare and security of the people."
These sentiments were expressed in the opening paragraph of the Report of Education Commission 1964-66.
Popularly known as `Kothari Commissions Report'.
What was said 45 years back holds true today.
As a matter of fact, the importance of a trained teacher is much more in the present system.
The quality of education would depend upon the quality of teachers.
If the standard of the education in the schools is to be improved, then it is mandatory to improve the quality of teachers who are to impart education.
Kothari Commission was not dealing with an abstract proposition.
It took note of the pattern of education in all the States including the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
This becomes apparent when the table given at page 26 of the report is perused.
Thus, what was being considered was a wholesome picture of the educational system in this country including the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
In Chapter IV, in paragraph 41, the Commission impressed upon the need to have "a sound programme of professional education of teachers".
It was observed that this is essential for the qualitative improvement of education.
"Investment in teacher education can yield very rich dividends because the financial resources required are small when measured against the resulting improvements in the education of millions".
7.
As to the weakness of the system.
Kothari Commission observed that teachers for different stages of school education or for special subjects should be trained separately.
It was noticed that there is separate setting up of institutions where proper training is imparted to pre-primary and primary teachers.
The Commission recommended upgrading of all training institutions.
A system which takes note of teachers evaluation was found to be of immense importance.
This aspect of the matter was adverted to in paragraph 423 of the Report.
The Commission was also favouring a system where there are separate categories of teachers for Secondary school courses and for professional institutions.
These observations were made when the scales of pay of the teachers were sought to be fixed.
It was observed that salary of a trained graduate teacher working in the primary level should be the same as that of a trained graduate teacher working in secondary schools.
Reference to Kothari Commission's report is being made because the Commission was dealing with the State of Jammu and Kashmir also.
If the trained teachers was felt to be the need of the day 45 years ago, then the question arises as to whether laying emphasis on 10+2 qualification is justified?
More than this, the question arises as to whether allocating 50 percent marks for 10+2 qualification and giving only 5 marks for Post Graduate qualification in the discipline of education is something which is justifiable ?
In somewhat different context, the fixation of percentage of marks to be given to one criteria and thereby tilting the scales in favour of another set has been the subject matter of judicial pronouncements.
Most of the decisions on this are with regard to giving undue advantage to viva-voce test.
8.
The marks allocated to the interviews and non-allocation of marks under various heads was held to be illegal in case of Pariakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1971 SC 2303.
The allocation of 33-1/2 percent of total marks for interview was found to be vitiated in the case of Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487.
It was observed that "even in the matter of public importance......interview test should not be relied upon as an exclusive test."
No doubt, in the present case only 20 marks have been allocated for viva-voce, but then allocating 50 marks for 10+2 qualification which has no nexus with object sought to be achieved, is not a good criteria and it has tilted the balance against the candidates possessing Graduate and Post Graduate degree in the discipline of education.
As indicated above, two decisions of the Supreme Court, referred to above, no doubt, deal with a different concept, but nevertheless, the thought behind these decisions is that undue weightage should not be given to one criteria alone.
This is one aspect of the matter.
The other aspect of the matter is the need to have trained teachers.
The question has been directly and indirectly considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Vijay Kumar v. State of Bihar, 1998(9) SCC 227.
Appointments were made to the post of Assistant teachers in elementary/primary schools in the State of Bihar.
Advertisement notice was issued on 28th Oct' 91.
Appointments were sought to be made district-wise.
Even though, the High Court of Patna came to the conclusion that the candidates had a right to be considered but no relief was granted.
The Supreme Court of India was of the opinion that as out of 25000 posts only 19700 candidates were selected and out of these only 19272 were appointed, it was held that these vacancies should be filled by confining the selection to those candidates who possess Teachers Training qualification from Government/Private Teachers Training Institution.
Thus, the Supreme Court did lay down emphasis on the fact that trained teachers should be given the job.
9.
The need for appointment of properly trained teachers has been emphasised by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Andhra Kesari Education Society v. Director of School Education, 1989(1) SCC 392, wherein it has been observed as under :  "It is, therefore, needless to stated that teachers should be subjected to rigorous training with rigid scrutiny of efficiency.
It has greater relevance to the needs of the day.
The ill-trained or sub-standard teachers would be detrimental to our educational system, if not a punishment on our children."
Again in the context of appointment of primary school teachers, the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Sukh v. State of Rajasthan, 1989 (Supp) (2) SCC 189, made observations which are relevant for the purpose of disposal of this appeal.
These observations are being reproduced below :  "We are not less sympathetic to the petitioners who are out of job but we cannot forget the welfare of those who are not before the Court.
They are the tiny tots who require proper handling by well trained teachers.
The primary school teachers are of utmost importance in developing a child's personality in the formative years.
It is not just enough to teach the child alphabets and figures.
But much more is required to understand child psychology and aptitudes.
They need a different approach altogether.
Only trained teachers could lead them properly.
The untrained teachers can never be proper substitute to trained teachers."
These two decisions were noticed in a later decision reported as State of Rajasthan v. Shyam Lal Joshi and others and connected petitions, 1994(1) SCT 518 (SC) : 1994(1) SCC 593.
It was observed that "a distinction has to be drawn between a general teacher who has received complete training and is in a position to teach all the subjects and a teacher who has received training in a particular craft and can, therefore, properly teach that particular craft only........" In view of the above, we are of the opinion that giving undue weightage to 10+2 qualification and giving lesser importance to the degrees in the discipline of Education is not apt.
10+2 qualification has no rational with the object i.e. appointment as teachers.
10+2 qualification is basic for all further attainments in all walks of life.
How does this qualification advance the cause of teaching and of those who are to be taught when this qualification is not given any weightage for any other discipline then why give it so much importance in the selection of teachers.
In any case, 50 marks for 10+2 qualification is definately on the higher side.
At 10+2 stage, an individual's personality is yet to develop and as observed in Lila Dhar's case (supra) "it is too early to identify the personal qualities for which greater importance may have to be attached in later life".
Deeper traits of leadership, tact, forcefulness are yet to develop.
Therefore, giving undue regard to 10+2 qualification at the cost of later qualifications is not apt.
In somewhat different context, reserving 75 marks under one head out of 275 marks was held to be bad in the case of Pariakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1971 SC 2303 (supra).
Again reserving 50 marks out of 150 under one head in the case of Nishi Maghu v. State of J&K and others, AIR 1980 SC 1975 and 33-1/2 percent of total marks for interview in Ajay Hasia's case (supra), did not find favour with the Supreme Court of India.
As indicated above, this was in the context of reserving marks for viva-voce.
Nevertheless, the thought behind this view is that giving undue weightage to one criteria at the cost of other attract the vice of inequality.
This has certainly not been avoided in this case.
There is no rational; there is no nexus with the object to be achieved.
The object is to appoint a teacher.
A trained teacher having Graduation and Post Graduation qualifications in the discipline of Education would be best suited for the job.
By the process adopted in the present case, a trained teacher is being almost ousted from consideration by giving insignificant weightage to his B.Ed.
and M.Ed.
qualifications.
As indicated above, if in the discipline of medical, law, engineering, architecture etc., the basic qualification is the one which is possessed by a candidate in that very discipline, then there is no justification to not to adopt the same criteria when appointments are made in teaching faculty.
The decisions of the Supreme Court noticed above do lay down the importance of trained teachers.
The criteria adopted in the present case brings in arbitrariness.
10.
We are not quashing the appointments which have already been made but we do feel that this criteria is required to be recast.
Let steps be taken in this regard.
The question arises as to what relief the appellant is entitled to.
The appellant does possess degree in B.Ed.
and also a Masters Degree.
In our view she has been put to a disadvantageous position by considering her claims on the basis of 10+2 qualification.
She has not been properly judged.
The training which she has got in the discipline of Education has not been given significant importance.
This is not in line with the recommendation made by the Kothari Commission.
This is also not in line with the observations made by the Supreme Court in the cases noticed above.
We are accordingly of the view :  i) that the allocation of 50 marks for 10+2 qualification is on the higher side; ii) that this allocation operates to the detriment of those candidates who possess Graduate and Post Graduate qualification in the discipline of Education.
This is not in conformity with the spirit of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; iii) that the criteria is required to be recast; iv) that the appointments already made are not being quashed; v) that the appellant would, therefore, be entitled to be considered against a vacancy which is now available.
She would not be denied appointment merely on the ground that she has become overage.
Reference in this regard can be made to the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Arun Kumar Rout and ors. v. State of Bihar, 1989(9) SCC 71 and Keshav Narayan Gupta and ors v. Jila Parishad Shivpur (MP) and Anr, 1989(9) SCC 78.
11.
Before parting with this judgment, we would like to refer to what was said by a Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of National Council for Teachers Education and another v. Chouhan Education Society and ors., 2000(1) SCT 482 (M.P.)(DB) : AIR 1999 MP 206.
Dipak Misra, J, emphasised on the importance of education and the person who is to impart this.
What was said and quoted by the learned Judge, is relevant and is being quoted below :  "Life without education is sans `elan vital', a body without a soul, eyes without sight, ear without power to hear and mind without sensibility.
In the case of Sitam Seshanka v. principal College Pharmaceutical Science, AIR 1997 Orissa 62, the Court while dealing with the rule of a `Guru' as a teacher observed as under :  "Shashtras" put the `Guru' on a padestal making him equivalent to God and treat him as one who enlightens, illumines, guides, paves the path of light, unfolds the bright horizon amidst the encircling gloom, expands his sura enigmatically reaching the true follower, and he is also the one who transfer his sense of originality, duty of accountability and progressive creativity to the dubious disciple leaving his lively footprints on the sands of time.
In turn, the disciple follows him with reverence, acts in veneration and obeys with obeisance."
12.
To conclude, we would observe that it should be our endeavour to educate our children so that discoveries of science may be a living interest; that our national history and poetry should be a source of legitimate pride and rational enjoyment.
In short, our schools, if they are to be worthy of the name - if they to fulfil their high function - must be something more than mere places of dry study; they must train the children educated in them so that they may be able to appreciate and enjoy those intellectual gifts which might be, and ought to be, a source of interest and of happiness, alike to the high and to the low, to the rich and to the poor.
A wise system of education will atleast teach our children how little man yet knows, how much he has still to learn; it will enable them to realise that those who complain of the tiresome monotony of life have only themselves to blame; and that knowledge is pleasure as well as power.
It will lead us all to try with Milton "to behold the bright countenance of truth in the quiet and still air of study," and to feel with Bacon that "no pleasure is comparable to the standing upon the vantage ground of truth."
This can indeed be achieved if we have trained teachers.
This is the object which is foremost.
It is because of this, the State is advised to recast its selection policy in the matter of appointing teachers.
Disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.