Pratap Kumar Ray, J - In terms of the order dated 10112000, the matter was taken up for hearing on 15th November, 2000 in the Chamber.
Respective parties submitted their written notes of argument and thereafter supplies books very recently.
Considering all aspects, the case is decided accordingly.
In this writ application the writ petitioner has prayed for the following reliefs :  (a) A writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents authorities to act according to law and to cancel, withdraw, recall and set aside the appointment of the respondent No. 7 as Assistant Teacher in Kalitha Junior High School; (b) A writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 6 to give appointment to the petitioner, as only eligible empanelled candidate who is a 60% handicapped person in the post of Assistant Teacher reserved for only handicapped candidate in Kalitha Junior High School, the interview for which was held in the year 1984; (c) Any other appropriate writ or writs, directions and/or orders; (d) Rule Nisi in terms of prayer of a to c; (e) Injunction restraining the respondent No. 3 from giving any approval to the appointment of said respondent No. 7 who by suppressing the real fact got the said appointment in reserved quota if not already approved; (f) Costs and incidental to this petition; 2.
In the writ petition it is contended that the consideration of candidature of respondent No. 7 under handicapped quota is nothing but exercising fraud on the statute.
It is the positive case of the petitioner that respondent No. 7 is not at all a person suffering from physical disability to have the special treatment under handicapped quota.
Upon referring the writ application, the affidavit in opposition filed by the respondent-School Authority as well as the respondent No. 7, it has been pointed out to the court about non- eligibility of respondent No. 7 to appear before the interview board in respect of a post which is reserved for handicapped persons by the following contention :-  (a) Concerned post relates to the vacancy in a School under the jurisdiction of District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum and within the territorial jurisdiction of District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum whereas the respondent No. 7's name was referred to by District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum on the basis of a Medical Certificate issued by the Sub Divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur Distt.
Murshidabad dated 31st day, 1984.
(b) The said certificate dated 31st May, 1984 was not issued by the competent authority namely competent authority of District of Birbhum empowered to issue such.
No such test was made for determination of percentage of disability before issue of said certificate annexed as X6 at page 10 of the opposition of School Authority, hence in the certificate since the percentage of disability of the respondent No. 7 was not mentioned, the same was not at all the certificate which is required in such cases to avail special benefit.
(c) that the certificate was issued on 31st May, 1984 by one Sub Divisional Medical Officer of District Murshidabad and the same was accepted by the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum as a proper certificate for grant of privilege under handicap quota to the respondent No. 7 by referring his name on 1st June, 1984 District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum also connived with the respondent No. 7 to refer his name.
It was quite impossible to refer the name of the candidate who got alleged certificate that too from different district, within less than 24 hours from the date of issuance of the certificate.
(d) that the School Authority, that is the Managing Committee and Selection Committee also exercised fraud in the matter of selection by accepting such certificate as a certificate to grant privilege under physically handicap quota for consideration of appointment to the post of Teacher in question of the concerned School.
3.
It is submitted that petitioner is a second empanelled candidate and he is a candidate with 60 per cent physical disability as was certified by the competent authority namely a Board constituted with Chief Medical Officer of Health, Birbhum, Superintendent Suri Sadar Hospital, Birbhum and Orthopaedic Surgeon of Suri, Birbhum.
Since the respondent No. 7 exercised fraud in connivance with the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum, the Managing Committee of the School and the Selection Committee to secure his appointment in the post in question, his appointment to be cancelled and the writ petitioner to be given appointment as a second candidate of the panel on cancellation of the name of the respondent No. 7.
4.
It has been further contended by the writ petitioner that since the consideration of candidature of respondent No. 7 who is not at all a physically handicapped person came to the knowledge of the petitioner in the year 1991, though the interview was held on 15th July, 1984 and since the writ petitioner despite his filling several representations to the authorities concerned got no remedy, came to this writ Court in the year 1992, assailing the selection and appointment of respondent No. 7 and for that ground the writ petition cannot be dismissed as there was no delay, negligence on the part of the writ petitioner.
5.
It is contended firmly by the writ petitioner that since the reference of the name of the writ petitioner No. 7 itself is an exercise of the fraud upon the statute, the entire process so far his selection was vitiated and accordingly respondent No. 7 accrued no right and such can be challenged in a writ proceeding.
6.
In the affidavit in opposition filed by the respondent No. 7, it is contended that in pursuance of the certificate issued by the Sub Divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur dated 31st May, 1984, as annexure X of the opposition at page 10, his name was referred to by the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum on 1st June, 1984 under category "physically handicapped persons" for the concerned post of the teacher of the said School in question namely Kalitha Junior High School, Post Kalitha, Dist.
Birbhum hereinafter referred to as said School.
He was selected as first candidate hence his appointment cannot be cancelled.
It is contended by the respondent No. 7 that his name was rightly referred to by the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum and there was no illegality in the matter in question though Medical Certificate was not issued by the competent authority of the District Birbhum.
It is further contended that since he is working for a long period being duly approved, his service cannot be cancelled.
7.
The respondent Nos. 3 and 6 namely the School Authority has filed affidavit in opposition supporting the case of the respondent No. 7 contending in the same line that respondent No. 7's name since was referred to by the District Inspector of School (SE) by his letter dated 1st June, 1984 and since respondent No. 7 was empanelled as a first candidate whereas writ petitioner stood second man in the panel, there was no illegality to give appointment.
It is further contended by the School Authority that the writ application is not maintainable on the ground of delay.
It is further contended that even if the certificate as was issued by the Sub-divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur, Dist.
Murshidabad was not a valid one, still them same was nothing but an irregularity for which the appointment of the respondent No. 7 cannot be canceled.
Reliance has been placed in support of such contention in the case reported in 1993(2) SCT 279 (SC) : JT 1993(1) SC 220, being the case of Ms. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan and others.
On the ground of delay the writ petition to be dismissed and to that effect reliance has been made to the judgment reported in JT 1992(3) SC 322.
It is submitted by the School Authority that in terms of the circular letter dated 26th August, 1986, Education Department's Memo No. 1417(6)/ (Establishment) dated 22.8.1983, relating to the procedure for declaring vacancies under handicapped quota was introduced in the Schools in the West Bengal with effect from 25.4.1983 and same is the guiding rule in the instant case.
8.
It is contended that in terms of the conditions mentioned thereto since the Medical Certificate can be taken from any Medical Officer in terms of Rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules part (1) which is applicable in the instant case, there was no illegality in the matter in question for reference of the name of respondent No. 7 under handicapped category on the strength and basis of Medical Certificate issued by Sub-divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur, Dist.
Murshidabad though respondent No. 7 is a permanent regiment of District Birbhum and vacancy relates to a School within the District of Birbhum under the jurisdiction of District Inspector of School (SE), Birbhum.
It is contended that in terms of the said rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules, any certificate from any Medical Officer within State of West Bengal is to be accepted as a valid certificate by any District Inspector of School (SE) throughout the West Bengal for enlistment of the name of the candidates under physically handicapped quota.
About non-mentioning of percentage of physical disability, in the certificate of respondent No. 7, it is urged that the same would not vitiate the selection and the subsequent appointment in the post in question.
9.
On consideration of the respective submission of the parties the following points emerged for adjudication :-  (a) Whether the certificate issued by Sub-divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur, Distt.
Murshidabad in favour of respondent No. 7 would be considered as a valid certificate issued by the competent authority and whether on that basis the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum was right to refer the name.
(b) Whether on the basis and strength of the certificate of respondent No. 7 issued by one Sub-divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur of Distt.
Murshidabad, District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum had the power to enlist his name and to refer his name within 24 hours from the date of issuance of the certificate.
(c) Whether non-mentioning of percentage of disability in the certificate of respondent No. 7 and non-mentioning of his physical disability on examination made by any Orthopaedic Surgeon, would be considered as illegality in the matter in question for consideration of his candidature for the post in question under special category of handicapped candidates and thereby such certificate should be declared as invalid.
(d) whether the writ petitioner is entitled to get any benefit in view of his empanelment as a second candidate in the panel satisfying his disability.
(e) Whether the delay has been properly explained and on that ground relief can be granted in favour of the petitioner.
10.
One additional post of Assistant Teacher of Kalitha SS Junior High School hereinafter referred to as said School within the jurisdiction of District Inspector of School Education, West Bengal was sanctioned by the Director of School Education, West Bengal by his decision dated 18.4.1984 appearing at Annexure X1 of the affidavit in Opposition of respondent No. 3 and 6.
11.
Direction was given to fill up the vacancy following the existing recruitment rules.
The existing rule being the recruitment procedure issued by Director of School Education of West Bengal on 1st August, 1981 was applicable in the post in question which provides inter alia in Clause 2 that on any vacancy the District Inspector of School concerned would be entitled to refer the names of candidates enrolled under "Died-in-harness category" or "physically handicapped category".
In the instant case District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum hereinafter referred to as concerned District Inspector of School referred the name of four candidates by his letter dated 1st June, 1984 from "physically handicapped category" which includes the name of writ petitioner as well as the respondent No. 7.
On that basis, Selection Committee upon holding interview empanelled the name of respondent No. 7 as a first candidate of the panel and the writ petitioner as second candidate of the panel for the said post.
12.
In the recruitment procedure there is no procedure laid down for reference of the name of physically handicapped candidate namely how the selection of such candidates for reference as handicapped candidate is to be made.
13.
The proposal for appointment of physically handicapped candidates has been introduced by the Education Department vide Memo No. 1417(6)/(Establishment) dated 21st August, 1982 by a circular letter published on 26th August, 1986.
Procedure for identification of physically handicapped candidates for consideration of appointment in the post of teacher has been mentioned upon giving effect of such with effect from 25th April, 1983.
The said circular letter provided as follows :-  "(i) Clause C :- The Orthopaedic who have physical defects or deformities which cause adequate interference with the normal functioning of bone, muscles and joints.
(ii) Clause (i) of para 3 :- Physically handicapped as listed in item (ii) below should be approved by medical certificate from competent Medical Officer as defined in Rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules, Part-I."
14.
In terms of the said circular letter, Rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules has been made applicable to determine the physical disability by way of grant of Medical Certificate in terms of the said Rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules, 1986 which is quoted hereinbelow :-  "Rule 14.
Competent Authority for M.C.
- Except as otherwise provided by rule, the certificate referred to in rule 13 shall be obtained - (a) in the case of candidate for employment in a Gazetted post, from the Medical Committee to be assembled under the orders of the Administrative Medical Officer of the State; and (b) in other cases - (i) in districts, from the District Medical Officers or such other medical officers below the District Medical Officers as Government may, by order, prescribe; and  (ii) in Calcutta, from the Presidency Surgeons as are specifically authorised to grant such certificates : Provided that in the case of a candidate to be appointed to a post in class IV service, the appointing authority may accept a certificate signed by a registered Medical practitioner."
15.
On plain reading of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that even on application of Rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules, the physical defects or deformities are required to be tested and determined by the District Medical Officer of the concerned district.
The submission of the learned Advocate of the School Authority as well as the respondent No. 7 that since under Rule 14 aforesaid every District Medical Officer or such other Medical Officer below the District Medical Officers as Government made by order so prescribed when entitled to grant such certificate, the certificate issued by Sub-divisional Medical Officer of Jangipur, District Murshidabad in favour of respondent No. 7 is a valid one for consideration by District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum even if there was no such certificate issued by District Medical Officer, Birbhum or any Medical Officer under him posted within the District of Birbhum, has no basis.
16.
I cannot agree with the aforesaid submission as made by the learned Advocate of the School Authority and the respondent No. 7.
On interpretation of the Rule 14 aforesaid it is clear that every District Medical Officers of respective districts are entitled to grant such certificate in respect of the citizens residing within the territorial jurisdiction of such district.
A District Medical Officer of Murshidabad or Medical Officer authorised by him is entitled to grant such certificate and that too after test by Orthopaedic Surgeon in respect of the candidates having permanent residence within the District Murshidabad and such can be considered by the District Inspector of School (SE) Murshidabad.
But in the instant case a certificate has been issued by Sub-divisional Medical Officer Jangipur, Distt.
Murshidabad though respondent No. 7 is a permanent resident of District Birbhum within the territorial jurisdiction of District Medical Officer Birbhum and vacancy of the School is also within the District Birbhum under the territorial jurisdiction of District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum.
Hence in my view the certificate granted in favour of respondent No. 7 as issued by Sub- divisional Officer, Jangipur, Murshidabad is of without jurisdiction and same is in violation of the rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules.
As such an action was required to be taken by the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum on the basis of the said certificate.
17.
Besides such, on perusal of the Medical Certificate as annexed by the respondent No. 7 in support of his claim that he is physically handicapped and entitled to have reference of his name under special category, it is revealed that in the said certificate nowhere it is mentioned about nature of disability, percentage of disability and the photograph is also not annexed and attested as a proof to detect the nature of disability and the appliance.
18.
The certificate was required to be issued by the Orthopaedic Surgeon after assessing the physical disability but here concerned officer was an Orthopaedic Surgeon but merely a Sub-divisional Officer who was not a competent officer to issue such.
In the printed form of the said certificate as relied upon by the said respondent No. 7 last paragraph 6 mentioned as follows :-  "Any other particulars to clarify the nature and extent of disability that the Surgeon might like to point out."
19.
From the aforesaid it is clear that in the case of "Orthopaedic disability" which is the case of the respondent No. 7, a determination with positive percentage of such disability by a competent surgeon namely Orthopaedic Surgeon was required.
But in the instant case no such certificate is appearing and accordingly this certificate issued by the said officer concerned was required to be rejected by the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum for enlistment of name of the respondent No. 7 in the roster in the District of Birbhum as is kept in his office for onward reference of the names of the candidates to different Schools in terms of the recruitment rule.
Recruitment rule has clearly provided that every District Inspector of School concerned will keep record of "physically disabled persons" which clearly leads to a conclusion that only the persons who are permanent resident of a concerned district (herein in the Birbhum) are entitled to have enlistment of their names under special category of physical handicapped category upon having such certificate from the competent Medical Officer of such district (herein the District Birbhum).
A conjoint reading of the recruitment rules and the rule 14 of the Service Rules leads to such conclusion.
In that view of the matter, the certificate as issued in favour of the respondent No. 7 cannot be considered as a valid and legal certificate for the purpose of enlistment of his name by the office of the District Inspector of School (SE), Birbhum.
20.
The service under reserve category of physically handicapped candidates is a special privilege granted by State and such privilege is reserved for District-wise quota and accordingly a candidate having permanent residence within the district of Birbhum cannot claim such enlistment before the office of District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum on production of a certificate from Medical Officer of Murshidabad district.
Beside such the aforesaid certificate also has not been issued by a competent authority in terms of rule 14 of the West Bengal Service Rules, which provides that the other Medical Officers, who are authorised to issue such certificate as per Government notification would be entitled to grant such certificate.
In the instant case no such authorisation letter of the Government allowing the Sub Divisional Medical Officer Jangipur, Murshidabad to grant such certificate has been produced and accordingly an adverse inference is drawn about competency of such Medical Officer to grant such certificate.
21.
In view of the aforesaid state of affairs the point No. (a) aforesaid namely whether the certificate would be considered as a valid certificate or not goes against the respondent No. 7 and I am of the clear view that the said certificate was not at all a certificate issued by a competent authority having jurisdiction to do such and such certificate also did not determine the percentage of disability by Orthopaedic test of the candidate also did not determine the percentage of disability by Orthopaedic test of the candidate concerned namely of the respondent No. 7, hence, such certificate has no binding effect and force for grant of a special privilege.
22.
That the circular letter dated 6th August, 1986 issued by Joint Secretary to the Government of India has provided guidelines for grant of such special concession in the matter of recruitment whereby an whereunder it is provided that minimum degree should be 40 per cent to have the concession/benefits.
The said circular letter is as follows :-  "At present, different definitions for various categories of handicapped are adopted in various schemes/programmes of the Central and State Governments.
In order to have a standard set of definitions, authorised certification, authorities and standard tests for purpose of certification, Government of India in Ministry of Welfare set up three committees under the Chairmanship of Director of General of Health Services one each in the area of visual handicaps, speech and hearing disorders and locomotors disabilities and a separate Committee for mental handicaps.
2.
After having considered the reports of these committees and with the concurrence of the State Governments/UTs and the concerned Ministries/Departments the undersigned is directed to convey the approval of the President to notify the definition of the following categories of physically handicapped :- 1.
Visually handicaps 2.
Locomotor handicaps 3.
Speech and Hearing handicaps 4.
Mental handicaps.
Report of the Committee as indicated in the Annexure-I ------------------------------------- 3.
Each category of handicapped persons has been divided into four groups viz. mild, moderate, severe and profound/total.
It has been decided that various concessions/benefits would in future be available only to the moderate, severe and profound/total groups; and not to the mild groups, the minimum degree of disability should be 40% in order to be eligible any concession benefits.
4.
It has been decided that the authorised certifying authority will be a medical board at the district level.
The board will consist of the Chief Medical Officer/Sub Divisional Medical Officer in the District and another expert in the specified field viz. opthalmic surgeon in case of visual handicaps, either an ENT Surgeon or an Audologist in case of speech and hearing handicaps; and Orthopaedic Surgeon a specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation in case of locomotor handicaps, a psychiatrist or a clinical psychologist or a teacher in special education in case of mental handicaps.
5.
Specified tests as indicated in Annexure should be conducted by the Medical Board and recorded before a certificate is given.
6.
The certificate would be valid for a period of three years.
7.
The State Governments/UT Admn.
may constitute the Medical Boards indicated in para 4 above immediately."
23.
By a notification issued by Department of Social Welfare, Government of West Bengal being No. 2101/SW/1A/14/97 dated 8th July, 1999, West Bengal persons with disabilities (Equal opportunities, protection of Rights and the Full Participation) Rules, 1999 were framed.
Under Chapter 2 under the heading guidelines for evaluation and assessment of various disabilities under rule 4, it is provided, that disability certificate shall be issued by a Medical Board which consist of not less than two members out of which one shall act as the Chairperson and another shall be specialised for assessment on the particular ground of disability, as the case may be.
Under rule 4(3) of the said rules it is provided that the Superintendent of all Government Medical College Hospitals, of all District Hospitals, of all Sub-divisional Hospitals and the Block Level shall act as the Chairpersons of such Medical Board and shall include as another member of the Board, such specialised Government Doctor as may be required.
It is further provided under Rule 4(4) that such Board will sit twice a week to determine the physical disability of the persons concerned.
Under Rule 6(1) of the said Rules, the District Social Officer or the District Programme Officer are entitled to issue such Identity Card.
24.
Taking into account of all the aforesaid provisions, it is clear that the Medical Board is a must to determine the percentage of physical disability and that Board must consist of atleast a member qualified as Orthopaedic Surgeon, in case of determination of candidates with "locomotor handicaps" which is the case of the present respondent.
From the subsequent certificate as issued by the writ petitioner, it is clear that such Board existed in the District Birbhum.
Hence the certificate of respondent No. 7 cannot be considered as valid one.
25.
So far as the point No. (b) is concerned I am of the view that District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum had no jurisdiction to consider, the Medical Certificate issued by Sub Divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur, Murshidabad in favour of respondent No. 7 as a valid certificate for enlistment of name of said respondent No. 7 in the reserve roster as was maintained by him.
Besides such, from the record it is clear that the purported certificate of respondent No. 7 was issued on 31st May, 1984 whereas District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum had referred the list of physically handicapped candidates including respondent No. 7 by his forwarding letter dated 1st June 1984 to the concerned School.
The respondent No. 7 has not explained when the certificate dated 31st May, 1984 was available to him and when he submitted such in the Office of District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum for consideration.
Hence, one point is clear that within a few hours from grant of said certificate, District Inspector of School concerned enlisted his name.
Under the Recruitment Rules the District Inspector of School concerned is required to enlist a candidate's name under special category on clear verification of the certificates and others.
But in the instant case in view of the hasty action on the part of the District Inspector of School concerned, it is clear that District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum had connived with respondent No. 7 in the matter of reference of his name under physically handicapped category.
District Inspector of Schools did not even verify that the certificate of respondent No. 7 was not at all a valid certificate not only for the reason that same was not issued by the competent authority but also for the reason that there was no test conducted before grant of such certificate and there was no mentioning of percentage of physical disability which is the condition precedent for reference of a name "under special category" of appointment in a School.
District Inspector of Schools concerned accordingly did not perform his duty fairly and exercised fraud on the statute and accordingly the entire action is vitiated.
26.
With reference to the point No. (c), I am of the view that in view of the particular character of the certificate of respondent No. 7, the same was required to be acted upon and to be considered even for enlistment, hence, the action of the District Inspector of Schools concerned namely reference of name of respondent No. 7 under such category was illegal and same is vitiated on the ground of fraud.
It is now a settled legal proposition that fraud vitiated everything.
In the case of Union of India v. M Vaskaran, 1996(1) SCT 469 (SC) : reported in 1995 Supp(4) SCC 100 in paragraph 6, the Apex Court held "in public employment when fraud is exercised to secure it, it is fraud on public".
In the said judgment it is further held "that fraudulent practice cannot be countenanced by Court of law."
Further there is no equity on fraud nor any estoppel, has been decided by the said judgment.
It is further decided in this case that if the service is allowed as obtained by exercise of fraud, it will amount to putting premium on dishonesty.
The Apex Court in the said judgment of M Vaskaran (supra) relied the judgment in the case of District Collector and Chairman v M Tripura Sundari Devi, reported in 1990(3) SCC 655.
In the judgment reported in the case Kumari Madhuri Patel v. Additional Commissioner Tribal Development, 1995(1) SCT 261 (P&H) : reported in 1994(6) SCC 241 in paragraph 16 it is held by the Apex Court "when it is found to be a case of fraud played by the person concerned, any sympathy and equitable consideration can come to his rescue".
In the case State of Tamil Nadu and others v. A Guruswamy, reported in 1997(3) SCC 542, it is held that no estoppel principle is applicable in case of fraud.
Fraud vitiates everything.
Reliance is placed on the judgments in the case of Union of India v. M Vaskaran (supra), in the case of SP Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath and others, reported in 1994(1) SCC 1 (paras 1, 7, 8), in the case of Indian Bank v. Satyam Fibres (India) Private Limited, reported in 1996(5) SCC 550 wherein the Apex Court referred the view of Lord Denning, J. in the case of Smith v. East Ellose Rural District Council and others, reported in 1956(1) All ER 855 and in the case of Lazarus Estate Ltd, reported in 1956(1) All ER 341.
27.
From the documents as placed before this court, I am of the view that the reference of the name of respondent No. 7 was made exercising fraud on statute and the recruitment rules.
Accordingly he is not entitled to have any sympathy which has been sought for by the School Authority and the respondent No. 7 by referring the judgment reported in JT 1993(1) SCC 220 in the case of Ms. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan and others.
The aforesaid judgment is not applicable in the factual matrix of this case.
Hence the contention as raised so far as condoning of the irregularity, is rejected so far as respondent No. 7 is concerned, in view of exercise of fraud on production of a certificate which was not at all issued by any appropriate competent authority and which not at all defined the percentage of physical disabilities of respondent No. 7.
Respondent No. 7 got a special benefit by reference of his name by District Inspector of School (SE) concerned upon conniving with each other, which action is considered by this court as an exercise of fraud upon the statute itself and as such respondent No. 7 is not entitled to have any sympathy.
It is settled law that sympathy and rule of law never dwells together.
In the case Latham v. Johnson of Nephew, reported in 1911(13) All ER, Ref-117 at page 123 it is held "Sentiment is a dangerous" will "O" "the wisp" to make a guide in search for legal principle".
Reference is placed on other judgment of Division Bench in the case of Smt. Debirani Bhattacharjee and another v. District Inspector of School (SE) Burdwan and others, reported in 1996(2) CHN 415.
28.
Now the points No. (d) and (e) to be considered about grant of relief to the writ petitioner.
The writ petitioner has placed document about his physical disability by placing a certificate of the year 1989 issued by competent authority that is the Medical Board and it is contended by him that earlier certificate as was issued was submitted to the office of the District Inspector of School concerned and on such basis his name was enlisted.
Here to prove the physical disability with 60 per cent physical disability, the subsequent certificate of 1986 has been annexed.
On perusal of the said certificate it is clear that said certificate has been issued by the competent Medical Board of District Birbhum upon fixing the photograph to show the physical disability as well as upon determining the percentage of disability.
Hence it is proved that the writ petitioner is a candidate with 60 per cent physical disability and accordingly was entitled to have the reference of his name for the post in question.
Since writ petitioner stood second in the panel and since I am of the view that the respondent No. 7 was not at all an eligible candidate on the strength and on the basis of the Medical Certificate issued by Sub Divisional Medical Officer, Jangipur, Murshidabad, his candidature accordingly ought not to have been considered by the District Inspector of Schools concerned for reference to the School for his selection.
Since respondent No. 7 exercised fraud on statute, and his name was referred to without any valid document to a special category of reserve post, entire action being void ab initio.
His selection and appointment accordingly in the post in question is hereby cancelled.
In view of such state of affairs the writ petitioner or being a second candidate of the panel is entitled to have the appointment in the post in question.
The Division Bench of this Court has considered an identical question in the case of Badal Kr.
Das v. Ramendra Nath Mandal and others, 1998(4) SCT 407 (Calcutta)(DB) : reported in 1998(3) Education Service Cases 1059 (Cal.)
Division Bench of this court held that when due to exercise fraud the name of the first empanelled candidate is cancelled, the second empanelled candidate is entitled to be appointed in the post in question.
In that view of the matter the writ petitioner is entitled to have the appointment.
Accordingly point No. (d) is decided in his favour.
29.
Now the last question about delay is to be decided.
It has been vehemently urged by the respondents both by the School Authority and the respondent No. 7, that the Selection was completed in the year 1984 but the writ application was filed after long lapse of 8 years in the year 1992 assailing such selection.
Accordingly, on the ground of delay, the writ application to be dismissed.
The writ petitioner has sufficiently explained the delay in his writ application in paragraph 7 contending that such fact of fraud came to light only on December, 1991 and he approached the Court after filing a representation on 16th December, 1991.
It is further contended that the respondent No. 7 did not produce valid certificate and the said respondent is of good physique.
He is not at all a physically handicapped person.
The eligibility of the respondent No. 7 accordingly has been challenged on the ground of exercising fraud by the statutory body namely the District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum and the other members of the Selection Committee.
Since it is a question of exercise of fraud, the estoppel principle is not a bar, which has been decided by the Apex Court in the judgment reported in M Vaskaran (supra).
It is settled legal proposition now that these are no estoppel and acquiscence in the case of fraud, as fraud vitiates everything.
In the instant case since the eligibility of respondent No. 7 is a question and this Court has reached to the conclusion that respondent No. 7 was not all "physically handicapped person" in view of the certificate as issued in his favour and statutory body namely District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum acted against the statute by considering the certificate and thereby referred the same even within few hours of issuance of certificate, it is a clear case for inference by this court to remedy the injury as has been caused by the public officer in the field of public employment and in that view of the matter the delay for 8 years which has been explained is accepted by this Court and on that ground the writ application cannot be dismissed.
The judgment as referred to by the School Authority in support of their contention on ground of delay reported in JT 1992(3) SC 322 is distinguishable in the instant case.
This Court is not unmindful of the legal propositions that normally the writ court will not interfere when there is a inordinate delay but there are exception to such which has been decided by the Apex Court in the language than when any benefit is obtained in violation of any rule, delay to be condoned on merit of the case and reference to that is the case of Chief General Manager, Telecom and another v. G Mohan Prasad and others, 2000(2) SCT 18 (SC) : reported in 1999(6) SCC 67 and the case Union of India and others v. R Swaminathan and others, 1997(4) SCT 467 (SC) : reported in 1997(7) SCC 690.
Further the Apex Court held in different cases that the question of delay qua the rule is flexible one for consideration of the matter to decide any question of law in support of case to case.
There is no absolute bar of entertainment of any writ application.
In the case State of Haryana v. Chandramoni, the Apex Court considering several judgments, as reported in 1996(3) SCC 132 has settled the principle that pragmatic and Justice oriented view to be adopted.
30.
Considering the matter in hand since the respondent No. 7 has exercised fraud in connivance with the officers holding the public post and thereby got his appointment under a special category "handicap quota", though there is no proof that he is physically handicapped by determination of his such physical disability by the competent authority, I am of the opinion that delay in the instant case is to be condoned and accordingly the writ application cannot be dismissed on the ground of delay.
31.
Now considering all the points as decided aforesaid, the question of relief as to be granted to the writ petitioner qua the fate of the respondent No. 7 is to be decided.
On the aforesaid, findings I have come to the conclusion that the appointment of respondent No. 7 is wrong and illegal appointment.
Such wrong and illegal appointment whether to be cancelled or not the ultimate question.
The learned Advocate of the respondent No. 7 and the School Authority had referred other judgment of Rekha Chaturvedi (supra) to contend that in view of long service by the respondent No. 7, the Court should take a lenient view in the matter to protect the service of the respondent No. 7.
I am sorry to agree with such contention.
It has been established that the appointment of respondent No. 7 was not only wrong and illegal but on exercise of fraud on statute by production of a ficiticious document to avail the reserve quota of handicap.
The said Rekha Chaturvedi (supra) judgment came for consideration also in the Apex Court in a three Judges Bench Judgment in the case CM Singh v. H.P.
Krishi Vishva Vidyalaya and others, reported in 1999(9) SCC 40.
Considering the matter in the judgment the Apex Court distinguished the judgment of Rekha Chaturvedi as relied upon by the learned Advocate of the respondent No. 7 and School Authority.
Relying upon the judgment of CM Singh (supra), the judgment in the case Bhagaban Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, reported in 1999(9) SCC 573 and the judgment in the case Monohar v. Sanjoy Education Society and others, reported in 1999(9) SCC 118.
Wrong and illegal appointment of respondent No. 7 cannot be protected by this Court.
Accordingly the appointment of respondent No. 7 is hereby cancelled forthwith and the respondents namely the Managing Committee of the School is directed to issue appointment letter in favour of writ petitioner within a fortnight from this date and to allow his joining in the post.
District Inspector of School (SE) Birbhum is directed to accord approval to such appointment within a fortnight from the date of reference of such joining of the writ petitioner in the School in question which to be done by the School Authority within a fortnight from the date of joining of the writ petitioner of the School in question.
The writ petitioner is granted liberty to take note of the gist of the order and to communicate it.
Xerox copy if applied for to be supplied on priority basis.
Writ application accordingly succeeds.
Order accordingly.