SB Sinha, J - This application is directed against the judgment and order dated 8.7.1997 passed in Original Application No. 958/96 by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioners herein was dismissed.
2.
The fact of the matter is that the petitioners were working as constables.
They appeared at the examinations held for the purpose of grant of promotion to the post of A.S.I.
of Police.
The petitioners were declared as passed therein.
Nayan Kundu and others who were unsuccessful candidates filed a writ petition before this Court marked as CO 20183(W) of 1994 and Mukul Gopal Mukherjee, J by his order dated 22.12.1995 disposed of the said application inter alia by appointing an Expert Review Committee to examine the matter afresh relying on Dr. Shantanu Singh v. State of UP, reported in AIR 1993 Allahabad 85 wherein it was held that in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution it is not possible for the Court to find out whether the questions having more than one correct answer would resulting in disadvantage of the candidates.
In that case the University suo motu got the papers examined by appointing a committee of experts to ensure that the students did not suffer on account of disputed question being attached (attempted ?)
to by some students and no candidate was put to any disadvantage in awarding of marks because of any discrepancy, ambiguity or duplication in the examination process.
3.
Upon perusal of the answer scripts produced before Court and the marks secured mentioned on the same and having considered decisions of the apex Court and others High Courts with regard to power of Judicial Review the learned Judge thought it proper that the matter should be considered afresh by a team of experts.
The learned Judge observed as follows :  "Here the team of experts need not be professors of Law College as suggested by the learned Advocate for the petitioners.
It would be sufficient if high ranking Police Officers of unquestionable honesty and integrity acceptable to both the sides are chosen in this regard.
We ask the West Bengal Police Directorate to suggest the names of three Deputy Inspectors General of Police forming a committee to scrutinise and review the answer scripts and the Director General and Inspector General of Police forming a committee to scrutinise and review the answer scripts and the Director General and Inspector General of Police by Memo No. 344/LG dated 12121995 suggested the names of Sri KK Das, IPS, IG (Border), Sri Prasun Mukherjee, IPS, DIG, CID and Sri D Sarangi, IPS, DIG, RCO.
This Court directs that such team of experts would go through each and every answer script and decide upon the final result in accordance with law and publish the final result within 3 months from the date of communication of this order.
The writ application is thus disposed of."
4.
Pursuant to that order admittedly a Review Committee was appointed.
They published three lists.
The said lists in terms of the recommendation of the review committee had been accepted by the State Government.
5.
The Review Committee, inter alia, found that 821 candidates should have been promoted on the basis of the examination held in the year 1994.
Some of the candidates who were already declared to have passed by the department were found to have not fulfilled the eligibility criteria.
They were declared failed.
Such candidates filed an application before the Tribunal questioning the power of the Review Committee inter alia on the ground that it could not go beyond the guidelines given by MG Mukherjee, J  6.
The Tribunal in the instant case did not find anything wrong in the action of the review committee in evaluating all the answer scripts afresh and allot the marks according to their own evaluation.
According to the Tribunal the committee was perfectly justified in doing so in the light of the judgment rendered by the High Court in Nayan Kundu's case.
7.
Against the said order passed by the Tribunal one writ application being WPS.T No. 149 of 1997 was filed by Lakshimi Kanta Laha and others before this Court.
It has been alleged in the said writ petition that the Review Committee had exceeded its jurisdiction but it was found that the State had acted upon the recommendations of the Review Committee.
It was held :  "On this basis, of the 444 candidates only 398 were found suitable for promotion and they had, in fact, been promoted except for same, whose promotion was withheld by reasons of the interim order obtained in this proceedings.
8.
The balance number of candidates who are not in the second list as well as third list, but were found successful, on review, were 649.
According to the State respondents, of these 649 candidates, only 423 candidate have been found fit for the promotion on the basis of the Part II examination.
In other words total number of candidates who were promotable/promoted on the basis of the examination held in 1995 would be 821.
9.
In fact, according to the State respondents, all the 821 candidates have been promoted except 53 whose promotion has been stayed by virtue of the interview (interim ?)
order.
It is clear from the aforesaid that the State Government has accepted both the second list as well as third list being valid and treated the candidates whose names appeared in either of these lists having successfully passed in the written examination.
Having subjected each of them to the Part-II examination, 821 candidates, even according to the State respondents' own showing can be promoted.
The State Government has itself reconciled the contradictory enquiries by evolving this formula and we see no reason to disturb the same in the circumstances of the case.
In our view, it would be unnecessary either to direct the selection to the held again or to exclude the persons who were found fit on review for the purpose of promotion, particularly when those persons who are not found fit on review are also being promoted.
10.
We accordingly dispose of the appeal by vacating the interim order of injunction passed by the directing the State-respondents to grant promotion to the 821 candidates.
The candidates will be entitled to seniority as was prevailing in the feeder cadre inter se.
None of the promoted candidates will be entitled to back wages and this order will operate prospectively.
The wages and seniority of each of the candidates must be fixed on the basis of the next below rule that is to say the promoted candidates will be entitled to the same wages as the person immediately below each promotee.
There will be no order as to costs.
It is being made clear that this order, having been passed after advertisement, will be binding on all the candidates.
11.
It is, therefore, evident from the aforesaid judgment that not only the jurisdiction of the review committee to review the answer scripts of all the candidates has been upheld but also this Court directed the State-respondents to grant promotion to the 821 candidates.
12.
The learned Advocate for the petitioners, however, inter alia, submitted that the review committee in the facts and circumstances of the case must be held to have exceeded its jurisdiction.
The learned Advocate in particular submitted that as this court did not find any anomaly in the answer scripts of the petitioners, the Review Committee cannot have any power to declare them as unsuccessful by re-examining the answer scripts.
He has further urged that the judgment and order passed by the learned Tribunal was wholly erroneous, unwarranted and bad in law.
13.
A judgment, as it well known, cannot bread as statute.
The judgment has to be read reasonably in its entirety.
As noticed hereinbefore, the Review Committee was constituted by the Court having regard to the allegations made to the effect that Head Examiner acted illegally by deducting ten marks from the marks obtained by the candidates who were declared to have passed whereas failed candidates were declared to have passed.
14.
Thus, the Court in view of the aforementioned finding appointed High Ranking Police Officers of unquestionable honesty and integrity acceptable to both the sides, who can be chosen in this regard as experts.
The Court itself appointed the review committee having obtained concept (consent ?)
of all concerned in this regard.
The learned Judge directed that the team of experts would go through each and every answer script and decide upon the final result in accordance with law and publish the final result within three months from the date of communication of this order.
The review committee complied with the said order.
The petitioners were aware of the said order.
So it does not lie in the month (month ?)
of the petitioners to contend that the Review Committee had exceeded its jurisdiction.
15.
In any event, as noticed hereinbefore, similar writ application being WP No. 149 of 1997 was moved before a Division Bench of this Court and was disposed of in the manner as stated supra.
Principles of judicial comity demands that this court does not pass contradictory orders, more so when a quietus to the problem has been given by all concerned.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that an application under Article 136 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the aforementioned Nayan Kundu and others.
If that be so and if the Apex Court overturns the judgment of this Court in WPS.T.
No. 149 of 1997 there cannot be any doubt that the parties will be bound by that order passed by the Apex Court.
16.
For the reasons aforementioned we do not find any merit in the instant writ application and the same is accordingly dismissed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of this order be handed over to the Ld.
Advocates for the parties on priority basis, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.