GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner's date of joining as Assistant Lineman could be changed from 391970 to 811971 and his seniority could be revised without giving him notice and opportunity of hearing is the core issue which requires consideration and adjudication in this petition filed by Shri Krishan Lal under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The facts on which there is no dispute between the parties are that the petitioner had joined the service of erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board (for short `the Board') on work-charged basis in June, 1969.
By an order dated 391970 issued by the Executive Engineer, Construction Division, Narnaul, he was appointed as temporary Assistant Lineman in the pay scale of Rs. 80-125.
He was confirmed w.e.f.
31121972.
Thereafter, he was promoted as officiating Lineman in March, 1979 and as officiating Assistant Foreman in July, 1997.
His seniority was fixed in the cadre of Assistant Lineman on the basis of total length of service, but after about one year and six months his promotion as officiating Foreman, the Superintending Engineer (OP), Rohtak (respondent No. 3), issued order No. 53/SL-9A dated 20.1.1999 (Annexure R.2) withdrawing the benefit of temporary service given to the petitioner for fixing his seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman.
By another order of the same date (Annexure R.3), he directed that the petitioner's seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman be fixed from the date of joining on regular basis.
In pursuance of those orders, the Superintending Engineer, (OP) Circle, Bhiwani, issued order Annexure P-6 dated 15.3.1999 refixing the petitioner's seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman at Serial No. 109-A by counting his service in that cadre w.e.f.
811971 instead of 391970..
Immediately thereafter, notice Annexure P-7 dated 1931999 was issued by the Chief Engineer/OP, Zone-III HVPNL Hisar (respondent No. 2), to the petitioner to show cause as to why he may not be reverted from the post of officiating Assistant Foreman.
In reply to the show cause notice, the petitioner challenged the refixation of his seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman and the consequential action taken/proposed to be taken by the authorities.
However, without considering the points raised by him, respondent No. 2 issued order Annexure P-9 dated 3121999 reverting him from the post of Assistant Foreman to that to Lineman.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the withdrawal of the benefit of temporary service and consequential refixation of his seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman as well as his reversion from the post of Assistant Foreman on various grounds set out in para 10 of the petition, one of which is that the impugned decision and orders are vitiated due to the violation of the principles of natural justice.
He has averred that before withdrawing the benefit of temporary service and refixing his seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman, respondent No. 3 did not give him any notice or opportunity of hearing.
He has further averred that his initial appointment on the post of Assistant Lineman was a regular appointment and not a temporary, ad hoc or fortuitous appointment made without considering the cases of other eligible persons and, therefore, his seniority could not has been revised by excluding the period of temporary service from 391970 to 711971.
4.
The respondents have justified their decision to refix the petitioner's seniority the premises that they had to do so in accordance with the judgment and decree issued by the Sub Judge, 2nd Class, Mahendergarh in Civil Suit No. 430/657 of 1983 held by Bhawani Shankar.
According to them, suit filed by Bhawani Shankar (Assistant Lineman) for grant of a declaration that the seniority list of Assistant Linemen prepared on the basis of continuous length of service is illegal with a prayer that the seniority be re-fixed by excluding the temporary/ad hoc service was decreed by the trial Court on 23.3.1988 and the appeal filed by them was dismissed by the learned District Judge, Narnaul and, therefore, action had to be taken for re-fixation of the seniority of the petitioner and others.
5.
Although, the counsel for the petitioner has not appeared, after hearing Shri IP Sawhney, Law Officer, Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd., who appeared for the respondents we are convinced that the decision taken by respondent No. 2 to re-fix the petitioner's seniority in the cadre of Assistant Lineman by excluding his term temporary service from 391970 to 711971 and the consequential order passed by the Superintending Engineer (OP) Circle, Bhiwani are liable to be nullified on the ground of violation of the rule of alteram partem.
Likewise, the order of reversion passed by respondent No. 2 is liable to be declared as void on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
6.
It cannot be disputed that the seniority constitutes an important civil right of an employee on the basis which he/she can claim promotion to the higher post and grant of monetary benefits like higher grade or pay scale, proficiency step up etc.
Therefore, before passing an order adversely affecting the seniority of an employee, the public employer is duty bound to act in accordance with the basic principles of natural justice, one of which is that no man can be condemned unheard.
The duty to act judiciously and in consonance with the rules of natural justice is inherent in exercise of power by the competent authority in such matters and if a decision is taken in violation thereof, then the Court will be least hesitant in invalidating such decision or order.
The applicability of above-mentioned rule even in purely administrative matters must be treated as judicially recognised by the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 1269; Sayeed-ur Rehman v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1973 Supreme Court 239; SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan, 1986 RRR 341 : AIR 1981 Supreme Court 136; Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and another, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 597; and Olga Tellis and others v. Bombay Municipal Corporation and others, 1986 RRR 290 (SC) : AIR 1986 SC 180  7.
The facts of Dr. Binapani Dei's case show that she was retired from service on the basis of decision taken by the competent authority to correct her recorded date of birth without giving notice and opportunity of hearing.
The Orissa High Court quashed the order of retirement mainly on the ground that the concerned authority had acted in violation of the rules of natural justice.
While approving the decision of the High Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court laid down the following proposition :  "An order by the State to the prejudice of a person in derogation of his vested rights may be made only in accordance with the case rules of justice and fair play.
The deciding authority, it is true, is not in the position of a Judge called upon to decide an action between contesting parties, and strict compliance with the forms of judicial procedure may not be insisted upon.
He is however under duty to give the person against whom an enquiry is held an opportunity to see his version or defence and an opportunity to correct or to controvert any evidence in the possession of the authority which is sought to be relied upon to his prejudice.
For that purpose the person against whom an enquiry is held must be informed of the case he is called upon to meet, and the evidence in support thereof.
The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed is entitled to a hearing applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the fundamental rules of our constitutional set-up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
Duty to act judicially, would therefore arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed; it need not be shown to be super- added.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essential of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is a nullity.
That is a basic concept of the rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a decision in any particular case.
xxx xxxx xxxx It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences as already stated must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence.
No such steps were admittedly taken; the High Court was, in our judgment, right in setting aside the order of the State."
8.
The facts of Sayeed-ur Rehman's case show that the appellant, who was a teacher was dismissed from service by the Managing Committee of the school.
That order was set aside by the President of the Board of Secondary Education who also ordered that he be reinstated with full salary, allowances and increments.
However, on a representation made by the Managing Committee, the President modified his earlier order and directed that the appellant would be entitled only to subsistence allowance for the period of suspension.
The appellant unsuccessfully challenged that order before the Patna High Court but, in appeal, their Lordships of the Supreme Court upheld his plea that the President of the Board of Secondary Education could not have reviewed/revised his order without giving him notice and opportunity of hearing and while doing so, a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court observed as under :  "We are, however, clear that if the order dated April 22, 1960 is to be reconsidered then the appellant must be afforded adequate opportunity of hearing and presenting his case.
This unwritten right of hearing is fundamental to a just decision by any authority which decides a controversial issue affecting the rights of the rival contestants.
This right has its roots in the notice of fair procedure.
It draws the attention of the party concerned to the imperative necessity of not overlooking the other side of the case before coming to its decision, for nothing is more likely to conduce to just and right decision than the practice of giving hearing to the affected parties."
9.
In SL Kapoor's case, the supersession of Municipal Corporation, Delhi was held to be void for want of compliance of the principles of natural justice.
In Maneka Gandhi's case, the decision of the concerned authority of the Central Government to impound the passport of the petitioner was held to be illegal.
10.
If the petitioner's case is examined in the light of the above noted proposition, we have no hesitation to hold that the action taken by respondent No. 3 and the orders passed by Superintending Engineer (OP) Circle, Bhiwani and respondent No. 2 are liable to be quashed because it is an admitted fact that before refixing his seniority, the authority concerned did not give any notice or opportunity of hearing to him.
In other words, it must be held that the petitioner has been condemned unheard and on that ground alone, the impugned orders are liable to be declared as void.
11.
The order of the petitioner's reversion passed by respondent No. 2 deserves to be invalidated on an additional ground i.e. failure of the said respondent to consider the reply filed by the petitioner to the show cause notice.
A bare reading of the order Annexure P.9 shows that respondent No. 2 did not even advert to the reply filed by the petitioner, what to say of objectively considering the same.
12.
The judgment and decree passed in Bhawani Shankar's case cannot be treated as binding on the petitioner because he was not a party to the suit and, therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the impugned orders have been passed in the purported compliance of the decree passed by a competent Court, we are of the view that the respondents could not have passed orders adversely affecting the civil rights of the petitioner without hearing him and without considering the points raised by him in the reply to the show cause notice issued by respondent No. 2.
13.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order passed by respondent No. 3 refixing the petitioner's seniority by excluding his temporary service on the post of Assistant Lineman from 391970 to 711971 is declared illegal and quashed.
The consequential orders, Annexures P-6 and P-9, passed by the Superintending Engineer (OP) Circle, Bhiwani and respondent No. 2 are also declared illegal and quashed.
It is, however, made clear that the competent authority of HVPNL/Dakshni Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. shall be free to pass fresh order in the matter after giving a notice of hearing to the petitioner.
The petitioner is given liberty to raise all the permissible objections against the proposed action and it is expected that the concerned authority will objectively examine those objections and pass a speaking order.
Petition allowed.