Pratibha Bonnerjea, VC - This review petition has been taken out by the petitioner on 2351990 against our judgment and order dated 24.4.1990 dismissing OA No. 935 of 1988.
2.
In paragraph 5 of the review petition, the petitioner alleges that there was an error apparent on the face of the judgment dated 24490 and that will be evident on the basis of three letters issued by the Deputy Director (Admn.
), Enforcement Directorate, Government of India, Ministry of Finance, New Delhi regarding appointment of Class IV staff to the post of L.D.C.
These documents were not in the possession of the petitioner at the time of hearing but which he has been able to procure afterwards.
The entire colour of the case would have changed if these three letters could be produced during hearing and considered by the Bench concerned.
The three letters are collectively at Annexure 'X' to the petition.
3.
It is clear from the facts alleged in the review petition that the petitioner wants a re-hearing of OA No. 935 of 1988 on the basis of Annexure 'X' to the petition.
4.
The petitioner has not explained when and wherefrom he came to know about the existence of the aforesaid three letters and wherefrom he procured the same.
The petition is absolutely silent on these material points.
It is settled law that unless proper and satisfactory explanations are given which are acceptable to the Tribunal, no new material could be entertained and the question of fresh hearing would not arise.
It is his case that these documents were not in his possession.
If he had knowledge of the existence of those documents, then certainly he could ask for production of the same by the respondents during hearing.
If he had no knowledge of the existence of these documents and came to know it after the judgment was delivered, then it is his duty to explain to the Tribunal, the source of his knowledge regarding the existence of these documents and the method of procuring the same.
When this fatal lacuna in the proceeding was pointed out to the counsel for the petitioner, he conceded defect.
5.
Order 47 Rule 1 of C.P.C. clearly provides that if any review of the judgment is prayed for on the basis of discovery of new and important matter on evidence, proper explanation for not producing the same at the time of hearing must be given.
This is a statutory requirement.
For the sake of convenience, Order 47 Rule 1 CPC is set out below :-  "Order 47, Rule 1(1) Any person considering himself aggrieved - (a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been preferred; (b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed; or (c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which after the exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order.
(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order may apply for a review of judgment notwithstanding the pendency of an appeal by some other party except where the ground of such appeal is common to the applicant and the appellant, or when, being respondent, he can present to the Appellate Court the case on which he applies for the review."
6.
As the statutory requirement of O 47, Rule 1 have not been complied with in the present case, we are unable to entertain the present petition.
In ATR 1987(1) CAT 112 (Anit Kumar Bose and others v. Presidency Post Master, Calcutta), the Calcutta Bench of the Tribunal has held -  ".......'review' does into mean re-agitating the merits of the case then merely averring in a mechanical way "discovery of new and important matter or evidence which after the exercise of due diligence.....could not be produced at the time when the decree was passed or order was made" is not enough.
There must be some satisfactory statement in support of that - some convincing materials to the reasonable satisfaction of court about the exercise of such due diligence which is utterly lacking in the present application."
7.
In the premises aforesaid, the review petition is dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.