NR Chandran, J - The applicant is challenging in this application, the charge memo issued on 3051989 (Annexure A4) by the Senior Superintendent of Post Offices, Kolar namely the first respondent.
The articles of charge issued against the applicant read as follows :-  "That the said Sri V Krishnamurthy, before joining the department as Postman on promotion from the cadre of ED Packer, Chikballapur, had declared his caste as 'Kadu Kuruba' a sub-community of scheduled tribe in the Attestation Form furnished by him on 31121974.
Based on the caste declared by the said Sri V Krishnamurthy, he was selected to the cadre of Time Scale Clerk under the reserve quota to which he was appointed on 20.8.1979.
But, the said Sri V Krishnamurthy actually belongs to the 'Kuruba' community which does not come under the 'Scheduled Tribe'.
Thus, the said Sri V Krishnamurthy, by furnishing false information about his caste failed to maintain absolute integrity and acted in a manner unbecoming of a Government servant, and so he is charged for violation of Rule 3(1)(i) and 3(1)(iii) of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964."
Dr. MS Nagaraja, learned counsel appearing for the applicant submits that the charge memo issued is one without jurisdiction and, therefore, prays for quashing the charge memo.
According to the learned counsel, he produced a valid community certificate issued by the Block Development Officer and the said certificate had not been cancelled by the revenue authorities.
Therefore, the present proceeding on the ground that the applicant did not belong to a Scheduled Tribe, would be patently without jurisdiction.
He also drew our attention to the proceedings of the Government of Karnataka wherein they have constituted a committee to go into the issues relating to certain communities and intends to make a recommendation to the Government of India.
Government of Karnataka have also passed orders that till a final decision is taken by the Government of India, no penal or disciplinary action should be taken against the Government servants.
The operative portion of the Government order reads as follows :-  "3.
Government are further pleased to order to make available to persons belonging to Maaleru and Kuruba communities the benefits available to the Scheduled Tribes relating to - a) Reservation in admission to educational institutions and  b) Educational concessions.
Government are also pleased to order that no penal or disciplinary action shall be taken and prosecution if any, launched, shall be kept in abeyance and shall not be pursued against the persons belonging to Maaleru community for having obtained caste certificates as belonging to Malleru community for having obtained caste certificate as Jenu Kuruba or Kadu Kuruba.
Suspension orders if any issued shall be revoked in such cases and persons retrenched shall be reinstated."
He further submits that the Supreme Court had occasion to consider this question in Writ Petition No. 11894 of 1985 and after referring to the Government of Karnataka instructions, has directed that no action should be taken against the Government servants for producing false community certificates.
The relevant observations of the Supreme Court are as follows :-  "The view expressed in the Government order obviously is that the matter has to be examined and appropriate recommendations have to be made to the Central Government and until the investigation is made and appropriate action as envisaged in paragraph 3 of the Government Order is taken, we see no justification for continuing the criminal proceedings or departmental action.
We direct the State of Karnataka to withdraw all such proceedings - civil or departmental - and expedite the process contemplated in their own order.
Only when a positive conclusion is reached, depending upon exigencies of the situation.
Government may take such action as they consider appropriate......" The learned counsel for the applicant pleads that the respondents should be estopped from going into the question since the applicant had been promoted.
He, therefore, prayed that the application may be allowed as prayed for.
2.
On the other hand, Sri MS Padmarajaiah, learned counsel Senior Central Government Standing Counsel appearing for the respondents, submitted that it would be open to the respondents, submitted that it would be open to the respondents to initiate disciplinary proceedings and the Government of Karnataka circular and the decision of the Supreme Court referred to above by the learned counsel for the applicant would not apply to a Central Government servant.
Since there is no lack of jurisdiction, he prayed that the application may be dismissed as premature.
3.
Both the counsel relied on several case laws to substantiate their contentions.
But we are of the view that it is not necessary to consider those decision because the issue raised in this application is covered by the decision of this tribunal in V Padmavathi v. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner in Karnataka (Application No. 760 of 1989 decided on 2221990) to which one of us (Sri NR Chandran, Judicial Member) was a party.
In Padmavathi's case, the applicant, an employee of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, challenged a similar charge memo and submitted that in view of the Notification of the Government of Karnataka and the decision of the Supreme Court in W.P. No. 11894 of 1985, no proceedings could be initiated.
This Tribunal accepted the said contention and the operation portion of the said judgment reads as follows :-  "Sri Ravivarma Kumar contended that the whole issue as to whether Kuruba community is a ST or not is under consideration by the Government of Karnataka and after such consideration the State Government would forward its recommendations to Government of India for its consideration and decision.
Till a final decision is taken on the subject by the Government of India, it is premature now to take action against the persons who according to the respondents belong to the Kuruba community and not to Jenu Kuruba community but have obtained the benefits extended to STs.
We are inclined to agree with this view.
If eventually the Government of India are persuaded to agree that the Kuruba community also is a ST, then the applicant here who according to the respondent is a Kuruba and not a Jenu Kuruba would automatically become eligible for the benefits extended to a ST.
Therefore, we agree that the initiation of proceedings against her at this stage is premature."
In Padmavathi's case this Tribunal rejected a similar objection raised by the respondents that the said notification of the Government of Karnataka and the decision of the Supreme Court would not apply to the Central Government servants.
It is true that the notification issued by the Government of Karnataka and the decision of the Supreme Court are referable only to the State Government servant.
But, the status of a Central Government servant as one belonging to scheduled tribe or scheduled caste community is defendant upon the certificate issued by the revenue officials of the State Government.
Therefore, this Tribunal rejected the contention and observed as follows :-  "At this stage, Sri M Vasudeva Rao, however, pointed out that the respondent is not concerned with what the State Government may do or with any recommendation that it may make in future to the Government of India in regard to the status of the Jenu Kuruba community.
The respondent has to act in accordance with the brochure now in force which has been issued by the Government of India.
The decision of the Supreme Court is only in regard to the action of the State Government and not of any Central Government and not of any Central Government department.
We however, feel that since a State Government itself is undertaking a study and proposes to make recommendations which could have a bearing on the status of the Kuruba community, it is premature to charge anybody belonging to that community of having obtained an undue advantage by claiming to belong to a ST...." Therefore, we are of the view that the applicant is right in contending that the issue of the charge memo under the present circumstances would not be valid.
Sri Padmarajaiah submitted that in any event the respondents may be directed to go on with the proceedings and if necessary the final orders may be stayed.
We are of the view that when once we come to the conclusion that the charge memo is premature in view of the circumstances narrated above, we think it is not desirable to direct the respondents to proceed with the inquiry.
Hence, the contention is rejected.
Following the decision in Padmavathi's case we allow the application and quash the memorandum dated 3051989 (Annexure A4) as premature.
We also direct the respondents not to take any further action till the Government of India takes a final decision in regard to 'Kadu Kuruba' community in view of the proceedings referred to above.
4.
The application is allowed as indicated above, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Application allowed.