AV Haridasan, Member (J).
- The applicant working as Khalasi in the South Central Railway, Hubli Division, has filed this application praying for a direction to the respondents to pay him the arrears of his salary amounting to Rs. 236400 with interest from 22.11.1982 to 31.5.1983.
It is averred in the application that during the above period he was paid only daily wages while he was entitled to monthly salary in the scale of Rs. 196-232 and that the difference between the two would amount to Rs. 236400.
This application is for recovery of the said amount with interest.
The applicant has filed an application for condonation of delay stating that he had filed a suit before the Munsif Court for the same relief and that the pendency of the above suit was really the reason for the delay.
When the application came up for final hearing, neither the applicant nor his counsel appeared.
2.
We have decided to dispose of the application on merits though the applicant and his counsel are absent because pleading necessary for disposal of the application are available.
The reason for condonation of delay mentioned in the IA is that the applicant had filed a Suit before the Munsif Court in 1988 but even if that period is excluded, the application will be beyond the period of limitation because the cause of action has arisen in the year 1983, the Suit itself would have been barred by limitation.
Therefore, we do not find any reason to condone the delay.
Further, a perusal of the application would clearly show that the relief claimed in the application is one coming within the ambit of Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The applicant should have first approached the Labour Court with an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, which is an effective alternative remedy.
For all these reasons, we are of the view that the application does not deserve to be admitted, hence the same is rejected under Section 19(3) of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
Application dismissed.