Amitav Banerjee, Chairman - A Division Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the Tribunal') at Hyderabad finding a conflict in the views taken by the Chandigarh Bench and the Guwahati Bench of the Tribunal has referred the matter to be considered by this larger Bench.
The point at issue is in respect of the interpretation of Section 20(1) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
The question is whether a party is entitled to approach the Tribunal even before the expiry of six months period allowed for disposal of appeal or representation statutorily permitted against an order in respect of service matters, passed against the Central Government employee.
2.
The question arises in this way : the applicant was a former Telephone Operator.
He was dismissed from service by an order dated 28101989 passed by the DET Telecom, Eluru (1st respondent).
The applicant submitted an appeal to the District Manager, Telecom, Eluru who is the Appellate Authority challenging the order of dismissal.
The appeal was filed on 30111989.
A month later he filed the present Application before the Hyderabad Bench of the Tribunal.
The applicant's plea is that he had waited for a month and he is not bound to wait any longer and he could come straightaway to the Tribunal seeking relief.
The respondent's plea is that in view of the provisions of Section 20(1) of the Act he is precluded from coming to the Tribunal without exhausting the remedy provided by law.
He has to wait for a period of six months for the disposal of the appeal and in case the same is not disposed of within that time, he can invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under Section 19 of the Act after the expiry of six months from the date of the filing the said appeal.
3.
The question, therefore, is whether it is incumbent on an applicant to await the result of the appeal/representation/revision, statutorily provided, for a period of six months or whether he can approach the Tribunal even before the decision in the aforesaid remedy.
There are two conflicting decision on the point, one is by the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal in case of Sital Singh v. U.O.I.
and others, 1989(1) All India Administrative Tribunal Law Times 150, decided on 6121988.
The Chandigarh Bench held that the applicant is not bound to wait for six months and there is no bar in Section 21 of the said Act to his filing an Application earlier.
A different view is taken in the case of Jananada Sarma Pathak, IPS v. Union of India and others, 1987(2) ATC 657 decided on November 19, 1986 by the Guwahati Bench which declined to grant any exemption from the operation of the Section 20 of the Act and they rejected the Application as not maintainable on the ground that the remedy available under law had not been exhausted.
4.
We have heard Shri N Johnson and Shri Y Suryanarayana, counsel for the application and Shri E Madan Mohan Rao, ACGSC for the respondents.
5.
Shri N Johnson appearing for the applicant relied on the decision of the Chandigarh Bench to urge that there was no bar to wait for six months after filing the appeal/representation against the impugned order of dismissal.
He urged that Section 20 of the Act nowhere lays down that the applicant has to wait for six months before filing the Application under Section 19 of the Act against the order of dismissal from service where an appeal had been filed before the Appellate Authority.
He had availed of the remedy by filing an appeal.
He had a right to approach the Tribunal, as he was aggrieved by the order of dismissal from service.
He was, therefore, not required to wait for six months after the passing of the dismissal order, and he could certainly file the Application under Section 19 of the Act challenging his dismissal.
6.
Shri Y Suryanarayana argued that the time frame for computing limitations is provided in Section 21 of the Act.
There is some restriction on the Tribunal under Section 20(1) of the Act but that does preclude the applicant from approaching the Tribunal.
The restriction provided under Section 20(1) of the Act indicates that the Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application if the applicant has not availed o all remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
That, however, does not speak of a bar in approaching the Tribunal within the period of limitation allowed by the provision of Section 21 of the Act.
He referred to the case of Ram and Shyam Company v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1985 SC 1147 and specifically paragraph 9 thereof where it is observed that it is not necessary to approach the Appellate Authority and that the court's jurisdiction is not ousted.
7.
Shri E Madan Mohan Rao, learned counsel for the respondents drew our attention to the opening part of Section 20(1) of the Act which lays down that :  "A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless....." He urged that the Court had discretion to exercise the power of admission even before the expiry of the period of six months after filing of the statutory appeal/representation provided that the matter is extraordinary or somewhat special that cannot await the decision of the appellate authority.
In other words, his contention was that ordinarily the Tribunal will not entertain an Application until after the disposal of until a period of six months from the date of filing the appeal/representation provided for, under the relevant service rules.
Only in exceptional or in extraordinary case the Tribunal has the power to entertain the matter even before the exhaustion of the said remedy.
In other words, his contention was that normally the Tribunal will not entertain an application before the applicant has exhausted all remedies under the extant Service Rules.
He urged that an applicant has no right to approach the Tribunal until he has filed an appeal (as provided under the Service Rules) and wait for six months for its decision and if not decided within that time, then invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Consequently, his cause of action to approach the Tribunal will not arise until the disposal of the appeal or the expiry of the period of six months from the date of filing such appeal, whichever is earlier.
In case the appeal is decided, he can approach the Tribunal immediately without waiting for the remaining period of six months from the date of filing.
The substance of his contention was that the applicant has to wait for a period of six months provided by the statute and he has no right to approach the Tribunal within that period unless the said appeal etc. had been decided.
Learned counsel referred to the case of Titaghar Paper Mills Co Ltd and another v. State of Orissa and others, AIR 1983 SC 603 and in particular to paragraph 11, where it was stated :  "It is now well recognised that where a right or liability is created by a statute which gives a special remedy for enforcing it, the remedy provided by that statute only must be availed of."
Lastly, he referred to the recent decision of the Supreme Court in the case of SS Rathore v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1990 SC 10 and specifically to paragraphs 20 and 22.
The Supreme Court had considered the provisions of Section 20 of the Act and had finally opined that where the appeal has been filed against an order complained of against the applicant, he must wait for a period of six months from the date of preferring the appeal or making of the representation and the period of six months of the representation and the period of six months will be the date of when the cause of action shall be taken to have arisen.
He also laid stress that in paragraph 22 of the Report, the Supreme Court has clearly laid down that "accrual of cause of action shall first arise only when the higher authority makes its order on appeal or representation and where such order is not made on the expiry of six months from the date when the appeal was filed or representation was filed or representation was made."
8.
Shri Y Suryanarayana in rejoinder referred to the case of Karnal Leather Karamchari Sanghatan v. Liberty Footwear Company and others, 1990(1) AISLJ 108, where a Division Bench of the Supreme Court held :  "Ordinarily, we would have revoked the leave since the party has not exhausted the remedy available by way of appeal.
But in view of the importance of the question raised and the need to decide it promptly in the interest of industrial adjudication, we proceed to consider the appeal on merits."
He had also referred to two other cases PP Biswas v. State of West Bengal (1980(1) SLR 611 at page 637) and Dalip Kumar Roy v. Union of India, 1986(2) All India SLJ 177.
In both these cases although the Departmental appeal had not been disposed of the matters were entertained.
9.
We have considered the matter and we are of the view that the answer to the question referred to this Full Bench will depend on the interpretation of Section 20 read with Sections 19 and 21 of the Act.
Section 19(1) reads as follows :  "19.
Applications to Tribunals - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal may make an application to the Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance."
Section 20(1) and Sub-Section (2)(a) and (b) reads as under : "20.
Application not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.
- (1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances - (a) If a final order has been made by Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection with the grievance; or (b) where no final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired.
Section 21(1)(a)(b) reads as under : "21.
Limitation - (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an application :- (a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause (a) sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from the date on which such final order has been made; (b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expiry of the said period of six months."
Section 19(1) provides that an Application may be made to the Tribunal by a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal.
But for the redressal of his grievance, it makes the above provision subject to other provisions of the Act.
The cardinal feature of this provision is that the person must be aggrieved by an order.
Such an order can be passed by the Government or a local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or by any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government or by an officer, committee or other body or agency of the Government or a local or other authority or corporation or society referred to above.
In other words, it means that until an order has been passed which causes a grievance to the applicant, he cannot approach the Tribunal under Section 19 of the Act.
Now under Section 20(1) even if an Application is made under Section 19 of the Act, the Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit such an Application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
10.
Section 20(2) of the Act provides that a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances, firstly, where after filing the appeal/representation under the relevant service rules, it has been decided and he is still an aggrieved person.
And, secondly, where the said appeal or representation has not been decided for a period of six months from the date of filing of an appeal etc.
The Tribunal will ordinarily entertain such Application where any of the above two situations occur.
It will be seen that in the latter event even though no order is passed by the appellate authority, yet the statute lays down a fiction, by introducing a deeming clause in Section 20(2) of the Act - "a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him".
The deeming clause enables an aggrieved party to approach the tribunal immediately on the expiry of six months from the date of the filing of the appeal/representation, even though no order on such appeal etc. has been passed by the authority concerned.
11.
Where the statute itself provides for the starting point for filing of the Application under Section 19 of the Act, normally, no such Application can be filed before that date.
A person aggrieved can file an Application under Section 19 of the Act when the cause of action arises viz. when the impugned order is passed provided that rules do not make provision for filing of an appeal/revision/representation.
Where the law requires that the applicant exhausts his statutory remedies for redressal of his grievances under the relevant service rules, it is incumbent on the application to file an appeal/revision/representation, whichever is permissible under the rules, to the authorities concerned and then wait for six months time for the latter to decide the matter.
If he decides in favour of the applicant, it may not be necessary for him to seek further relief under the Act.
However, if there is an order against the applicant, he may immediately approach the Tribunal under Section 19 of the Act, having exhausted all the available remedies under the relevant service rules.
There may be, however, cases where the authority concerned is not able to conclude the appeal etc. within a period of six months from the date of filing the same.
In such cases, aggrieved person need not wait any further and on the expiry of six months period from the date of filing an appeal etc., he can approach the Tribunal under Section 19 of the Act.
This is the scheme of the Act.
The question now is whether it is imperative for every applicant to exhaust the remedy of statutory appeal for redressal of service matters before he comes to the Tribunal under Section 19 of the Act ?
The wordings of Section 20 of the Act uses the words :  "A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application ......" which means that ordinarily it will not be open to the Tribunal to admit an Application under Section 19 of the Act where the statutory provision for appeal etc. had not been availed of.
It will be deemed to have been availed of if after the filing of such an appeal, period of six months have expired and no order have been passed by the Appellate Authority.
The emphasis on the word "ordinarily" means that if there be an extraordinary situation or unusual event or circumstances, the Tribunal may exempt the above procedure being complied with and entertain the Application.
Such instances are likely to be rare and unusual.
That is why the expression "ordinarily" has been used.
There can be no denial of the fact that the Tribunal has power to entertain an Application even though the period of six months after the filing of the appeal has not expired but such power is to be exercised rarely and in exceptional cases.
12.
The word "ordinarily" has come in for judicial consideration in a number of cases.
13.
In re Putta Ranganayakalu and others (AIR 1956 Andhra 161 (Full Bench), Subba Rao, Chief Justice as he then was, explained, the meaning of the word "ordinarily" in the following words :  "Ordinarily" means habitually and not casually.
It cannot obviously mean "always".
In the same judgment, Chandra Reddy, J explained the meaning of "ordinarily" in the following words :  "The plain and popular meaning of the word "ordinarily" means usually, normally and not exceptionally as contrasted with extraordinarily."
14.
In the case of Kailash Chandra v Union of India, AIR 1961 SC 1346, their Lordships explained the meaning of the word "ordinarily" and held -  "This intention is made even more clear and beyond doubt by the use of the word "ordinarily".
"Ordinarily" means in the large majority of cases but not invariably".
15.
The K.JC.
Bose v. Govt. of India and another, ATR 1986 CAT 169, the Madras Bench of the Tribunal while considering the provisions of Section 20 of the Act referred to the remedy of appeal under Rule 16 of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969 not being exhausted and held that Application was not entertainable.
The Vice-Chairman ruled :  "No doubt, the expression 'ordinarily' occurring in that Section will indicate that the Tribunal has some sort of discretion in the matter.
But such a discretion cannot be exercised in all the cases and that has to be exercised in extraordinary situations."
In Corpus Juris Vol. 67, the meaning of the word "ordinarily" has been given as : usual, common, normal, regular, conforming to general order, common in recurrence, often recurring.
16.
The antonym of "ordinary" is extraordinary, unusual or uncommon.
17.
In view of the above, the power to entertain an Application under Section 19 of the Act even before exhaustion of the statutory remedy of appeal etc. in service matters is not the unusual feature but an extraordinary, unusual or uncommon feature.
As indicated above, this power to entertain an Application under Section 19 of the Act even before availing of the remedy provided by statute or statutory rules cannot be exercised generally or always.
The statutory right of appeal has to be exhausted before the Application under Section 19 of the Act is admitted by the Tribunal in exercise of its power Section 20 of the Act.
18.
This leads to the conclusion that no Application under Section 19 of the Act should ordinarily be admitted by the Tribunal unless the applicant has exhausted the remedy as indicated above.
In other words, normally, and usually, such applications will be rejected or declined as premature.
However, where the Tribunal exercises its discretion treating it to be exceptional or extraordinary case as contrasted to the word "ordinarily", it may be entertained and admitted subject to other provisions of the Act.
19.
We are fortified in our views in this regard by latest pronouncement by the Supreme Court in the case of SS Rathore v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1900 SC 10.
Their Lordships were considering the provisions of Section 20(1) of the Act.
After quoting the provisions, their Lordships observed :  "The Rules relating to disciplinary proceedings do provide for an appeal against the orders of punishment imposed on public servants.
Some Rules provide even a second appeal or a revision.
The purport of Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act is to give effect to the Disciplinary Rules and the exhaustion of the remedies available thereunder is a condition precedent to maintaining of claims under the Administrative Tribunals Act.
Administrative Tribunals have been set up for Government servants of the Center and several States have already set up such Tribunals under the Act for the employees of the respective States.
The law is soon going to get crystillised on the line laid down under Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
"In this background if the original order of punishment is taken as the date when cause of action first accrues for purposes of Article 58 of the Limitation Act, great hardship is bound to result.
On one side, the claim would not be maintainable if laid before exhaustion of the remedies; on the other, if the departmental remedy though availed is not finalised within the period of limitation, the cause of action would no more be justiciable having become barred by limitation.
Redressal of grievances in the hands of the departmental authorities takes an unduly long time.
That is so on account of the fact that no attention is ordinarily bestowed over these matters and they are not considered to be governmental business of substance.
This approach has to be deprecated and authorities on whom power is vested to dispose of appeals and revisions under the Service Rules must dispose of such matters as expeditiously as possible.
Ordinarily, a period of three to six months should be the outer limit.
That would discipline the system and keep the public servant away from a protracted period of litigation."
Their Lordships then considered the question : whether it should be disposal of one appeal or the entire hierarchy of reliefs as may have been provided.
After quoting the provisions of Sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 20 of the Act, their Lordships observed :  "We are of the view that the cause of action shall be taken to arise not from the date of the original adverse order but on the date when the order of the higher authority where a statutory remedy is provided entertaining the appeal or representation is made and where no such order is made, though the remedy has been availed of a six month's period from the date of preferring of the appeal or making the representation shall be taken to be the date when cause of action shall be taken to have first arisen.
We, however, make it clear that this principle may not be applicable when the remedy availed of has not been provided by law.
Repeated unsuccessful representations not provided by law are not governed by this principle."
Their Lordships then observed in paragraph 22 :  "It is proper that the position in such cases should be uniform.
Therefore, in every such case until the appeal or representation provided by a law is disposed of, accrual of cause of action for cause of action shall first arise only when the higher authority makes its order on appeal or representation and where such order is not made on the expiry of six months from the date when the appeal was filed or representation was made.
Submission of just a memorial or representation to the Head of the establishment shall not be taken into consideration in the matter of fixing limitation."
20.
In view of the above enunciation of the law on the subject, very little remains to be said in this case.
21.
However, we will refer to some of the arguments raised on behalf of the applicant.
Shri N Johnson, learned counsel for the applicant argued that the applicant has right to approach the Tribunal whether or not he had availed of all the remedies under the existing service rules.
We do not think that this question is open any more after the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of SS Rathore (supra).
Learned counsel referred to the case of the Ram and Shyam Company (supra).
Reliance was placed on the observations made in paragraph 9 of the report which reads as follows :  "Ordinarily it is true that the court has imposed a restrain in its own wisdom on its exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 where the party invoking the jurisdiction has an effective, adequate alternative remedy.
More often, it has been expressly stated that the rule which requires the exhaustion of alternative remedies is a rule of convenience and discretion rather than rule of law.
At any rate it does not oust the jurisdiction of the Court."
We are conscious of the fact that this was an observation by the Supreme Court in respect of Article 226 of the Constitution and we are further conscious of the fact that the Tribunal has been held to be a substitute of the High Court in service matters of employees.
But the aforesaid expression of law in the case of the Ram and Shyam Company (supra) will not be attracted where the Supreme Court in the case of SS Rathore (supra) analysed and expressed itself as to the ambit and scope of Section 20 of the Act.
22.
Shri Y Suryanarayana had urged that limitation for presenting an Application under Section 19 of the Act is contained in Section 21 of the Act.
He urged that limitation only fixes the time after which the case is barred by time.
He urged that it is open to a party to approach the Tribunal any time before it.
In our opinion, this contention has also to be rejected as without substance.
Obviously, a party has to present the Application before the Tribunal before the period of limitation expires.
It means that he has to file the Application within time.
The question in the present case is when does the time commence.
No one can file an Application before the Tribunal unless he is aggrieved by an order or by the failure of the Government to pass an order on a statutory appeal etc. within a period of six months of the filing of the said appeal.
There must be a cause of action to approach the tribunal.
A cause of action may arise when an impugned order is passed and the time begins to run from the date of the impugned order.
Section 20(2) of the Act visualises a case where no order is passed by the appellate authority in a service matter for a period of six months from the date of filing of the said appeal etc.
The aggrieved person should not wait indefinitely and law, therefore, provides that on the expiry of six months, he can approach the Tribunal forthwith.
The limitation begins from the expiry of the period of six months from the date of the filing of the appeal.
The right accrues then and not before.
23.
The Guwahati Bench in the case of Jananda Sarma Pathak, IPS (supra) in paragraph 17 of the judgment rejected the prayer for entertaining the Application and observed that the order will not preclude the applicant from approaching the Tribunal after the disposal of the appeal.
24.
In the case of Sital Singh (supra), the Chandigarh Bench took the view that the applicant is not bound to wait for six months and there is no bar in Section 21 of the said Act to his filing an application earlier.
Advisability to wait for six months after making a representation is not the same thing as saying that his not waiting for six months would render his application under Section 19 of the Act pre-mature.
The preliminary objections raised by the respondents were held to be not legally tenable.
25.
For the reason indicated above, we are unable to hold that the view taken by the Chandigarh Bench is correct.
It is true that there is no bar in Section 21 of the Act for filing an Application.
The provision of limitation in Section 21 of the Act prescribes the period during which the Application can be filed.
It has a period of commencement as well as a period of conclusion.
The period of commencement begins on the passing of an appellate order under the service rules or on the expiry of six months from the date of the filing of the appeal etc. under the service rules in case no order has been passed by the Appellate Authority.
There is no expression "advisability" in Section 20 or in Section 21 of the Act.
In view of the clear pronouncement by their Lordships in the case of SS Rathore (supra), we are of the opinion that the view taken by the Chandigarh Bench that an Application under Section 19 of the Act can be filed even without exhausting the remedy of appeal-representation under service rules is not correct.
The view taken by the Chandigarh Bench in the case of Sital Singh (supra) is, and we say so with great respect, incorrect and must be overruled.
We order accordingly.
26.
Although the Guwahati Bench declined to entertain the Application under Section 19 of the Act, it was of the view that in a suitable case it could entertain.
We have already expressed our view above and explained that the use of the word "ordinarily" connotes a discretionary power in the Tribunal but as indicated earlier, that power has to be exercised in rare and exceptional cases and not usually or casually.
27.
The view taken by us above will now be placed before a Division Bench of this Tribunal.
Reference answered.