Special leave granted.
2.
The subject matter of challenge in this Special Leave Petition is the order of 2nd August, 1985 whereby the appellant was ordered to retire compulsorily under the provisions of 56(J) of the Fundamental Rules as in the opinion of the Screening Committee the appellant has lost his effectiveness as well as utility to the Department and in the public interest he is required to be prematurely retired.
3.
Reliance has been placed by, the Ld.
ASG on the A.C.Rs.
as well as on the report of the Screening Committee.
We have gone through the A.C.Rs.
for the period 1980-81 where it has been stated by the Reporting Officer in all the columns "good, nothing adverse to my knowledge".
Then it has been recorded that he is a man of above average, he can improve his performance, his overall performance during the last year is categorised as "good" for the year 1981-82.
The report is regarding general assessment "good" and a capable Officer for the year 1981-82.
It has been remarked by Mr. S C Prashar Commr.. of Income-tax "an average officer" in the A.C.R.
for the period for 1982-83.There for the period 1983-84 against all the columns the remarks is "good".
Regarding integrity it was remarked "nothing came to knowledge from which adverse inference can be drawn.
The officer was hold in Salary Circle prior to his assignment.
He himself left Column 12 blank "I appreciate that he is honest to admit that he has not done any outstanding work.
Quality of assessment is average.
Considering his experience and capability recommend his posting for Salary Circle etc." The report for the period 31-3-85 is as follows:  "The ITO has acceded (exceeded) all his targets or met (sic) him.
He has good investigating capabilities and did some good 133A cases also during the year."
The Inspecting Assistant Commr.
also remarked as follows:  "He is intelligent systematic officer.
He ran his station well and smoothly.
He knows his job and works sincerely."
4.
The Screening Committee considered the cases of several Income-tax Officers including the petitioner Mr. R P Malhotra and it has been observed that the rating for the year 1982-83 is "average".
On the basis of his A.C.R.
the Screening Committee' decided that this officer has lost effectiveness and has also lost utility to the Government.
The Committee, therefore, decided that he is not fit for any retention in the Department and recommended his case under FR 56(J).
5.
We have heard Ld.
ASG and we have very carefully considered the A.C.Rs.
as well as the order of the Screening, Committee, we are not satisfied that the appellant has lost his utility in service and has become a deadwood and so in public interest he is required to be compulsorily retired before the age of superannuation which is on 4-1-89.
6.
In that view of the matter, we for the sake of fair play and justice set aside the order of compulsory retirement dated 2nd August, 1985 and direct the authorities concerned to take immediate steps for payment of the emoluments including salary and allowances as he is entitled to under the Rules for the period from the date of compulsory retirement i.e. 2nd August, 1985 till his attaining the age of superannuation on 4-1-89.
We accordingly allow the appeal.
The authorities will reconsider his retiral benefits on the basis of this order and will pay him accordingly.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.