TS Doabia, J - "Conduct which led to conviction" can be made the basis of taking disciplinary action against an employee and this right to take disciplinary action which is vested in the employer is not any way taken away merely because of suspension of sentence on an appeal having been preferred against the judgment of conviction is the argument raised by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
2.
The brief facts which led to the filing of this letters patent appeal be noticed as under :  The respondent-writ petitioner, Laxman Singh Kushwah, was working as Principal with the appellant-institution.
He was involved in a criminal case.
He was convicted by the Court of Sessions under section 302 and also other sections of Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code).
This happened on 12th of March, 1992.
The respondent was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life.
It is the case of the respondent that political rivalry was the reason for a criminal case being registered against.
It is, however, not necessary to go into all these allegations because the fact remains that the respondent stands convicted.
The further fact is that the respondent-writ petitioner preferred an appeal and a Division Bench of this Court on 12th of August, 1992, directed the release of the respondent-writ petitioner on bail.
The execution of sentence of imprisonment for life thus stand, suspended.
3.
After he was allowed bail, the respondent-writ petitioner came to this Court.
He submitted that he has neither been suspended nor any order of termination of his services has been passed to his knowledge.
It was accordingly contended that he was entitled to continue to work against the post of Principal of the appellant institution which post he was said to be holding at the time of his conviction.
It appears that there was a proposal to bring an end to the relationship of master and servant.
This proposal of sent to the Joint Director, Education.
The Joint Director, Education, however, did not give approval to this proposal of the appellant-management.
It is stated that there was express disapproval in this regard.
Reliance is being placed on an order dated 20th of April, 1993.
This is annexure P/3.
It is contended that the respondent is entitled to continue to work against the post he was working at the time he was convicted.
Action of the appellant- management in not permitting him to so perform his duties as Principal of the institution is said to be violative of Madhya Pradesh Aahskiya Shikshan Sanstha (Adhyapakon Tatha Anya Karmachariyon Ko Padchyut Karne/Sewa se Hatane Sambandhi Prakriya) Rules, 1983.
4.
It is on the basis of the above, the writ petition preferred by the respondent under Article 226 of the Cconstitution of India, found merit with the learned single Judge of this Court.
The respondent-writ petitioner was held entitled to payment of subsistence allowance upto the date of his rejoining the services.
A further direction was also given that he be permitted to continue as Principal of the appellant-institution.
It is against the above directions given in writ petition No. 886 of 1993, on 3rd of January, 1996, the present appeal has been preferred.
It has been urged that the respondent-writ petitioner was taken into custody on 12th of March, 1992.
It is again submitted that a resolution was passed by the managing body of the appellant-institution on 31st of March, 1992, and the respondent No. 1 was placed under suspension.
It is further stated that the services of the respondent-writ petitioner were terminated vide order dated 15th of April, 1992.
This order is said to have been served on the respondent-writ petitioner on 20th of April, 1992.
Copies of these orders have been placed on the record as annexures A/3 and A/4.
It is accordingly argued that the directions given in the writ jurisdiction that the respondent No. 1 is entitled to payment of subsistence allowance and also that he should be reinstated as Principal of the appellant-institution cannot be sustained.
5.
It be seen that the order of termination, Annexure A/3 was not placed on the record of writ file.
A perusal of this order, however, indicates that a resolution has been passed in which it has been stated that as the respondent-writ petitioner stands convicted under sections 148/302/149/307/ 149 of the Code, it has been thought apt to snap the relationship of master and servant.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondent-writ petitioner submits that no error has been committed by the learned single Judge in giving the directions as contained in the order under appeal.
It has also been argued that the sentence has been suspended.
It has further been argued that annexure A/3, placed on the record of this appeal should not be looked into.
In any case, it is submitted that even this order has not been passed in accordance with law.
7.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that when an employee is convicted by a criminal Court, then the employer can take disciplinary action on the basis of conduct which led to his conviction.
This aspect of the matter was considered by a Full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case reported as Om Prakash v. The Director Postal Services (Posts and Telegraphs Deptt.
), AIR 1973 P & H 1.
In the above case, an order was passed under section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
It was held that the passing of the order under section 12 of the aforementioned Act would not obliterate the original lapse and the employer is free to take departmental action.
Following propositions were laid down in para 21 of the judgment :  (i) the departmental punishment of removal or dismissal is not an essential and automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge; (ii) the authority competent to take disciplinary action against an employee convicted on a criminal charge has to consider all the circumstances of the case and then to decide : (a) whether the conduct of the delinquent official which led to his conviction is such as to render his further retention in service undesirable; (b) if so, whether to dismiss him or to remove him from service, or to compulsorily retire him; and (c) if the said conduct of the official is not such which renders his further retention in service undesirable whether the minor punishment, if any, should be inflicted on him; (iii) to be retained in service is not a qualification, but a right in certain circumstances, subject to service rules; (iv) the liability to be departmentally punished for conduct which has led to the conviction of the employee does not attach to the conviction, but attaches to the original conduct (misconduct) which constituted the offence of which the official has been convicted; (v) the original misconduct of an employee does not merge with his conviction so as to become non-existent after conviction; and  (vi) an order imposing a punishment simply because of his conviction on a criminal charge without reference to the conduct which led to the conviction cannot be sustained.
8.
It may be mentioned here that the above decision given by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Om Prakash (supra) was approved by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as AIR 1975 SC 2216.
It was observed that merely because a convict is released on probation would not lead to the conclusion that the original stigma is obliterated.
If above is the position vis-a-vis a person who is released on probation, then the case of a person who has been convicted and released on bail cannot be on a better footing.
It is accordingly held that the appellant-management had a right in coming to the conclusion that the services of the respondent-writ petitioner should be terminated.
It may, however, be seen that the appellant-management has not taken into consideration the conduct which led to his conviction.
It has merely relied upon the statutory provisions under which the respondent-writ petitioner was convicted.
This order would not be in conformity with law.
As to what would be its effect is being dealt with in later portion of this judgment.
9.
The argument that departmental proceedings cannot be continued as the sentence imposed upon the respondent-writ petitioner has been suspended by this Court be also examined.
10.
The question as to whether remission of sentence under section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, would wipe out the offence was considered by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Sarat Chandra Rabha and others v. Khagendranath Nath and others, AIR 1961 SC 334.
A distinction was made between the effect of a pardon and remission.
The position of law as it obtained in England and in this country was considered.
The following observations made in para 4 of the judgment are relevant and may be noticed.
These read as under :  "Now it is not disputed that in England and India the effect of a pardon or what is sometimes called a free pardon is to clear the person from all infamy and from all consequences of the offence for which it is granted and from all statutory or other disqualifications following upon conviction.
It makes him, as it were, a new man : (See Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. VII.
Third Edition, p. 244, para 529).
But the same effect does not follow on a mere remission were stands on a different footing altogether.
In the first place, an order of remission does not wipe out the offence; it also does not wipe out the conviction.
All that it does is to have an effect on the execution of the sentence; though ordinarily a convicted person would have to serve out the full sentence imposed by a court, he need not do so with respect to that part of the sentence which has been ordered to be remitted.
An order of remission thus does not in any way interfere with the order of the court; it affects only the execution of the sentence passed by the court and frees the convicted person from his liability to undergo the full term of imprisonment inflicted by the court, though the order of conviction and sentence passed by the court still stands as it was.
The power to grant remission is executive power and cannot have the effect which the order of an appellate or revisional court would have of reducing the sentence passed by the trial court and substituting in its place the reduced sentence adjudged by the appellate or revisional court.
This distinction is well brought out in the following passage from Weater's "Constitutional Law" on the effect of reprieves and pardons vis-a-vis the judgment passed by the court imposing punishment, at p. 176 para 134 - "A reprieve is a temporary suspension of the punishment fixed by law.
A pardon is the remission of such punishment.
Both are the exercise of executive functions and should be distinguished from the exercise of judicial power over sentences.
"The judicial power and the executive power over sentences are readily distinguishable," observed Justice Sutherland.
"To render a judgment is a judicial function.
To carry the judgment into effect is an executive function.
To cut short a sentence by an act of clemency is an exercise of executive power which abridges the enforcement of the judgment but does not alter it qua judgment."
Though, therefore the effect of an order of remission is to wipe out that part of the sentence of imprisonment which has not been served out and thus in practice to reduce the sentence to the period already undergone, in law the order of remission merely means that the rest of the sentence need not be undergone, leaving the order of conviction by the court and the sentence passed by it untouched.
In this view of the matter the order of remission passed in this case though it had the effect that the appellant was released from jail before he had served the full sentence of three years' imprisonment, and had actually served only about sixteen months' imprisonment, did not in any way affect the order of conviction and sentence passed by the court which remained as it was ..." 11.
The case of the respondent-writ petitioner who has been merely released on bail cannot be said to be on a better footing.
As a matter of fact as to what would be the effect of suspension of sentence on a judgment of conviction was taken note of by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Rama Narang v. Ramesh Narang and others, (1995) 2 SCC 513.
AM Ahmadi, Chief Justice of India speaking for the court took note of the provisions contained in section 389 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and it was observed that merely because an appeal against conviction has been admitted, it would not lead to disappearance of disqualification arising from such conviction.
In the above case, the accused was granted interim bail under section 389(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
He was directed to be released on bail.
Thereafter, the accused was appointed as a Managing Director of a company.
A challenge was made to the validity of a convicted person's appointment as Managing Director.
His appointment was held to be void being in breach of the provisions of section 267 of the Companies Act, 1956.
It was observed in categoric terms that the admission of an appeal against conviction would not mean that the disqualification arising from conviction has ceased to exist.
12.
Similar view was expressed by the Supreme Court in another case reported as Deputy Director of Collegiate Education (Administration), Madras v. S Nagoor Meera, 1995(2) SCT 717(SC) : AIR 1995 SC 1364.
It was observed that until the conviction is set aside by the appellate Court, it is not advisable to retain such a person in service.
13.
Reinstating a convicted employee was deprecated by the Supreme Court in the case report as State of Punjab v. Ajaib Singh, 1995(2) SCT 417 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 975.
In the above case, the concerned police officer was convicted by the trial Judge.
He was acquitted by the High Court.
The State preferred an appeal before the Supreme Court of India.
This appeal was pending.
During the pendency of the appeal, the said police officer was not only reinstated but was promoted.
In para 8 of the judgment, following observations were made :  "Before closing this case, we shall be failing in our duty if we do not record our serious disapproval of the manner in which the Government not only reinstated but promoted the officer when the appeal by it against his acquittal was pending in this Court.
In our opinion the Government would have been well advised to adopt the sealed cover procedure, a firmly established and well known practice in service law.
Murder by a police officer is provocative.
The trial of the officer and conduct of the Government both are in public glare.
It is not the competency or efficiency of the officer but his conduct and behaviour and approach of the Government toward such officer which is measured in social scale.
Such unwarranted actions of the Government shake the confidence of common man in the system.
He loses faith in it when a person who is standing trial in appeal is promoted."
14.
Thus, there is abundant judicial authority for the proposition :  (i) that, merely because a person has earned a remission or has in his favour an interim order suspending the sentence would not lead to the conclusion that he is free to join his duties with the employer; (ii) that, the employer is free to bring an end to the relationship of master and servant; and  (iii) that, the relationship of master and servant can be brought to an end by holding a departmental proceeding and the conduct which led to his conviction can be made the basis of snapping this relationship.
If this conduct is not taken into consideration then the order pased by the employer- management would not be in accordance with law.
15.
In the present case, the appellant-management has passed an order, annexure P3.
This does not take into consideration the conduct which led to his conviction.
As such, this order cannot be said to be a valid order.
Apart from this, the respondent-writ petitioner could urge before his employer that merely because he has been convicted under section 302 of the Code, it cannot be said that he is not entitled to reinstatement.
16.
The question of moral delinquency and the question as to whether the offence was such which involved moral turpitude or not may also have to be taken into consideration.
Some judicial precedents do exist that merely because a person stands convicted under section 302 of the Code, it would not give rise to a conclusion that the offence involved moral turpitude.
The circumstances under which the offence was committed may have to be taken into consideration.
Reference in this regard be made to Corpus Juris Secundum.
The relevant extract is as under :  "While frequently general statements have been made to the effect that mere assault does not or may not, involve moral turpitude, or the assault and battery rarely involve moral turpitude, the rule would seem to be that assault and battery may involve moral turpitude and it may not, the difference depending on the circumstances, and whether an assault does or does not involve moral turpitude generally will be determined by the particular facts of the individual case.
The statutes of various jurisdictions divide assaults in the different degrees and many of the crimes which are included within such definitions are crimes that involve moral turpitude.
Homicide may or may not involve moral turpitude depending on the degree of the crime."
This aspect of the matter was considered by this Court in Brij Kishore Shukla v. M.P. S.R.T.
Corporation and others, 1996(1) SCT 254 (MP) : 1995 MPLJ 870.
In para 8 of the order, following observations were made :  "When can it be said that an offence involves moral turpitude.
The term 'moral turpitude' has not been defined either in the Act or in the Indian Penal Code.
According to the New Lexicon Webster's Dictionary of the English Language, 'turpitude' means 'inherent wickedness'.
The concept of moral turpitude as stated in Black's Law Dictionary is that it involves baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowman or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and man.
Thus it is an act or behaviour that gravely violates moral sentiments or accepted moral sentiments or accepted moral standards of the community and is a morally culpable quality held to be present in some criminal offences as distinguished from others.
In other words, it is the quality of a crime involving grave infringement of the moral sentiment of the community as distinguished from statutory prohibitions.
If one were to look at the matter in a very narrow sense or in general term, of righteousness, society does not permit or approve of any offence being committed.
It has to be borne in mind that every act punishable in law is not offence involving 'moral turpitude'.
It appears to me that a circumstance in which a crime is committed and how the society views the commission of that offence in those circumstances is relevant.
The question whether offence involves moral turpitude or not is a question of fact to be decided with reference to facts of each case.
The same offence may or may not involve moral turpitude.
It would depend upon a number of circumstances.
Drinking or gambling in a school may not involve moral turpitude if same outsiders are involved.
If, however, a school teacher does these acts, the position would be different.
An offence committed under one set of circumstances may involve moral turpitude and the some offence committed under a different set of circumstances may not.
For instances, a person who goes to commit theft or rape may not be able to achieve his object and on being caught may kill the person apprehending him.
Such an offence of murder committed under these circumstances would certainly involve moral turpitude as it involves depravity or wickedness of character and crime involves grave infringement of the community as distinguished from statutory prohibitions.
Offence of murder committed due to enmity may not per se involve baseness of character.
It is a matter of common knowledge that in many societies people do sometimes commit murder with a view to avenge their enmity and such murders are not looked down upon as involving that baseness or depravity of character as to amount to moral turpitude.
In other words this conduct by itself cannot be said to possess morally culpable quality which is present in those criminal offences which involve moral turpitude.
The offence of murder was held to be an offence involving no moral turpitude by a Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Kuldeep Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) SCT 15 (P&H)(DB) : AIR 1994 Punjab and Haryana 242 and it was observed that an "Act of killing a person is normally attributed to a feeling of hurt or revenge; act of murder will not come within the broad concept of 'moral turpitude' as interpreted by Courts...." 17.
In view of the above, the direction given by the learned single Judge directing reinstatement of the respondent-writ petitioner is held to be bad.
Such a direction could not be given in view of the directions given by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Ajaib Singh (supra).
The further direction that the respondent-writ petitioner be paid his salary can also not be sustained.
This is because for certain number of months, the writ petitioner was in jail.
Earlier to this, he is said to be under suspension.
Therefore, the question of paying him wages without taking into consideration this aspect of the matter cannot be sustained.
18.
The order of termination, annexure A/3 is held to be bad because this has not been passed by taking into consideration the conduct which led to the conviction of respondent-writ petitioner.
19.
However, taking into consideration the fact that the respondent-writ petitioner is supposed to function as Principal of an educational institution, it would not be apt to pass an order forthwith directing him to perform the duties of Principal of appellant-institution.
A period of three months is given to the appellant-management to pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
In the meantime, the respondent-writ petitioner shall not be associated with the teaching in the appellant-institution.
The order of the learned single Judge is varied in the manner indicated above.