T H B Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus, directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Junior Engineer.
2.
The respondents advertised 15 posts of Junior Engineers on 2171986.
In response to the said advertisement the petitioner applied under reserved quota as he belongs to Scheduled Caste.
Interviews were held on 22nd of October, 1986 but two persons namely Gurmukh Singh and Jagroop Singh were appointed as Junior Engineers as against the reserved quota from among the Scheduled Castes.
They joined the service on 1021987.
Thereafter, on coming to know about the selection and appointment of only two candidates from the Scheduled Caste quota, the petitioner filed this writ petition seeking a direction that he should also be appointed as Junior Engineer as he stood at 3rd place in the order of merit among the Scheduled Caste candidates.
According to the petitioner, the results of the selection were not intimated either to the petitioner nor was there any publication of the results and even on the notice board of the office of the respondents, the list of selected candidates was not displayed.
Therefore, he was not aware of the selection made by the respondents and thereafter, he made enquiries and came to know that Gurmukh Singh and Jagroop Singh were appointed and thereafter one Dalip Singh who filed writ petition No. 1625 of 1987 was also appointed as a Junior Engineer by the Board on a representation being made by said Dalip Singh to the Board and the writ filed by Dalip Singh was dismissed as having become infructuous because of his appointment.
According to the petitioner, the said Dalip Singh was much lower than the petitioner in the merit list of the Scheduled Castes.
Therefore, he filed writ petition on 2711988 seeking a direction to the respondents to appoint him as Junior Engineer as against the reserved posts for Scheduled Castes.
3.
The respondents contended, inter alia, in their written statement that the writ petition is highly belated and, therefore, it is liable to be dismissed.
They further contended that the writ petition was filed by Sh. G S Sathi, Advocate, for the petitioner and said Shri G S Sathi was Legal Advisor of the Board and he was also a member of the recruitment committee and he divulged the secrecy of the selection to the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
They further stated that the writ petition filed by Dalip Singh was pending and therefore, according to the respondents there are no merits in the writ petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner applied for the post of Junior Engineer in response to an advertisement given by the respondents to fill up 15 vacancies of Junior Engineers in the Board under quota of reserved vacancies for Scheduled Castes.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents fairly admitted before me today that the petitioner stood at No. 3 in the merit list at the interview held on 22.10.1986.
There is also no dispute that the petitioner belongs to Scheduled Caste.
Therefore, in the normal course, the petitioner ought to have been appointed as the Board made appointments to 20 posts of Junior Engineers in the Board.
There is also no dispute that there is a reservation of 25 per cent of the posts reserved for filling from among the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes.
Therefore, five posts have to be filled up from the category of Scheduled Castes, but the respondent-Board did not fill up the vacancies of 5 candidates from the category of Scheduled Castes.
Thus there is a clear violation of reservation policy of the State Government which has been adopted by the Board.
It is also asserted before me by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Dalip Singh was appointed on his representation by the Board while his writ petition was pending in this Court and the writ petition was dismissed as having become infructuous because said Dalip Singh got appointment.
This fact is not controverted by the learned counsel for respondents.
It is not disputed that the said Dalip Singh was much lower in rank in the merit list.
Simply because, there is a representation by Dalip Singh, the Board cannot ignore the claims of those persons who stood high up in the list and select and appoint the persons who are lower in the merit list.
The appointment of Dalip Singh was also not made by virtue of any order of the Court.
It is made only on a representation made to the Board, by the Board itself.
This act on the part of the Board deserves to be condemned.
Public appointment is now considered to be a new concept of property.
It has been held by a Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the District Manager, AP State Road Transport Corporation v. Labour Court, Guntur and another, AIR 1980 AP 132 as follows :-  "The intervention of the law in the matters of public employment is even more direct and intense.
Even the small area of free contract that may still be open to a private employer is closed and sealed to the State by such provisions of our Constitution as Articles 14, 15 and 16 and even by Article 21.
Contract or no contract, State within the meaning of Article 12 of our Constitution can neither deny nor discriminate on any of the constitutionally forbidden grounds a citizen's right to employment.
Law is today prepared to recognise and protect the right to public employment as a sort of a "New Property", the enjoyment of which is necessary for the exercise of the creative faculties of man".
5.
Justice O Chinnappa Reddy in State of Maharashtra v. Chandrabhan, 1983(2) S.L.R.
493 held that the public appointment opportunity is national wealth in which all citizens are equally entitled to share and that no class of people can monopolise public employment in the guise of 'efficiency' or other ground.
6.
In the same decision Justice Varadarajan approves observation of the Full Bench of the Hon'ble High Court in the decision referred to above which is to the following effect :-  "The right to public employment is undoubtedly, as noted above, a new form of property.
It is not only a vast source of patronage for the Government but is also a great source of living and happiness to our unemployed millions."
His Lordship further added that it should not be monopolised by any particular section of the people of this country in the name of efficiency, though efficiency cannot altogether be ignored.
7.
Thus every citizen has got a right to compete for public employment and his claims cannot be negatived by adopting unscrupulous methods.
There is no justification in appointing Dalip Singh on his representation ignoring the persons who ranked above him in the merit list prepared by the Selection Committee.
No reason has been given by the respondents for not filling up all the posts out of the reserved quota of Scheduled Castes.
Initially, only two persons from Scheduled Castes have been appointed though five persons were to be appointed.
The petitioner who stood at 3rd in the merit list ought and should have been appointed by the Board in the vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes.
Thus the respondents violated the principles of equality and natural justice.
Even in the written statement, no reasons have been given for not appointing the petitioner.
8.
The contention of the learned counsel that there is a delay of more than one year in filing the writ petition will not come in the way of the petitioner getting the relief.
Admittedly, the result of the selection was not intimated to the candidates.
The names of the selected candidates have also not been displayed on the notice board of the Board.
Therefore, there was no occasion for the petitioner to come to know of the result of the selection, until he made enquiries some time in January, 1988.
He came to know about the selection and the appointment of Gurmukh Singh and Jagroop Singh.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner approached this court seeking a writ of mandamus immediately on coming to know of the selection.
9.
The delay in disposal of the writ petition by this Court will not and cannot be held to dis-entitle the petitioner from getting the relief.
The rights of the parties crystallised on the date of initiation of the proceedings.
The delay in disposal of the case will not take away the rights which have already been crystallised on the date of the institution of the proceedings.
10.
Normally, I would have directed the Board to consider the case of the petitioner along with other eligible candidates for appointment as the court will not direct the appointment of any person directly since there is no rule or principle of law that a person who approaches the court should be directed to be appointed.
The ordinary direction the Court will issue, is to direct the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner along with other eligible candidates, but the situation in the present case is quite different.
The petitioner is ranked 3rd in the merit list.
There is no other eligible candidate above the petitioner.
This factual position is admitted.
When there is no other eligible candidate to be appointed, there is no question of giving any direction to consider the case of the petitioner.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that this is a fit case where the Court can direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner as a Junior Engineer as against the reserved category of reserved vacancy for Scheduled Castes.
If there is no vacancy at present, the respondents are directed to create a supernumerary post and appoint the petitioner as Junior Engineer in that post.
11.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed but without costs.
Petition allowed.