TH B Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed invoking the certiorarial jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the order passed by respondent No. 3 on August 9, 1994, and the order of Respondent No. 2 dated January 6, 1995, which are attached to the writ petition as Annexure P-1 and P-2 respectively.
2.
The petitioner appeared for B.Ed.
Examination held in April 1994 with Roll No. 2348 at Lopon Examination Centre in Faridkot District.
On April 25, 1994, the examination in Economics paper was held.
The petitioner was given the answer-sheet.
Thereafter, she obtained another answer-sheet and after completing the answer book, she handed over the same to the concerned Examiner, Incharge at the Centre.
At the time of evaluating the answer paper, the Examiner found that the additional or continuation sheet attached to the original answer book was a smuggled one and that there was a difference in handwriting and ink on the additional/continuation sheet when compared with the main answer sheet and he also found that some part of one answer was cancelled by the petitioner as no question was given in the question paper to which the said answer found in the continuation sheet related.
Therefore, the Examiner opined that the candidate used unfair means.
Accordingly, proceedings were initiated by the authorities against the petitioner for using unfair means in the examination.
Show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner and she submitted her reply.
The Committee was constituted and the Committee after giving an opportunity or hearing to the petitioner, disqualified the petitioner from appearing in any University Examination for a period of four years including the examination in question.
Against the orders of the Committee, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Vice- Chancellor of University, namely, respondent No. 2, who dismissed the appeal.
Challenging the disqualification imposed on her, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
3.
There is no dispute that the petitioner appeared in B.Ed.
Examination held in April 1994 and she attached one additional/continuation sheet to the original answer book.
According to the authorities of the University, the additional/continuation sheet has been smuggled in the Examination Hall and it was attached to the original answer sheet, therefore, the petitioner is guilty of indulging in unfair means at the Examination Centre.
The Committee constituted for the purposes of enquiry and taking action against the erring candidate, gave an opportunity to the petitioner to submit her explanation and also heard the petitioner in person.
After considering the entire material on record, the Committee found that the candidate had smuggled the inner pages of some continuation sheets in the Examination Centre on the date of the examination.
It was also found that the writing on the sheets which were inside the title cover had been written by the candidate very closely and she also gave answers to irrelevant questions.
It was also found that in her main answer book, she left enough margin and space between the various words but in the case of continuation sheet, the space between the various words is very little.
The candidate admitted before the Committee that handwriting in the answer sheets is that of her but she is not in a position to explain as to how she left more space in the original answer sheet and how had written closely in the continuation sheet.
She also could not explain as to why she had written answers for the questions which were not found in the question paper.
After considering all the material available, the Committee found that the petitioner adopted unfair means in the examination hall and accordingly disqualified her from appearing in any University Examination for a period of four years.
4.
This finding is based on a proper perusal of the evidence by the Committee after affording a full opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of this Court in Vinay Sharma v. Punjabi University, Patiala reported as 1992(3) RSJ 456 but that decision is of no assistance to the petitioner.
In that case, the learned Judge found that the entire material as noticed by the Committee in support of its conclusion had not been put to the petitioner and, therefore, the principles of natural justice have been violated but in the case on hand, the entire material was brought to the notice of the petitioner.
5.
It is useful to extract the following passage from Suresh Roshy George v. University of Kerala and others, A.I.R. 1969 SC 198 :-  "What, then, are the requirements of natural justice in a case of this kind ?
Firstly I think that the person accused should know the nature of the accusation made; secondly that he should be given an opportunity to state his case; and thirdly, of course, that the tribunal should act in good faith.
I do not think that there really is anything more."
The decision of the Judicial Committee in University of Ceylon v. Fernando, 1960-1 All ER 631 appears to go much further than what was laid down in the aforementioned case.
For the purpose of this case it is not necessary to take assistance from the ratio of that decision.
Suffice it to say that in the case before us there was a fair inquiry against the appellant the officer appointed to inquire was an impartial person he cannot be said to have been biased against the appellant; the charge against the appellant was made known to him before the commencement of the inquiry; the witnesses who gave evidence against him were examined in his presence and he was allowed to cross-examine them and lastly he was given every opportunity to present his case before the Inquiry Officer.
Hence we see no merit in the contention that there was any breach of the principles of natural justice."
It has been held in Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. KS Gandhi and others, 1991(2) SCC 716 : 1991(2) SCT 611(SC) as follows :- "We remind ourselves that while exercising the powers, under Article 226 or Article 136 of the Constitution, by the High Court or of this Court, we are not sitting as a Court of appeal on the findings of facts recorded by the Standing Committee (domestic enquiry body), nor have power to evaluate the evidence as an appeal court and to come its own conclusions.
If the conclusions reached by the Board can be fairly supported by the evidence on record then the High Court or this Court has to uphold the decision, though as appellate court of facts, may be inclined to take a different view."
The Apex Court further held as follows :- "We have no hesitation to conclude that when the evidence justified the Education Standing Committee to record the finding that the examinees, parents or guardians are parties to the fabrication, it is not open to the High Court under Article 226 to itself evaluate the evidence and to interfere with the finding and to quash the impugned notification.
This Court under Article 136 has to correct the illegalities committed by the High Court when it exceeded its supervisory jurisdiction under Article 226."
I am, therefore, of the opinion that there are no grounds warranting interference with the orders of respondents Nos. 2 and 3.
Writ Petition is devoid of any merit and is accordingly dismissed but without costs.