RP Sethi, J - Scaling of punishments and the manner of their award is the question of law required to be settled in this appeal.
The punishments have been directed to be inflicted according to the scales detailed in Section 73 of the Air Force Act, 1950 (for short the 'Act').
2.
The facts required to be noticed to answer the question of law posed before us are that the respondent-writ petitioner was tried by the Court Martial held at No. 7 Wing Air Force on 2181986 for eight charges under Section 39(a) of the Act.
The charges were detailed in Annexure P/3 to which the writ petitioner pleaded guilty.
The Court Martial sentenced the writ petitioner:  (a) to be reduced to rank; and  (b) to undergo detention for three months.
The petitioner submitted a mercy petition to the punishing authority under Section 161(1) of the Act praying for taking a lenient view keeping in view the 20 years unblemished service career.
The confirming authority, however, changed the sentence of detention with that of dismissal from service which according to the writ petitioner amounted to enhancement of the sentence.
He pleaded that the effect of the punishment awarded by the Court Martial was that he was to be reduced to rank and after undergoing the punishment he was entitled to continue in service of the Indian Air Force as a Leading Air Craftsman after being reduced from the rank of substantive Sergeant (Acting Junior Warrant Officer).
3.
The action was justified by the appellant on the ground that all the provisions of law as contained in the Act or the Rules made thereunder had fully been complied with.
The mercy petition is stated to have been duly considered by the confirming authority before passing the order.
It was submitted that the confirming authority awarded the lower punishment to the writ petitioner.
The punishment of detention was stated to be higher than dismissal service in the scales of punishment set in Section 73 of the Act.
As the sentence was commuted from punishment of three months' detention to dismissal from the service, the petitioner could not have any grievance.
It is, however, submitted that the petitioner could have continued in service if the punishment was not commuted by the confirming authority.
4.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition after holding that the confirming authority had in fact awarded the punishment to the writ petitioner higher than that which was awarded by the General Court Martial.
It was further held that the action of the respondents was beyond the provisions of Section 157 of the Act.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Section 71 of the Act provides:- "83.
Punishments awardable by Courts-martial.
- Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by Court Martial according to the scale following that is to say- (a) death; (b) transportation for life or for any period not less than seven years, in respect of civil offences; (c) imprisonment, either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years; (d) detention for a term not exceeding two years in the case of airmen; (e) cashiering, in the case of officers; (f) dismissal from service; (g) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or classification, in the case of warrant officers and non-commissioned officers; Provided that a warrant officer reduced to the ranks shall not be required to serve in the rank as an airman; (h) forfeiture of seniority of rank, in the case of officers/warrant officers and non-commissioned officers; and forfeiture of all or any part of their service for the purpose of promotion, in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of service; (i) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose; (j) severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers, warrant officers and non-commissioned officers; (k) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence committed on active service; (l) forfeiture, in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service, of all arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or dismissal; (m) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted is made good."
6.
The punishments awarded under the Act are required to be inflicted according to the Scales prescribed under Section 73 of the Act.
The scales determined by the legislature can neither be adjudicated nor substituted by the Court whatsoever be the reason.
The punishment of imprisonment having been prescribed then the dismissal from service could not be termed to be a lesser punishment as has been done by the learned Single Judge.
If the legislature in its wisdom had thought it proper to scale the imprisonment as a higher punishment than the dismissal from service, the Court could not read between the lines for the purposes of determining the legality of the action impugned in the Court.
The Courts have been limited power to interpret the law without legislating, altering or substituting it on the basis of their opinion or views.
Otherwise also under the constitutional system prevalent in our country the right of personal liberty has been acknowledged to be the paramount right which cannot be substituted.
Article 21 of the Constitution unambiguously declares that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law.
The inclusion of personal liberty in the Chapter of fundamental rights is indicative of concern of the constitutional framers in the personal liberty of the individuals.
To come to the conclusion that the punishment awarded to be respondents was considered higher than the one awarded by the General Court Martial, the learned Single Judge held:  "A perusal of the above provision shows that the confirming authority can 'mitigate or remit the punishment' or 'commute' a 'punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in Section 73.
In the present case, the confirming authority has converted the punishment awarded by the General Court Martial to that of dismissal.
As a result of this punishment, the petitioner who is stated to be about 40 years of age, was deprived of the right to continue in service till the age of superannuation viz. 55 years.
Furthermore, he was also deprived of the right to get pension etc.
In the circumstances of the case, it is apparent that the punishment of dismissal has not only resulted in his immediate unemployment but also deprivation of the retirement benefits which had already become due to him on completion of 15 years service.
As against this, the punishment as originally awarded by the General Court Martial would have only resulted in forfeiture of service for the period of detention viz. 3 months.
The petitioner would have, thereafter continued in service and even earned his future promotions etc. At the end of the tenure, he would have been entitled to all service benefits.
In the written statement it has been averred that the punishment of dismissal from service appears to be lesser than that of detention and is consequently lower in scale.
A perusal of Section 73 no doubt shows that the imprisonment can be for a term not exceeding 14 years and detention for a term not exceeding 2 years in the case of airmen.
In other cases, even detention can be for a higher term.
In that context it may be possible to hold that imprisonment or detention when awarded for a longer term, dismissal may be a lesser punishment.
However, in the context of the facts of the present case, it appears difficult to hold that the punishment of dismissal was lower than that of reduction in rank and detention for 3 months.
In a poor country where it is difficult to get a job, the need for two square meals a day is the primary concern of every citizen.
Dismissal would not only deprive the petitioner of the job but also of all retirement benefits.
He thus appears to be right in his contention that the punishment awarded by the confirming authority is severer than that awarded by the General Court Martial."
The approach adopted by the learned Single Judge in interpreting the provisions of Section 73 of the Act was contrary to the settled position of law.
The writ petitioner could not be held to have been awarded higher punishment by the confirming authority than the punishment awarded by the General Court Martial.
Under similar circumstances, the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 1800 of 1988 (Inderpal Singh v. UOI) decided on 14.9.1990 had held:-  "For civil offences covered under Section 71 of the Air Force Act, 1950 the lists of punishment awardable by a Court Martial are provided in Section 73 in a scaled manner.
Whereas detention for a period not exceeding two years in case of an Airman is provided at point (d) dismissal from service is provided at point (f).
Likewise forefeiture of rank is provided at point (h) and severe reprimand at point (j).
Section 157 confers on the Air Marshal power of confirmation mitigating or remitting the punishment awarded or commuting that punishment to any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in Section 73.
The clear mandate of the law is that a punishment can be commuted down that ladder in the manner given in Section 73 only and has to be understood in the sense of commutation as given thereunder and not any other sense of measuring of commutation.
Admittedly, dismissal from service in the ladder ranks lower to a punishment of detention though it is true that it ranks higher than punishment of forfeiture of seniority of rank.
The Air Marshal was careful to touch and commute the sentence of detention only bringing it down to dismissal from service."
7.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents has submitted that his client was prepared to undergo higher punishment and that the confirming authority was not justified in dismissing him from service without assigning any valid reason.
It is submitted that this Court may consider the desirability of altering the punishment by approving the punishment awarded by the Court Martial and dis-approving the one awarded by the confirming authority.
8.
The settled position of law is that the High Court while exercising writ jurisdiction cannot interfere with the sentence awarded by the Court Martial and confirmed by the competent authority under normal circumstances.
The question of choice of quantum of punishment is admittedly within the jurisdiction and discretion of the authority under the Act.
However, if the sentence is proved to have been awarded against the provisions of law prevalent in the country the same can be corrected by this Court as all actions of the authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution are subject to judicial review.
The Supreme Court in Ranjit Thakur v. UOI, AIR 1987 SC 2386 had held:  "....
Judicial review generally speaking, is not directed against decision, but is directed against the "decision making process".
The question of the choice and quantum of punishment is within the jurisdiction and discretion of the Court Martial.
But the sentence has to suit the offence and the offender.
It should not be vindictive or unduly harsh.
It should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of the bias.
The doctrine of judicial review would ensure that even on an aspect which is, otherwise, within the exclusive province of the Court Martial, if the decision of the Court even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance of logic, then sentence would not be immune from correction.
Irrationality and perversity are recognised grounds of judicial review.
In council of Civil Service Union v. Minister for the Civil Service, (1984) WIR 1174(HL) Lord Deplock said:- "...
Judicial Review has, I think, developed to a stage today when without reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the development has come about, one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review.
The first ground I would call illegality, the second irrationality and the third procedural impropriety.
That is not to say that further development on a case by case basis may not in course of time add further grounds.
I have in mind particularly the possible adoption in the future of the principle of proportionality which is recognised in the administrative law of several of our fellow members of the European Economic Community...." In Bhagat Ram v. State of HP, AIR 1983 SC 454, the Supreme Court had held:-  ".....It is equally true that the penalty imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and that any penalty disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct would be violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution."
Similar views have been expressed by a Division Bench of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in Ranbir Singh v. General Court Martial, 1991 K.L.J.
56.
9.
In the instant case, eight charges were levelled against the writ petitioner which pertain to his absence from duty without leave ranging from hours to some days to which he pleaded guilty.
The Court Martial thereafter sentenced him to reduction to the ranks and for undergoing detention for three months.
The confirming authority vide Annexure P/3 held, " the findings and sentence of the Court were confirmed by the AOC-in-C.
W.A.C., IAF while confirming the sentence has commuted the punishment to undergo detention for three months to "to be dismissed from the service."
10.
In his appeal under Section 161 (sic) of the Act, the respondent had submitted:-  "That the appellant prompted for rendering the service towards nation, enrolled himself in the Indian Air Force on 18.2.1965 in the trade of Clerk GD.
The following is the data of the appellant with regard to service promotions etc. and leading to his attaining the rank of acting Junior Warrant Officer:- (i) date of enrolment 18.2.1965 (ii) Reclassification 1.8.1966 (iii) -do- to LAC 121968 (iv) promoted to CPL 18.2.1970 (v) -do- Sgt 1.8.1980 (vi) -do- JWD 1.4.1985.
(acting paid rank of JWO)  That during his entire service career the appellant remained at the following Air Force Stations/Units:- (i) 3 S.A.C.
AF Dec 65 to Sept 68 (ii) 12 Wing Air Force Sept 68 to May 72 (iv) HW MO(U) April 76 to March 80.
(v) Air Defence College Air Force April 80 to August, 1986.
(vi) No. 7 Wing Air Force April 84 to August, 1986.
It is pertinent to mention that the appellant worked to the satisfaction of all superior officers whenever he was posted.
He was always given very good ACRs and he got his promotion in time.
During his service period from 1821965 to July, 1985 his entire record was clean and there was no adverse entry in the document and the appellant was never placed on charge nor any punishment awarded nor censured/admonished during his more than 20 years of service in the Indian Air Force.
That due to unfortunate circumstances coupled with the severe illness of the father of the appellant and other connected matters, the appellant was mentally deranged/sick and lost sense of mind somewhere in the month of July 1985 onward and unintentionally lost the interest (without any knowledge of the appellant), the appellant reported sick but was turned back saying that he is all right.
The careless treatment of the petitioner/appellant resulted in his absence from service for few days and in the meantime the appellant's father died on/in 2nd October 1985.
The appellant suffered another shock of unconsciousness and which resulted in further derangement of mind and mental disturbance was aggravated due to unfortunate events taking place at his residence/home town.
The appellant remained absent from duties at intervals and which resulted in attracting of service formalities and ultimately the appellant was tried by Court Martial.
It is pertinent to mention that due to carelessness attributable to the Medical Authority which failed to take timely action, the appellant was found to have absented himself from service eight times within a span of about 8 months ranging from few hours to 16 days and so on.
In fact the appellant never knew regarding his absence which was unintentional and without knowledge due to the circumstances mentioned above.
That the behaviour of the appellant was above board and he served the service in Indian Air Force from July 65 to July 85 with full zeal and enthusiasm without scoring any adverse remark.
But from July to April 1986 he remained absent from duty due to mental sickness about eight times unintentionally and without knowledge."
It appears that the confirming authority was persuaded to take a lenient view in the matter while deciding to reduce the punishment from imprisonment to dismissal.
However, the effect of commutation of the sentence was otherwise.
No reason was assigned for substituting the sentence of dismissal from service for the sentence of detention of three months as awarded by the Court Martial.
11.
Section 157 empowers the confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute the sentence.
It reads :-  "156.
Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences :- (1) Subject to such restrictions, reservations or conditions as may be contained in any warrant issued under Section 153 or Section 154 and to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), a confirming authority may, when confirming the sentence of a court-martial, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in Section 73.
(2) A sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentence of imprisonment or detention for a term exceeding the term of transportation awarded by the Court.
(3) A sentence of imprisonment shall not be commuted for a sentence of detention for a term exceeding the term of imprisonment awarded by the Court."
Mitigation under the said section means awarding less amount of the same species of punishment whereas the remission may be the whole or of part of the sentence awarded.
Commutation is changing the description of punishment by awarding the punishment lower in the scale of punishment under the Act.
We are sure that as the confirming authority was persuaded to change the description of the punishment by awarding the punishment lower in the scale of punishments described under the Act, it had never intended to award the sentence which would be otherwise affecting harshly not only to the respondents but to his family as well.
Under the peculiar facts and circumstances as noticed by the learned Single Judge, there does not appear to be any justification for awarding the commuted sentence of dismissal from service instead of detention for three months as awarded by the General Court Martial.
We are of the opinion that the punishment awarded by the confirming authority did not suit either the offence or the offender which was admittedly unduly harsh and disproportionate to the offence.
Feeling it to be a rarest of the rare case, we are inclined to interfere with the quantum of punishment which otherwise admittedly is within the domain and jurisdiction of the Court Martial.
The respondent has opted and declared to undergo imprisonment as awarded by the Court Martial, without praying for mitigating, remission or commutation of the sentence.
In view of the judgments of the Supreme Court noted herein above and of the Division Bench of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court, we are of the opinion that it is a fit and proper case where the sentence awarded by the confirming authority is required to be modified.
Accordingly, the sentence awarded to the respondent-writ petitioner by the confirming authority is directed to be substituted as awarded by the Court Martial.
In view of what we have discussed hereinabove, the appeal is disposed of by setting aside the impugned orders Annexures P/2 and P/4 in the writ petition.
The respondent after having been held guilty is directed to be awarded the punishment of to be reduced to ranks and to undergo detention for three months.
He is further held entitled to consequential benefits excluding the salary for the period he has not served the force.
Petition allowed.