Doabia, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is directed against an order passed by the General Manager, Central Warehousing Corporation hereinafter referred to as the Corporation.
The copy of this order is annexed as P.1.
The petitioner stands removed from service.
An appeal was preferred against the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
This stands dismissed.
Copy of this order is annexure P2.
2.
The petitioner was proceeded against for certain acts of omission and commission.
These charges be noticed.
These read as under :  Article of Charge I  "That the said Shri JS Brah, Supdt.
while functioning as Warehouse Manager at Central Warehouse, Mullanpur during August 1986 colluded with Shri Tarsem Lal and other staff members and suppressed material information of misappropriation of 141 bags of wheat from godown No. 31 and pilferage/shortage of 29 bags of urea from godown No. 30 and kept higher authorities i.e. Head Office/Regional Office in dark about it.
He also allowed Shri Tarsem Lal WA1 to make good the stock misappropriated and accepted the wheat bags which were weighing 8776 Kgs per bag on an average as against 95 Kgs per bag originally misappropriated.
Thereby he has put the Corporation to a loss of about 1021 Kgs of wheat.
Thus, the said Shri JS Brah contravened Regulation 39(1)(a) and (b) of CWC (Staff) Regulations, 1986.
That the said Shri JS Brah while working in the said capacity at the aforementioned warehouse failed to ensure that the staff working under him maintains absolute integrity and performs their duties with devotion and thus contravened Regulation 39(ii) of CWC (Staff) Regulations, 1986.
The petitioner was found guilty of the charges referred to above.
3.
As indicated above, he stands removed from service.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the enquiry proceeding and also the final order by which the petitioner was removed from service.
This has been done on merits.
An additional point which has been urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that another officer namely Shri DS Braich was also found guilty of similar lapses.
As a matter of fact, one charge is common.
The petitioner as well as Shri DS Braich were found wanting in effecting proper supervision over the subordinate staff.
141 bags of wheat from Godown No. 31 were stolen.
The allegation is that petitioner was remiss in informing the police and also the higher authorities regarding the theft.
It was alleged that the petitioner as well as the above mentioned Shri DS Braich permitted the culprits to replace the bags.
The replaced bags were weighed.
These were found short of wheat.
Shortage was by about 8 Kgs.
As indicated above, it was this act of omission and commission coupled with allegation of lack of supervision qua which the present petitioner was found to be guilty and was removed from service.
So far as DS Braich is concerned in addition to the above charge there was an additional charge to the effect that 29 bags of urea were found to be missing.
Similar charge of lack of supervision and failure to inform the higher authorities was made.
This aspect of the matter is dealt with in annexure R II.
Relevant paragraphs are 914, 101, 103, 105, 106.
These be noticed :  914 "Further, it is also to be noted here that the entries in the stock registers and the depositors ledger show that the closing balance of fertilizer was added with a separate figure of 20 right after the detection of the shortage, till the so called final declaration by the WM and Tarsemlal.
As rightly pointed out by the PO the laid down procedure of the Corporation lays down very clearly that any shortage or excess found have to be recorded in a separate register, besides informing the RM immediately.
This was not done.
Further, recording of "1-20" in all the closing balance datewise establish that there was no recovery on various dates during deliveries as claimed by the defence.
They deliberately made an attempt to defeat the discovery of shortage and added 1 to 20" right after the discovery and waited for the lapse of some time to declare that they have recovered the short bags.
Even going by their claim it will be surprising to see as to how there was not other shortage due to faulty stacking in any other stock.
How is that they recorded only the exact number of bags, which were found short during deliveries, and not a bag more of less ?
In the circumstances, we are left with no doubt about the involvement of Shri JS Brah and DS Braich alongwith Shri Tarsemlal in this unauthorised cover up.
Another important lapse has to find place here.
The witnesses spoke about the non-issue of gate pass and the non-maintenance of gate register, etc.
This is a very serious lapse in the warehousing operation and it is shocking how this was allowed to happen.
CO-I, as WM has to be squarely held responsible for this."
101 ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCES WITH REGARD TO THE CHARGES AGAINST SHRI D.S.
BRAICH, TA, CO-II.
"He was charged that he did not report about the misappropriation of 141 bags of wheat and the shortage of 29 bags of urea.
The statement of allegations described the incident of removal of 141 bags of wheat and added that on 11386 Tarsemlal met him at the bus stand at about 900 am and handed over the office keys.
It concluded that the misappropriation took place only with the connivance of CO-II."
103 However, it is seen that the CO had not reported the matter to any of his higher Authorities.
It was not explained by the CO as to why he had not recorded the matter of the shortage, which occurred in his godown.
It was also not known as to why as Godown Incharge he had not verified the returned stock and ensured whether they were the same.
He had also not bothered to verify the weight of returned stock.
Are we to assume that the CO-II had kept silence since the WM himself was on the spot and took charge of the situation ?
It is also known as to why it did not occur to him to report to the RM about this incident.
Are we to assume that the CO had thought that it was the lookout of the MM ?
As the second incharge of the Warehouse, he should have advised the MM to take suitable action against Tarsemlal and Inderjit Singh.
Why had he kept quiet ?
No appropriate answers for these questions are forthcoming.
The dilemma is that whether the CO should be considered as an indifferent man who took things for granted or as a man who was passively co-operative, if not actively, with the culprits?
As there was no direct evidence available to show the involvement of the CO-II in this misappropriation and also that the CO-I (WM) himself was very much Incharge of the Warehouse and the situation, I am not inclined to hold the CO-II guilty of this charge."
105 Though Tarsemlal claimed to have informed CO-II and CO-I about the shortage of 29 bags of urea in G.No.
30 before he went on leave on 591986 after the matter was found out by Shri JV Bendre and that too a shortage of only 20 bags.
However, from the circumstances that came to light it has to be held that the shortage of 20 bags, if not 29, was within the knowledge of one CO Shri JV Bendre had categorically stated that the second layer from the top of the concerned stock was less by 20 bags, which goes to prove that it was done deliberately by the concerned staff i.e. Shri Tarsemlal and Shri DS Braich.
We have already seen that the claim of faulty stacking cannot be accepted for the reason discussed therewith.
Hence the obvious presumption would be that the CO-II had the knowledge of shortage of urea bags.
We have also discussed above two claims that the shortage was recovered at subsequent dates etc. could also not be accepted for the reasons mentioned there.
106 The CO had failed to follow the HO instructions with regard to the accounting and reporting of excess/shortage bags.
It is also to be noted here that as Godown Incharge, he was responsible for the quality and quantity of the stocks held in the godown.
It is surprising that it should have escaped his notice that there was a shortage of 20 bags in one layer as he was expected to supervise the transaction.
Therefore, it could not be believed that he was not aware that there was 20 bags shortage and came to know only on 591986.
The charge levelled against the CO in this regard is held as proved.
This DS Braich has merely been reverted.
This becomes apparent from the perusal of order Annexure P-1.
4.
This learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the allegation in the statement of charge that the petitioner did not inform the police authorities is incorrect.
According to him, the police authorities were duly informed by the petitioner.
He however submits that the petitioner would be satisfied if he is accorded the same treatment as was given to DS Braich.
He submits that for similar lapses, different punishment has been imposed.
Two different functionaries have been dealt with differently.
This according to the learned counsel would not fall within the parameters contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
5.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner's and DS Braich's misconduct should be judged by the same standard.
For this proposition, he has placed reliance on a decision reported as AIR 1983 Supreme Court 454 para 10 (Bhagat Ram v. State of HP)  Para 10.
"Let us make it abundantly clear that we are not sitting in appeal over the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
In a petition under Article 226, the High Court does not function as a Court of appeal over the findings of disciplinary authority.
But where the finding is utterly perverse, the Court can always interfere with the same.
We may refer in this connection to Union of India v. HC Goel, (1964) 4 SCR 718 at p. 728 : (AIR 1964 SC 364 at p. 369), Gajendra Gadkar, J speaking for the Court observed as under: "It still remains to be considered whether the respondent is not right when he contends that in the circumstances of this case, the conclusion of the Government is based on no evidence whatever.
It is a conclusion which is perverse and, therefore, suffers from such an obvious and patent error on the face of the record that the High Court would be justified in quashing it.
In dealing with writ petitions filed by the public servants who have been dismissed, or otherwise dealt with so as to attract Article 311(2), the High Court under Article 226 has jurisdiction to enquire whether the conclusion of the Government on which the impugned order of dismissal rests is not supported by any evidence at all.
It is true that the order of dismissal which may be passed against a Government servant found guilty of misconduct, can be described as an administrative order; nevertheless, the proceedings held against such a public servant under statutory rules to determine whether he is guilty of the charge framed against him are in the nature of quasi- judicial proceedings and there can be little doubt that a writ of certiorari, for instance, can be claimed by a public servant if he is able to satisfy the High Court that the ultimate conclusion of the Govt. in the said proceedings, which is the basis of his dismissal, is based on no evidence."
After applying this test in that case, the Court proceeded to have a close look at the evidence that was led in the case and in the circumstances of the case rejected the evidence of Shri Rajagopalan, who claimed to have given the bribe and reached the conclusion that the finding of the Government holding the delinquent officer guilty of accepting bribe was perverse and unsupported by any evidence.
More or less the facts before us almost lead to the same conclusion."
The judgment in the case of Sengara Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1994 SC 1499 has also been relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In fact, this appears to be a direct authority for the proposition canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Observations made in para 9 are relevant and be noticed:  "Now if the indiscipline of a large number of personnel amongst dismissed personnel could be condoned or overlooked and after withdrawing the criminal cases against them, they could be reinstated, we see no justification in treating the present appellants differently without pointing out how they were guilty of more serious misconduct or the degree of indiscipline in their case was higher than compared to those who were reinstated.
Respondents failed to explain to the Court the distinguishing features and, therefore, we are satisfied in putting all of them in same bracket.
On that conclusion the treatment meted to the present appellants suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and Art. 14 forbids any arbitrary action which would tantamount to denial of equality as guarantened by Art. 14 of the Constitution.
The Court must accordingly interpose and quash the discriminatory action."
In another judgment which lays down a proposition that in case the punishment inflicted is harsh the court may also take notice of that be also noticed.
This is reported in Union of India v. Giriraj Sharma, AIR 1984 SC 215.
The order of dismissal was set aside leaving the departmental authorities to impose a minor punishment.
6.
Thus there appears to be merit in the contention of the petitioner.
Two officers were involved with regard to shortage of 141 bags of wheat.
DS Braich was proceeded with in another matter also i.e. shortage of 29 bags of ureas.
If DS Braich has been dealt leniently then there is no justification to not to accord the same treatment to the petitioner.
7.
One question arises as to whether the relief should be granted straight way in this proceeding or this matter be left to be determined the disciplinary authority.
The learned counsel for the respondents submits that this is a matter which falls within the domain of power which is exercised by the disciplinary authority and this should according to him be left to be decided by the departmental authorities.
8.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that even this Court can straighaway grant relief.
According to him, whatever cause the petitioner is supposed to show before the disciplinary authority can be shown to this Court also and this Court can record a finding in this regard.
He has placed reliance on a decision of Supreme Court reported as Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, AIR 1994 SC 1074 : 1994(1) SCT 319(SC).
According to him, in the above decision, the Supreme Court did observe that where there is denial of natural justice and an allegation is made regarding prejudice then the case need not to be remanded in routine, and the Court can examine and if it is possible can give relief.
The relevant observations in this regard be noticed.
These read as under :  "If after hearing the parties, the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the non-supply of the report would have made no difference to the ultimate findings and the punishment given, the Court/Tribunal should not interfere with the order of punishment.
The Court/Tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is regrettably being done at present.
The courts should avoid resorting to short-cuts.
Since it is the Courts/Tribunals which will apply their judicial mind to the question and give their reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment (and not any internal appellate or revisional authority), there would be neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of the reasonable opportunity.
It is only if the Courts/Tribunal find that the furnishing of the report would have made a difference to the result in the case that it should set aside the order of punishment."
The same view is found in Bhagat Ram v. State of HP, AIR 1983 SC 454.
In para 15, it was observed as under:  " The question is once we quash the order, is it open to us to give any direction which would not permit a fresh inquiry to be held ?
After all what is the purpose of holding a fresh inquiry ?
Obviously, it must be to impose some penalty.
It is equally true that the penalty imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct, and that any penalty disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Having been influenced by all these relevant considerations, we are of opinion that no useful purpose would be served by a fresh inquiry.
What option is open to us in exercise of our jurisdiction under Art. 136 to make an appropriate order.
We believe that justice and fair play demand that we make an order of minor penalty here and now without being unduly technical apart jurisdiction, we are fortified in this view by the decision of this Court in Hindustan Steels Ltd, Rourkela v. AK Roy, (1970) 3 SCR 343 AIR : 1970 SC 1401, where this Court after quashing the order of reinstatement proceeded to examine whether the party should be left to pursue further remedy.
Other alternative was to remand the matter that being a case of an industrial dispute to the Tribunal.
It is possible that on such a remand this Court further observed, that the Tribunal may pass an appropriate order but that would mean prolonging the dispute which would hardly be fair or conducive to the interest of the parties.
This Court in such circumstances proceeded to make an appropriate order by awarding compensation.
We may adopt the same approach.
Keeping in view, the nature of misconduct, gravity of charge and no consequential loss, a penalty of withholding his increments with future effect will meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, two increments with future effect of the appellant be withheld and he must be paid 50% of the arrears from the date of termination till the date of reinstatement."
9.
I am of the view that this is a matter where a direction can be given straighaway.
The parameters for awarding of punishment have been laid down in the case of Shri DS Braich.
The case of the petition is no different.
His misconduct should be judged with the same standard.
Accordingly the petitioner should also be visited with a penalty of reversion.
This reversion should be one step below the present post.
I order accordingly.
10.
The question as to whether the petitioner is entitled to back wages or not be also considered.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the view of this Court is that back wages can be given.
According to him there is no justification to not to grant back wages and at least these wages be given with effect from the date order was passed in the case of DS Braich.
He has stated that the petitioner filed this petitioner in 1990 and merely because this petition has remained pending in this Court, the petitioner should not be penalised for that.
The petitioner submits that an order should be passed not only reinstating the petitioner but also direction should be given for payment of back wages.
As to what parameters are to be followed in the matter of granting back wages was considered by this Court in the case record as Pradeep Kumar Puranik v. Public Instructions, M.P. Bhopal and others, 1995 Labour and Industrial Cases 2554 : 1996(1) SCT 716.
The various decisions dealing with this aspect have been noticed.
These paras be noticed again:  "With regard to the question whether the employee is entitled to back wages or not and if backwages are to be given then what should be the quantum may now be examined.
The learned counsel appearing for the employee has placed reliance on the decision given by Hon.
Shri Justice AK Mathur in Datia Central Cooperative Bank Ltd v. Prabhu Dayal Dwivedi, 1994 RN 269.
According to him, the employee is entitled to full back wages on the same reasoning which was made applicable in the afore-mentioned case.
It may be seen that in Sevaram v. Board of Revenue, 1983 MPLJ 645 : 1983 Lab IC 1565 (FB) the order of termination of the employee was set aside and a direction was given to grant him full pecuniary benefits.
Similar is the opinion expressed in Gwalior Distt.
Co-op.
Central Bank v. Mannilal, 1986 RN 8.
As against the above, reference may be made to MPSRTC v. Mathura Prasad Sharma, 1991(2) MPJR (SC) 176, wherein backwages were denied because the employee had remained absent without leave for long duration.
The other decisions taking the same view are : Jitendra Singh Rathore v. Shri Baidhyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd., (1984) 3 SCC 5 : 1984 Lab IC 554 and Kashi Prasad v. District Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Tikamgarh, 1993(1) MPJR 362.
Taking note of all the aforementioned cases Hon.
Shri Justice AK Mathur in Datia Central Co-operative Bank Ltd (supra) observed as under : "From a review of all the cases mentioned above it appears that no hard and fast rule can be laid down that in which case the back wages should be allowed or in which case half back wages should be allowed or in which case total back wages should be denied.
All the cases have been decided on their peculiar facts, but in the present case, the order of termination has been set aside by the Board of Revenue as a result of the defect in the departmental inquiry and the incumbent had reached to the post of Manager and more than 20 years elapsed, therefore, it is neither expedient to order fresh inquiry nor it would be just and proper to deny the petitioner back wages.
Therefore, keeping in view equity, I direct that the order of the Board of Revenue to the extent of denying the petitioner back wages is set aside.
Nor it is expedient now after a lapse of more than 20 years to hold an inquiry against the stale claim and more so, the petitioner is said to be due to retire somewhere in June, 1994."
In HMT Ltd v. Labour Court, Ernakulam, (1994) 2 SCC 38, the dispute related to dismissal and remained pending for 14 years.
The Supreme Court awarded 60% back wages.
In the case of Dr. RC Tyagi, (1994) 2 SCC 416, the Supreme Court granted backwages to the extent of one-third.
This court while deciding second appeal No. 68 of 1993 in the case of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board v. Parvat Singh granted payment of one-half back wages," 11.
Taking into consideration the aforementioned judicial precedents, it would be just and proper to direct the respondent to pay 50% of the back wages which the petitioner would have earned on the reverted post.
This petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.