GS Singhvi, J - In the first three writ petitions the petitioners have made exactly identical claims.
They have prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to release the cash payment equivalent to the amount of unutilised half-pay leave lying at the credit of the petitioners at the time of retirement and also for declaring rule 821 as ultra virus to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In the last mentioned writ petition an additional prayer has been made to strike down the cut off date of 111990 specified in order Annexure P-1 for grant of benefit of cash payment in lieu of the earned leave to the employees of the departments.
2.
A look at the averments made in writ petitions shows that the petitioners have retired from service while holding the posts of Headmasters/Teachers in various schools under the control of the Education Department of the Government of Punjab.
Petitioners have claimed that in terms of rule 821 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, they are entitled to encash the unutilised earned leave lying at their credit or the half-pay leave due to them at the time of their retirement, and that the respondents have acted unlawfully in depriving them of the benefit of cash payment in lieu of the half-pay leave due to their credit.
In C.W.P.
No. 4749 of 1993 it has also been pleaded that up to 1990 the employees of the Education Department were not given the benefit of leave encashment but vide notification Annexure P 1 dated 831990 the Government has extended the benefit of cash payment to the employees of the vacation departments as well.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the benefit of cash payment to the employees of the vacation departments in lieu of the unutilised leave has been confined to the staff retiring with effect 111990 onwards and those who stood retired prior to 111990 have been deprived of this benefit.
3.
The first argument of Shri Ashok Sharma Nabhewala is that rule 8116 read with rules 8112 and 821 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, cannot make any distinction between the employees belonging to different departments of the Government and, therefore, the discrimination brought about between the employees of the vacation departments and other departments is per se arbitrary, irrational and unconstitutional.
The learned counsel argued that the employees of the vacation departments are as much Government servants as are the employees of the other departments and, therefore, the denial of benefit of cash payment to the employees of the vacation departments is contrary to the equality clause enshrined in the Constitution.
The learned counsel strenuously argued that the difference brought about between the employees of the Education Department and of other departments does not have any rational relation with the object of grant of benefit of cash payment in lieu of the unutilised leave.
The learned counsel also challenged the action of the Government in not giving the benefit of cash payment in lieu of the half-pay leave lying at the credit of the petitioners on the date of their superannuation.
4.
The second argument of the learned counsel relates to the validity of the fixation of the cut off date in the order Annexure P.1 dated 831990.
Shri Nabhewala argued that when the Government has accepted, in principle, that the employees of the vacation departments should also be given the benefit of cash payment in lieu of the leave lying to their credit at the time of superannuation, no distinction can possibly be made between those who retired prior to 111990 and those who retired or would retire after 111990.
Shri Nabhewal submitted that fixation of 111990 as cut off date does not have any rational relation with the object sought to be achieved, namely, to give the benefit of leave encashment to the employees of the vacation departments .
He further argued that the respondents have failed to offer any rational justification for making a distinction between the employees retiring prior to 111990 and those retiring after that date.
He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983 S.C. 130.
Shri Randhir Singh, Assistant Advocate-General, Punjab, argued that the claim made by the petitioners who retired prior to 111990 cannot be accepted because the employees of the vacation departments constitute a different class and they cannot claim parity with the employees of other departments who are not entitled to the benefit of vacation.
Shri Singh argued that a Full Bench of this Court in Surjit Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) PLR 428 : 1992(3) SCT 485 (P&H), held that the distinction between the employees of the vacation departments and other employees does not suffer from any arbitrariness and, therefore, this issue must be treated as finally concluded.
He also relied on a decision of the Division Bench dated 31.8.1993 in CWP No. 5087 of 1993, 1994(1) SCT 276 (P&H) (DB)(Gurdev Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others).
Shri Randhir Singh also supported the fixation of cut off date 111990 on the ground that extension of the benefit of leave encashment to the employees of the Education Department is nothing more than a concession and the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of this concession because they stood retired proper to 111990.
Mr. Singh submitted that some date had to be chosen by the Government for giving the benefit of leave encashment to the employees of the Education department and as the policy decision has been taken in the year 1990, the cut off date of 111990 cannot be castigated as arbitrary, irrational, unconstitutional or unjust.
He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Sevanivatra Karamchari Hitkari Samiti, JT 1995 (1) SC 315 : 1995(3) SCT 86 (SC), and The State of Rajasthan and another v. Gopaldas, JT 1995 (1) SC 528 : 1995(1) SCT 365 (SC).
5.
In so far as the first argument of Shri Nabhewala is concerned, we are of the opinion that the issue stands finally decided by the decision of the Full Bench in Surjit Kumar Sharma's case (supra) and the decision of the Division Bench in Gurdev Singh's (supra).
It is also significant to mention that SLP filed against the judgment of the Division Bench in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) has been dismissed by the Supreme Court on 131994 by a speaking order.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that an employee is entitled to the benefit of leave encashment only in respect of the unutilised earned leave and not any other kind of leave.
This means that the Supreme Court has affirmed the proposition of law laid down by the Full Bench and the Division Bench that half-pay leave cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of extending the benefit of leave encashment to an employee after retirement.
6.
In regard to the second argument of Shri Nabhewala, we would like to mention that up to 1990 the benefit of cash payment in lieu of earned leave was not admissible to the employees of the vacation department and as we have already mentioned the difference between the employees of vacation departments and of other departments has been upheld by the Division Bench as well as by the Full Bench.
It can, thus, be said that in the year 1990 the Government for the first time decided to make a concession and extended the benefit of cash payment in lieu of the earned leave to the employees of the vacation departments as well.
This policy decision having been taken in the year 1990, the Government was bound to introduce some cut off date.
If no cut off date had been fixed the employees who had retired decades ago and even the legal representatives of those who had died in the meanwhile would have made a claim for cash payment in lieu of the leave which was due to their credit at the time of retirement.
This could not have been the intention of the Government while extending the benefit of cash payment in lieu of the unutilised earned leave to the employees of the vacation departments.
It cannot be accepted that even though this Court has upheld the classification between the vacation departments and the other departments the Government intended to ignore the law laid down by this Court and give benefit to those who lost cases in the Court.
7.
We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have failed to prima facie establish that the fixation of cut off date as 111990 in the order Annexure P 1 dated 831990 suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
The mere allegations that the petitioners have served in the vacation department and they constitute one class with the employees who are still serving the vacation departments cannot lead to a conclusion that the extension of the concession of cash payment in lieu of the unutilised earned leave to the employees of the vacation departments violates Articles 14 and 16 because the benefit of concession has not been given to those who stood retired prior to the issue of the order.
The law laid down by Supreme Court in DS Nakara's case (supra) has been explained and restricted in its applicability in the subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court in Krishan Kumar v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 1862; State of Rajasthan v. Rajasthan Pensioner Samaj, AIR 1991 SC 1743, and a number of other decisions.
In The State of Rajasthan and another v. Gopaldas (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court examined the claim of U.D.Cs of the subordinate offices of the Government of Rajasthan to be given the benefit of revised pay-scales with effect from 1.19.1981 on the ground of parity with the U.D.Cs of the Secretariat.
The respondents successfully contended before the High Court that once the Government had decided to extend the benefit of revised pay-scales to the U.D.Cs of the subordinate offices such benefit had to be extended from the date the revised pay scales were given to the U.D.Cs of the Secretariat.
While reversing the judgment of the High Court, the Supreme Court held that :-  "So far as the notification dated February 23, 1985, relating to the U.D.Cs of subordinate offices is concerned, it was not with a view to remove any anomaly or to make any provision for a category which was left out of the Rules.
It was a notification issued as a result of the acceptance of the demand of the UDCs of the subordinate offices for grant of higher pay-scale which was given to their counterparts in the Secretariat.
The High Court failed to appreciate that the factual basis for issuing the notificating dated January 23, 1985 and the fourteen notifications relied upon by the High Court was entirely different.
No fault could be found with the notification dated January 23, 1985 and the State Government and other UDCs of subordinate offices with effect from February 1, 1985."
In our opinion, the law laid down in the aforesaid cases fully apply to the facts of this case and we do not find any irrationality or arbitrariness in the fixation of 111990 as the date of applicability of the Goverment order dated 831990.
8.
In the result, all these writ petitions are dismissed.
We, however, make it clear that if the petitioners or any one of them is entitled to the benefit of leave encashment given to the employees of the vacation departments vide Government order No. 10/36/89-4EPI/2033 dated 831990, this judgment shall not be used for depriving that benefit to the petitioners or any one of them.
Similarly, the petitioners or any one of them shall not be deprived of the benefit of leave encashment in respect of the earned leave, if any due, only on the basis of the fact that the writ petition filed by such a petitioner has been dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.