T.S.Daobia, J - This order shall dispose of Writ Petition Nos. 129 of 1994 and 257 of 1994 (Dr. Rashmi Gadkari v. State of M.P. and others, 1994(4) SCT 687 (M.P.)) and (Dr. Suneeta Gupta v. State of M.P. and others), respectively.
The facts have been taken from the Writ Petition No. 129 of 1994.
2.
This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The brief facts out of which this petition arises may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner had completed her course of MBBS and also internship from Gajra Raja Medical College, Gwalior in the month of September, 1989.
She joined the house job in the Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics.
This was also completed by her in the year 1990.
She applied for further studies in the course of Gynaecology and Obstetrics in Gajra Raja Medical College, Gwalior.
She was denied admission.
She approached this Court by filing a writ and a direction was given by this Court to grant the requisite admission.
It may however be seen that the petitioner was adjusted against a seat which fell vacant out of quota of Assistant Surgeon.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner is that every student pursuing the Post Graduate studies in the Medical College is entitled to a monthly stipend but this is being denied to her.
This aspect of the matter has not been denied by the State but it is true that the denial is based on a sound logic.
According to the State as she was adjusted against the quota of Assistant Surgeon, she is not entitled to any stipend.
Reliance has also been placed on an order dated 6th April, 1994 said to have been to be issued in the case of the petitioner.
As per this office order, it was stated that the petitioner is being admitted against a non-stipendary seat of 1990 of Assistant Surgeon quota.
The petitioner, however, denies receipt of this letter.
5.
The question which arises is as to whether the denial of the stipend to the petitioner on the ground that she was given admission against the quota meant for Assistant Surgeon is valid or not.
The law permits reasonable classification and the classification must have some nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
If there is not valid classification and in case there is failure to establish the proper nexus with the object sought to be achieved then the artificial classification which may be created by the State may have to be struck down and ignored.
6.
When a student is given admission for pursuing studies in the higher courses, the object is to impart the requisite knowledge to the students.
The object in all the cases remains the same.
As such making a distinction between a student who was given admission against Assistant Surgeon quota or against some other quota cannot be said to be based on any rational.
7.
A similar matter came up for consideration in the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Dr. Satish Kumar Gupta and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) Recent Services Judgments 216.
A Doctor working with the State government and who had completed five years of service was entitled to receive full pay whereas a Doctor who had less than five years standing but more than three years was only entitled to a stipend.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court came to the conclusion that this classification has no rationale behind.
It was held that this was not based on any intelligible differentia and no distinction could be made between a doctor with five years or more service and those having less than five years' service.
It was observed as under :-  ...This further classification has in my opinion no rationale behind it and is not founded on any intelligible differentia which could distinguish the doctors with five years or more service from those having less than five years service.
When all relevant considerations are the same as in the instant case, persons holding identical posts of PCMS Class II and having been admitted to the Post Graduate Courses for the purpose of improving their educational qualifications cannot be treated differently in the matter of pay for the duration of the Course solely on the ground of their length of service in PCMS Class II Service.
The length of service in the PCMS Class II service is to my mind wholly irrelevant so far as the Post Graduate Courses are concerned.
Against, the doctors who were selected for the Post Graduate Courses in January, 1987 session and have two years of rural service to their credit have also been given full pay during the period of the Course whereas it is denied to the doctors who joined in any subsequent session.
There is no rationale behind this either...." 8.
The above decision given by NKSodhi, J of Punjab and Haryana High Court was followed in Ajit Pal Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(3) SCT 332(P&H) : (1993) 14 Legal Reports and Statute 173.
Amarjeet Chaudhary, J took note of the fact that a Letters Patent Appeal filed in Satish Kumar Gupta's case (supra) was dismissed by the Division Bench of that Court.
The observations made in the above cases are fully applicable to the facts of this case.
The object is to enable the doctors/students to improve the educational qualification.
It is a matter of common knowledge that during the course of study, these students look after the patients and perform similar work/duties irrespective of the category from which they are admitted.
Thus, I am of the view that the classification sought to be made in the present case is not tenable and the petitioners in both the petitions are entitled to the same privileges which have been given to other students.
9.
The petitioner has also placed reliance on an order passed by this Court in M.P. No. 1501 of 1989 decided on 23rd April, 1991 in the case of Dr. Ashutosh Dwivedi v. Dean, GR Medical College, Gwalior and others.
The Court observed as under :-  ...He was admitted in the M.D.
Course on 22.5.90 under an order of this Court.
The other admitted students have been paid their stipend under the rules.
The petitioner should have been paid his stipend, but none has been paid so far.
The reply of the State is that the decision of the Government is still awaited.
The plea taken is that this Court should have given a specific direction for the payment of the stipend to the petitioner.
The stand is untenable because the right of a candidate to receive his stipend commences on the admission the P.G.
Course.
The State has said that the matter is being processed.
One month's time is given as prayed for."
The State has not been able to distinguish the decision given in the aforementioned petition except to say that in the above case, in the letter issued to the petitioner of that case it was not mentioned that he would not be paid stipend.
I do not find that this is a valid explanation.
10.
In view of the decision given by this Court in the aforementioned petition and in view of the decision given by the Punjab and Haryana High Court, it is held that non-payment of stipend to the petitioner in the present case is arbitrary and it is not based on any valid classification.
A direction is accordingly given to the State to release the stipendary benefit to the petitioner within a period of eight weeks.
In the event of failure to release the same within the aforementioned period, the petitioner would be entitled to receive interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
Appeal allowed.