VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner was enrolled as Constable on 16.7.1975 in the Haryana Police and he continued to serve as such upto 2331993 when he was dismissed from service with immediate effect.
Petitioner is aggrieved of the order of dismissal and also order dated 18/2661993 passed in appeal and order dated 10.6.1994 passed in revision affirming the order of dismissal.
Petitioner's grievance is that the order against him has been passed though on allegations of misconduct yet he has been dismissed from service because he happens to be President of Haryana Police Sangathan, Hisar Range, Hisar.
2.
It has been averred in the petition that pursuant to report given by the Dharamvir Commission which was set up by the Government of India recommending and approving the formation of police associations in various States, the Haryana Police Association (Sangathan) was formed in the year 1979 whose members included Constables, Head Constables, Assistant Sub Inspectors, Sub Inspectors and Inspectors.
The Association had been struggling to ameliorate and uplift the lot of policemen in Haryana.
One of the demands of the Association was that excessive political interference in the police in Haryana should be cut off and this demand was highlighted during the Lok Sabha elections in Haryana in the years 1980/1982 and 1990 when in certain constituencies the police force was demanding that recruitment of Constables and other members of the force should be by some neutral independent agencies as even in the recruitment of police personnel there was too much political interference and the persons are being recruited in disregard of the rules and not on merits but for extraneous considerations.
Besides this, the Association was demanding better pay scales, cycle allowance for Constables/Head Constables and also uniform and a regular timely allowance for washing of uniform etc.
It has been averred that the demands raised by the Association had irked the superiors who did not want the Constables/Head Constables in the police to assert their rights, but rather wanted them to continue to work as per their dictates.
It has further been averred that from 1979 onwards the politicians in power in the State of Haryana have always been trying to suppress and curb the Haryana Police Sangathan and have also seen to it that the Haryana Police Sangathan is not recognised.
The petitioner as President of the Haryana Police Sangathan for Hisar Range has throughout been exposing the corrupt and illegal activities of the politicians in power, specially in the area with regard to booth capturing etc., during the elections which is always done with the help of police force giving the police force a bad name in the public.
In 1980 itself when Ch.
Bhajan Lal (respondent No. 6) was the Chief Minister of Haryana, the Haryana Police Sangathan opposed the malpractices during the election specially booth capturing.
Dilawar Singh as President of the Sangathan sent a telegram to the Chief Election Commissioner of India pointing out that under pressure from the political regime in Haryana the constables would be forced to indulge in booth-capturing and other illegal activities and thus, the malpractices should be stopped.
The Chief Election Commissioner sent a team to the constituency, where Shri HN Bahugana was to contest the election, which gave its report that the constables/head-constables were indulging in malpractices and on that report by-election was cancelled.
This infuriated the then Chief Minister Ch.
Bhajan Lal.
The matter regarding Kalka by-election in which Shri Chander Mohan son of Ch.
Bhajan Lal was contesting election, added fuel to the fire and on the instructions of Chief Minister, all the higher officials became more inimical.
On coming to know that many of the police officials will be misused in the Kalka by-election for the purpose of booth-capturing and other illegal activities in order to get majority in favour of the Chief Minister, the Sangathan gave a press note in the newspaper on 171993.
Due to this reason, the situation became more deteriorated and all the respondents became more inimical as Shri Chander Mohan was contesting the election.
It has been alleged that on the instructions of Chief Minister, booth capturing was done on high scale and on this the activists of the Sangathan protested.
When the respondents failed to pressurize them to withdraw their voice against booth capturing, respondents arrested some of the police officials in order or pacify the activists of the Sangathan.
They were later on released because of interference of the Chief Minister.
As these activities were highlighted by the office-bearers of the Sangathan the Chief Minister and his government got a bad name in the general public and this is the only reason that all the respondents are absolutely against the Sangathan and its office-bearers.
It has further been alleged that office- bearers of the Sangathan gave a news item in the newspaper that a CBI enquiry should be marked to question the Haryana Government regarding misuse of Rs. 35 crores given to the government for curbing terrorist activities.
3.
It is averred that the petitioner who is President of Haryana Police Sangathan for Hisar Range was also not spared and he was served with Summary of allegations dated 14.1.1993 alleging that while he was posted at Bahman Wala Nakka, Police Station Ratia, Head Constable Mohinder Singh (Dismissed) and Constable Umed Singh came to him and the petitioner instigated the members of the police force to boycott the mess meals and take part in the rally organised by the Sangathan at Rohtak and that he did take part in the rally and further collected funds for unrecognized police Sangathan.
Thereafter he was issued charge-sheet dated 1911993.
The petitioner submitted reply controverting the allegations levelled against him.
It is the allegation of the petitioner that as the petitioner is an active President of Sangathan for Hisar Range, the respondents who were pre- determined and had already decided to punish him, did not consider the reply submitted by him and ultimately an enquiry was ordered to be held against the petitioner.
On conclusion of the enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted his enquiry report dated 1621994 and on the basis of the enquiry report the petitioner was dismissed from service vide order dated 2331993.
Appeal against this order was dismissed by the Director General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar on 18.6.1993, and revision-cum-mercy petition preferred against the order passed in appeal met the same fate.
4.
Challenge to the orders is on two counts : (i) that the orders impugned have been passed on the basis of evidence which is not admissible in the eye of law; and (ii) that the Punishing Authority was not alive to the mandate of Rule 162 which envisages dismissal only for the gravest acts of misconduct and that the petitioner had put in 17 years of service and would have qualified for pension which was not kept in view.
5.
Two sets of written statements have been filed; one by respondents 1 to 5 and another by respondent No. 6.
Respondents 1 to 5 have denied the allegation of the petitioner that he was dismissed from service because he is President of Haryana Police Sangathan for Hisar Range.
It has rather been averred that the petitioner was dealt with departmentally for the allegations of misconduct as referred in Summary of allegations and charge- sheet and after regular enquiry the petitioner was found guilty of misconduct and as such the disciplinary Authority after complying with the procedure as laid down in Rule 1624 passed order of dismissal against the petitioner.
It has also been averred that the so-called Sangathan is not recognised by the Government and the allegations that the petitioner has been instrumental in exposing the corruption and nepotism in the State and that he contributed to the welfare of the police employees are not correct.
They have denied that there is political interference in the working of Haryana Police or that the petitioner has been dismissed for the cause mentioned by him in his petition.
Respondent No. 6 in his written statement has denied that he ever used or made an attempt to use police force during elections or that constabulary of Haryana Police was sent to Garhwal during by-election to Lok Sabha in the year 1980 under his orders or that the cancellation of elections personally affected him.
He has specifically denied that allegations levelled against him are false, motivated and have been made just to malign his name.
He has denied that he ever instructed anybody orally or in writing to dismiss the petitioner from service.
It has been averred that the pleas raised by the petitioner levelling personal allegations directly or indirectly against him are misconceived and baseless.
6.
Petitioner has filed replication to the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 5 and with his replication has annexed the gist of cross-examination conducted on certain witnesses produced by the department during the course of departmental enquiry.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the entire evidence given by the witnesses produced by the department is hear-say because no eye-witness has come forward to give evidence about the alleged charges, i.e. instigating the police personnel to revolt against the Government and asking the police employees not to take meals in the Mess and also asking the police employees to join a rally at Rohtak and the allegations of collection of funds for the Sangathan.
He also contended that if the cross-examination of the witnesses is read, it would show that they had no knowledge at all with regard to allegations made against the petitioner.
8.
In a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court does not function as a Court of Appeal over the decision of the disciplinary Authority.
It is concerned to see whether the enquiry as held by the Authority competent is according to procedure prescribed; whether the rules of natural justice are not violated; and whether there is some evidence which may reasonably support its conclusion that the delinquent official is guilty.
The function of the High Court is not to review the evidence and to arrive at an independent finding.
Undoubtedly, where the finding is perverse, the Court can always interfere with the same.
In this context, reference may be made to decision of Apex Court in Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, 1983(1) S.L.R.
626 where the Apex Court after having referred to the observations made in Union of India v. HC Goel, (1964) 4 SCR.
718 has held that though High Court is not a Court of appeal over the decision of the Authority holding departmental enquiry, yet it can interfere with the same where it is utterly perverse.
In State of Haryana and another v. Rattan Singh, 1977(1) S.L.R.
750 it has been held by the Apex Court that in a domestic enquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence under the Indian Evidence Act do not apply.
All materials which are logically probative for a prudent mind are permissible.
There is no allergy to hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility.
It has also been held "The simple point is, was there some evidence or was there no evidence, notin the sense of the technical rules governing regular court proceedings but in a fair commonsense way as men of understanding and worldly wisdom will accept.
Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is beyond scrutiny.
Absence of any evidence in support of a finding is certainly available for the Court to look into because it amounts to an error of law apparent on the record."
In this case, the petitioner had made grievance before the appellate Authority that the evidence of the prosecution witnesses is based upon hearsay evidence.
This contention did not find favour and it was held "But this contention of the appellant has no force in view of the positive evidence of SI Mohinder Singh the then SHO PS Ratia (PW4) and Constable Dilbag Singh 78/HSR (PW5) who have specifically and categorically deposed that the delinquent/appellant had instigated the police officials not to take meals in Mess and to take part in the Rohtak rally on 811993 and these PWs had also sent their secret reports dated 311993 to the Distt.
Headquarters about the nefarious activities of the delinquent/appellant which have been marked as PW4/1, PW4/2, PW4/3, PW5/1 and PW5/2.
Constable Dilbag Singh (PW5) corroborates the version given by SI Mohinder Singh (PW 4) that the delinquent/appellant was seen by them on 26121992 at police Barrier Bahmanwala while he was talking with Ex. HC Mohinder Singh and Constable Umed Singh.
Moreover this fact has not been denied by Ex. HC Mohinder Singh and Constable Umed Singh when they appeared in the defence of the delinquent/appellant as DW1 and DW2 respectively.
So the evidence as discussed above is sufficient to prove the charges against the delinquent/appellant."
9.
With the help of learned counsel for the petitioner, I have gone through the gist of the cross-examination which has been annexed with the petition.
The statement made in examination-in-chief has not been annexed but after calling for the record I have gone through the examination-in-chief and all other material which has been proved by the witnesses.
Though revaluation of the evidence is a matter not for this Court and is for the disciplinary Authority, yet having gone through the evidence I find no infirmity in the conclusion arrived at by the appellate Authority.
Ex. Head Constable Mohinder Singh and Constable Umed Singh who admittedly were the office- bearers of the Unrecognised Haryana Police Sangathan in their statements have admitted that they had met the petitioner on 26121992.
The witnesses produced by the prosecution in their statements and also the material which has been placed on record have linked the petitioner with acts which have been alleged against him in the summary of allegations and also in the charge-sheet.
It is thus erroneous to contend that no reasonable man could have arrived at such a conclusion.
Departmental Authorities are the sole judges of facts and adequacy or reliability of evidence cannot be permitted to be canvassed.
10.
It was next urged by the counsel that the impugned order is in violation of Rule 162 as it has been held by this Court in 1994(4) S.L.R.
311 that resort to rule 162 can be taken only if the Departmental Authorities addressed themselves with regard to the length of service either specifically or impliedly, whereas in this case the Authorities have failed to take into consideration the length of service while awarding the punishment.
11.
In order to appreciate this contention of counsel, it is expedient to note Rule 162 relevant part of which is as under :-  "162 : Dismissal - Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
"Explanation - For the purposes of sub-rule (1) the following shall, inter-alia be regarded as gravest acts of misconduct in respect of a police officer, facing disciplinary action, - (i) indulging in spying or smuggling activities; (ii) disrupting the means of transport or of communication; (iii) damaging public property; (iv) causing indiscipline amongst fellow policemen; (Emphasis supplied).
(v) promoting feeling of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language; (vi) going on strike or mass casual leave or resorting to mass abstentations; (vii) spreading disaffection against the Government; and (viii) causing riots and the (sic) life."
On a reading of the rule, it emerges that dismissal from service shall be awarded after finding that the act of misconduct attributed to the delinquent is gravest or there is a cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
This rule was interpreted by the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex. Constable, 1992(3) SCT 448(SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2188 and it was held "Rule 162(1) consists of two parts.
The first part is referable to gravest acts of misconduct which entails awarding an order of dismissal.
Undoubtedly there is distinction between gravest misconduct and grave misconduct.
Before awarding an order of dismissal it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct, that too when it impinges the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service.
As stated the first part relates to gravest acts of misconduct.
Under General Clauses Act singular includes plural, act includes acts.
The contention that there must be plurality of acts of misconduct to award dismissal is fastidious.
The word "acts" would include singular "act" as well.
It is not the repetition of the acts complained of but its quality, insidious effect and gravity of situation that ensues from the offending 'act'.
The colour of the gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or attending circumstances.
Take for instance the delinquent that put in 29 years of continuous length of service and had unblemished record; in 30th year he commits defalcation of public money or fabricates false records to conceal misappropriation.
He only committed once.
Does it mean that he should not be inflicted with the punishment of dismissal but be allowed to continue in service for that year to enable him to get his full pension?
The answer is obviously no.
Therefore, a single act of corruption is sufficient to award an order of dismissal under the rule as gravest act of misconduct.
The second part of the rule connotes the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness of police service and that the length of service of the offender and his claim for pension should be taken into account in an appropriate case."
The very contention of counsel that after recording finding of gravest acts of misconduct it is mandatory for the disciplinary Authority to take into consideration or give due regard to length of service before awarding severest punishment of dismissal, did not find favour with the Apex Court in Ram Singh's case and it was repelled by saying "The contention that both parts must be read together appears to us to be illogical.
Second part is referable to a misconduct of minor in character which does not by itself warrant an order of dismissal but due to continued acts of misconduct would have insidious cumulative effect on service morale may be a ground to take lenient view of giving an opportunity to reform.
Despite giving such opportunities if the delinquent officer proved to be incorrigible and found completely unfit to remain in service then to maintain discipline in the service, instead of dismissing the delinquent officer, a lesser punishment of compulsory retirement or demotion to a lower grade or rank or removal from service without affecting his future chances of re-employment, if any, may meet the ends of justice.
Take for instance the delinquent officer is habitually absent from duty when required.
Despite giving an opportunity to reform himself he continues to remain absent from duty off and on.
He proved himself to be incorrigible and thereby unfit to continue in service.
Therefore, taking into account his long length of service and his claim for pension he may be compulsorily retired from service so as to enable him to earn proportionate pension.
The second part of the rule operates in that area.
It may also be made clear that the very order of dismissal from service for gravest misconduct may entail forfeiture of all pensionary benefits.
Therefore, the word "or" cannot be read as "and".
It must be disjunctive and independent.
The common link that connects both clauses is "the gravest act/acts of misconduct".
It thus, cannot be accepted that the disciplinary Authority is required to take into consideration the length of service or claim for pension before awarding punishment of dismissal if it finds that the delinquent is guilty of gravest acts of misconduct.
Explanation appended to rule 162 explains that apart from other instances given therein, causing indiscipline amongst fellow policemen shall be regarded as gravest act of misconduct in respect of police officer facing disciplinary action.
The allegations which have been proved against the petitioner are that on 26121992 while he was posted at police barrier Bahmanwala PS Ratia, two dismissed police officials namely Head Constable Mohinder Singh and Constable Umed Singh met him and thereafter the said two officials again met him on 2.1.1993 at Bus Stand Ratia and held conversation for instigating the police personnel to strengthen the unauthorised police association and also for collection of subscription for the said association and then petitioner instigated the police officials of District Hisar to boycott the mess meals on 2611993 and to take part in the rally of unrecognised police union to be held to Rohtak on 811993.
The acts attributed to the petitioner certainly are the one which may cause indiscipline amongst the members of police force.
In a disciplined service like police service, it is expected that the personnel shall maintain discipline and not resort to such acts which would cause disaffection and indiscipline amongst the members of the police force.
The police association of which the petitioner is a President is not recognised one; rather the formation of such an association is against the provisions of section 3 of the Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966 which provides that a member of police force shall not, without the express sanction of the Central Government or Prescribed Authority, be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any other society, institution, association or organisation that is not recognised as part of the force of which he is a member or is not of a purely social, recreational or religious nature.
The disciplinary Authority on the basis of evidence found charges levelled against the petitioner fully proved.
While awarding punishment, the disciplinary Authority was of the view that retention of the petitioner is neither in public interest nor conducive to maintenance of discipline, especially in an organisation like the police.
In recorded that any leniency shown in dealing with such elements in the force would tantamount to promoting indiscipline and hence, punishment of dismissal as proposed vide show-cause notice dated 2321993 is fully justified and will meet the ends of justice.
This matter was again considered by the appellate Authority who dismissed the appeal by observing that charges against the petitioner are of very serious nature as he being a member of disciplined force has incited his fellow policemen to resort to boycott their meals on 2611993 and also to take part in the rally of unrecognised police union at Rohtak on 811993.
The appellate Authority while confirming the decision of disciplinary authority opined that acts of the petitioner fall under the category of gravest misconduct as given in Rule 162 as amended by Punjab Police Rules (Haryana First Amendment) 1985.
The judgment in 1994(4) S.L.R.
311 cited by learned counsel for the petitioner is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In that case, misconduct alleged this delinquent was for remaining absent for 83 days.
This Court held that mere absence from duty by itself does not amount to gross misconduct and therefore, the disciplinary Authority was required to take into consideration the length of service of the delinquent before awarding punishment of dismissal.
However, in this case acts of causing disaffection and indiscipline amongst the members of police force, being gravest acts of misconduct, were sufficient to award order of dismissal under the rules.
12.
Before concluding, it may be mentioned that though in the pleadings, allegations of malafides have been levelled against respondent No. 6 but during the course of hearing neither any reference was made to the pleadings nor any arguments were addressed in this regard.
13.
Consequently, there being no merit in the writ petition the same shall stand dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.