GS Singhvi, J - Reliefs claimed in all these petitions are almost identical and therefore they are being decided by a common order.
A detailed reference to the facts in C.W.P.
No. 3219 of 1993 is being made and in respect of other writ petitions brief reference would be sufficient for the purpose of this order.
2.
Sawarn Kumar Munjal, who is petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 3219 of 1993, was appointed as Overseer in the year 1958 in the Irrigation Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab.
On the reorganisation of the State of Punjab his services were allocated to the State of Haryana.
He was promoted as Sub- Divisional Officer on ad hoc basis vide Annexure P1 dated 2941974.
Subsequently vide order (Annexure P-4) dated 1511984 the petitioner was promoted as Sub-Divisional Officer on regular basis with effect from 12.6.1974.
Vide order (Annexure P5) dated 11121990 a revised list of promotee Sub-Divisional Officers was issued and the name of the petitioner was placed at No. 18 amongst the officers who were shown as promoted against the vacancies for the year 1974.
On 28th August, 1991 the Government issued order (Annexure P6) and issued a new order of promotion of Assistant Engineer on regular basis under the Haryana Service of Engineers Class-II Rules, 1970 (for short 'the Rules of 1970').
In this order the name of the petitioner once again came to be shown amongst promotees of 1974.
However, after about a period of one year and three months the impugned order (Annexure P7) came to be issued by the Government revising the list of promotee Assistant Engineers and the name of the petitioner does not figure amongst the promotee officers between the years 1971 to 1987.
It is this order which has given rise to the writ petitions of Sarwan Kumar Munjal and others.
3.
Before adverting to the grievance of the petitioner it is necessary to take notice of some more facts.
By order (Annexure P1) dated 2941974 as many as 348 persons were promoted on ad hoc basis and of them 24 were from amongst the Junior Engineers.
Before the issue of first order of regular promotion on 1511984 the petitioner was allowed to cross efficiency bar in the pay scale of the post of Assistant Engineer vide order (Annexure P2) dated 1591981.
In the year 1975 Shri ML Verma filed C.W.P.
No. 1524 of 1976 wherein the petitioner had challenged the methodology of ad hoc appointments which were continued from year to year.
In that writ petition Shri IM Khunger, the then Administrative Officer Irrigation Department filed an affidavit giving details of the vacancies in the cadre of Sub-Divisional Officers/Assistant Engineers which became available in different years between 1971 to 1979.
The Court took note of this affidavit and directed the Government to make regular promotions strictly in accordance with the rules by filling vacancies falling to the share of each source on yearly basis.
In compliance with this direction, the State of Haryana issued order (Annexure P4) under Rule 9 of the Rules 1970, promoting the petitioner and others against the various years between 1971 to 1982.
Subsequently, Shri RK Jain filed C.W.P.
No. 4489 of 1982 and sought a writ of mandamus for making regular appointments against the vacancies becoming available after 1982.
This writ petition was allowed on 1081984 with a direction to make regular promotions.
The Government issued order of promotion on 1241985.
This order was challenged by Ranjit Singh and others in C.W.P.
No. 4403 of 1985.
That writ petition was allowed by the High Court on 2451989 and the order of promotion dated 1241985 was quashed.
In Ranjit Singh and others v. State of Haryana, 1989(4) SLR 27 : 1989(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 168, a learned Single judge of this court held that ranking list of eligible candidates should be prepared every year and if a person who is senior does not acquire the requisite qualification in a particular year, he has to be ranked senior in a subsequent year after he acquires the qualification.
The learned Single Judge further held that under Rule 9(7) of the 1970 Rules consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission was necessary and in the absence of such consultation, the promotion was liable to be set aside.
Against this judgment of the learned Single Judged L.P.A. No. 1588 of 1989 was filed but the same was dismissed on 22121989 by a speaking order.
The judgment of the High Court was challenged in S.L.P.
No. 2525 of 1990 (Sushil Kumar Arora & another v. State of Haryana & others).
The same was decided by the Supreme Court on 7.8.1990 with the following direction :-  "On the application of the petitioner, the names of respondents 12, 13 and 18 are deleted from the cause title.
Special leave granted.
Counsel heard.
In our view, a fresh list should be prepared by the Government of Haryana within three months from today in accordance with the Haryana Service of Engineers, Class-II Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1970 and in particular Rule 9 thereof.
If there are any instructions including those in para 114 in the Manual, which are inconsistent with the Rules, the same will be ignored and the list will be made strictly in accordance with the Rules, untrammelled by inconsistent observations, if any, in the judgment of the High Court.
It is clarified that if any promotions had been made earlier in accordance with the Rules, same shall not be disturbed.
The appeal is disposed of as aforesaid."
4.
Pursuant to the direction of the Supreme Court order (Annexure P5) dated 11121990 was issued and as already mentioned above, the name of the petitioner was once again shown amongst the promotees of the year 1974.
In the meantime contempt proceedings were filed before the Supreme Court against the Government and its officials for the alleged non-compliance of the directions given on 7.8.1990.
In answer to the contempt petition, a fresh ranking list dated 2881991 was filed before the Supreme Court.
In this list (Annexure P6) the name of the petitioner was one against shown amongst the promotees of the year 1974 with the sole difference that his name was placed at No. 20 instead of serial No. 18 as shown in Annexure P5.
When the contempt matter came up for hearing before the Supreme Court, the following order was passed :-  "The State of Haryana has prepared two lists pursuant to our purported order dated 7.8.1990.
There is a host of objections from different employees to the correctness of these lists.
It appears prima facie that the lists to say the least are not fully in accordance with the Rule 9 as they have not been submitted to the Public Service Commission at all as contemplated by that Rule.
In these circumstances, we direct that all employees who have any objection to the lists prepared by the State of Haryana may file their objections with the Secretary to the Irrigation Department of the State of Haryana within two weeks from today.
A notice to this effect to be put up to the main offices of the Irrigation Department.
The Secretary of the Irrigation Department shall, thereafter, with the help of the Officer on Special Duty, if necessary, determine the validity of these objections and prepare final lists within a period of six weeks.
The said lists will, thereafter, be forwarded to the Public Service Commission as contemplated under Rule 9 and the Public Service Commission is requested to finalise these lists within a period of two months from the submission of the same to the Commission.
If there are any objections to the final lists prepared by the Commission, applications in this connections may be made to this Court.
List the Contempt Petition No. 79/91 in CA No. 3837 of 1990 with IA Nos. 3-9 in the first week of March 1992."
5.
On 11111992 the Supreme Court decided the contempt petition with the observation that if anyone is aggrieved with the ranking list, then he is entitled to raise all the points in an appropriate proceeding either before the High Court or other forum in accordance with law.
Immediately thereafter, order Annexure P7 came to be issued by the Government in which name of the petitioner does not figure.
At the same time only 3 persons have been shown as promoted against the vacancies of 1974 from the category of Junior Engineer (Civil)."
6.
The petitioner has challenged the order (Annexure P7), which excludes his name from the list of promoted officials on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as well as the Rules of 1970.
He has also alleged that the impugned order is contrary to the principles of natural justice because before excluding his name from the order (Annexure P7) no show-cause notice was given to him proposing a change in his seniority position.
The petitioner has also pleaded that after holding the post of Sub-Divisional Officer/Assistant Engineer for a period of 18 years, he is sought to be reverted and this is being done without hearing him.
7.
In their written statement the respondents have admitted the factum of petitioner's promotion as Sub-Divisional Officer on ad hoc basis vide order (Annexure P1).
They have also admitted the facts regarding the issue of various orders.
However, their case is that in compliance of the orders passed by the Supreme Court on 7.8.1990 and 11111992, the Government has superseded the promotions made vide order dated 1511984 because they were not in accordance with the rules.
According to the respondents these promotions had been made without the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commisison.
Their further statement is that the petitioner was not entitled to be heard before the issue of the final order in compliance of the Supreme Court's directions.
They have further pleaded that the promotion of the petitioner vide order dated 1511984, were not found in order and, therefore, his case was reconsidered and only in the year 1993 he has been found entitled to be promoted and, in fact, he has been promoted vide order (Annexure P1) dated 711993.
8.
In compliance of the directions given by this Court on 19.1.1995 an additional written statement has been filed by the respondents.
In this additional written statement it has been pleaded that in the year 1974 only two vacancies were available to be filled from amongst the Junior Engineers (Civil), but, in fact, 37 persons were promoted and this shows that direct recruitment quota posts were utilised for making promotions.
According to the respondents, promotions made by the then Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Irrigation Department, were contrary to the statutory rules and the same had to be reviewed.
Their further plea is that order dated 1511984 was issued on the basis of wrong interpretation of Rule 9 and after the judgment in Ranjit Singh's case (supra) promotions made earlier had to be reconsidered.
On page 59 of this additional affidavit, the respondents have submitted that the revised ranking list was examined by the Haryana Public Service Commission and in the light of the observations made by the Commission, the ranking list was once again circulated on 171992 amongst all concerned through Superintending Engineer and those who had filed objections were called for personal hearing.
However, no specific notice to the petitioner and similarly situated officers was given proposing a change in the year of their promotion or deleting their names from the list of promotees.
It has then been stated that the amended ranking lists were filed in the Supreme Court on 30.10.1992 along with additional affidavit, after they were approved by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
9.
An additional affidavit has also been filed by the petitioner on 621995 to highlight the contradictory stand taken by the respondents on the issue of number of vacant posts in the promotion quota during various years.
10.
In C.W.P.
No. 3220 of 1993 filed by Shri VP Dhiman it has been stated that he joined service on 7.10.1959 as overseer in the Irrigation Department.
He was promoted as Sub-Divisional Officer on ad hoc basis with effect from 10.10.1971.
Respondent No. 3 Shri D.K.
Gogia had been promoted along with him.
He was further promoted as Executive Engineer on 22121978.
As against this the respondent No. 4 was promoted as Sub-Divisional Officer on 2021978 and the respondent No. 5 was appointed as Assistant Engineer in the year 1974.
This petitioner further says that on 171992 a tentative seniority list (Annexure P5) was circulated in which his position was changed vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
He submitted objection against this tentative seniority list by way of notice of demand for justice.
However, the respondent-Government issued final list on 30111992 without examining the contents of his representation.
11.
In reply the respondents have admitted various facts relating to the promotion of the petitioner but they have pleaded that although the respondents Nos. 4 and 5 were promoted on 30121987, they were given deemed date of promotions with effect from 2461984 in view of the Supreme Court's decision.
Respondent No. 4 has filed separate reply and has justified his promotion on the basis of the order dated 681992 passed in C.W.P.
No. 4265 of 1980.
He has further stated that order dated 1511984 has never been made effective and no right came to vest on the petitioner on the basis of the said order.
12.
C.W.P.
No. 11906 of 1993 has been filed by Shri PD Gupta, who joined service as Overseer in the year 1959 in the Irrigation Department.
He was promoted as Sub-Divisional Officer on ad hoc basis vide order dated 971974.
In the order dated 1511984 he was shown as promoted against the year 1975.
Other facts of this petition are identical to the facts of C.W.P.
No. 3219 of 1993.
Similarly, reply to this petition is identical to the reply filed in C.W.P.
No. 3219 of 1993 and, therefore, detailed reference to the same is not necessary.
13.
C.W.P.
No. 3823 of 1993 has been jointly filed by Sarvshri AN Garg, Harbhajan Singh, Mohan Kumar Malhotra and SK Bhalla.
All the petitioners except Harbhajan Singh joined service as Draftsmen in the year 1961.
Harbhajan Singh joined as Tracer on 1681956.
He was appointed as Draftsman on 1441970.
All of them passed the Departmental examinations.
They claimed promotions against source No. 3 specified in Rule 6 of 1970 Rules.
The petitioners filed C.W.P.
No. 861 of 1983.
In reply to that petition the Government admitted that eight vacancies were available against source No. 3 and the petitioners were promoted as officiating Sub-Divisional Officers in the year 1978.
Vide order dated 1511984 these petitioners were shown as regularly promoted against the years 1975 and 1978.
These promotions were not challenged by anybody but with the avowed object of compliance of the Supreme Court's order the positions of these petitioners have been revised vide order dated 30111992 (Annexure P7).
The petitioners have alleged that they made representation (Annexure P-8) for bringing to the notice of the Government that their names have been arbitrarily excluded from the promotion list, but that representation has not at all been considered and a number of persons, who were not even eligible to be promoted as Sub-Divisional Officers, have been given promotion.
14.
In their reply respondents Nos. 1 and 2 have stated that in terms of Rule 6 promotions from source Nos. 2 and 3 can be made in the event of non- availability of the candidates from source No. 4 but such promotions are purely ad hoc.
The respondents have pleaded that in compliance with the order passed by this Court and the Supreme Court they had to undertake a review of the promotions already made and as the petitioners were found to be not entitled to be promoted, their names have not been included in the list issued on 30111992.
A replication has been filed by the petitioners reiterating their original stand.
A reply to this replication has also been filed wherein it has been stated that after proper determination of vacancies, the impugned order dated 30111992 was issued.
15.
First argument of Shri Jagia and Shri MM Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that the Government did not have jurisdiction to review the promotions made vide order dated 1511984.
The learned counsel submitted that there is no rule which authorised the Government to revise or review the promotions made on the recommendations of the D.P.C.
and, therefore, all the subsequent orders passed by respondent No. 1 are without jurisdiction.
Learned counsel, relied on the decision of the Privy Council in RT Rangachari v. Secretary of State, A.I.R. 1927 Privy Council 27, The General Manager, Northern Railway, Baroda House, New Delhi and another.
v. Madan Lal Chopra, Luggage Guard, Northern Railway and others, 1971 (1) S.L.R.
629; Rana Randhir Singh and others v. State of UP and others, 1989 (1) S.L.R.
1 and Bhagwan Shukla S/o Sh. Sarabjit Shukla v. Union of India and others, 1994(4) SCT 406(SC) : JT 1994(5) SC 253.
Second contention of the learned counsel is that even in terms of the directions given by the Supreme Court, the promotions of the petitioners could not have been disturbed because the order dated 15111984 was passed after full compliance of the Rules of 1970.
Learned counsel argued that the petitioners had been promoted on regular basis on the recommendations of the D.P.C.
and, therefore, in terms of the order passed by the Supreme Court these promotions ought not to have been touched.
Learned counsel submitted that in Ranjit Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(4) SLR 27, the learned Single Judge had quashed the list prepared by the respondent-Government for promotions after 1982 and this was indicative of the fact that the promotions made upto the year 1982 were not to be reviewed.
Last argument of the learned counsel is that even if the respondent-Government is held to be possessed with the right to review the promotions made prior to 1982, the year of the promotion of the petitioners could not have been disturbed without giving them an action oriented notice and an opportunity of hearing.
Shri Jagia invited the Court's attention to the contradictory affidavits and the averments made by the respondents in different replies filed before the Court and argued that if a proper opportunity of hearing was afforded to the petitioners, they would have demonstrated that the number of vacancies calculated for the year 1974 and other years were erroneous.
He laid emphasis on the fact that between the years 1984 to 1991 more than 20 vacancies were shown to be available during 1974 and, therefore, sudden depletion of the number of vacancies to 3 only cannot but be termed as arbitrary and unreasonable.
The learned counsel for the petitioners relied on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and another, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 597, Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, 1986(2) SLR 345; Shri H.L.
Trehan and others v. Union of India and others, 1989(1) SLR 7.
16.
Shri Rajiv Raina, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, submitted that the action of the Government in making promotions to the posts of S.D.Os.
is a purely administrative function and the Government is possessed with an inherent power to review or revise such administrative action if it is discovered that the earlier action was erroneous on facts or in law.
Shri Raina submitted that in this particular case the revision of promotion made in the year 1984 was necessitated due to the fact that the Public Service Commission was not consulted before the issue of order dated 1511984 and, therefore, that order was contrary to the provisions of the rules and in any case this revision had become imperative in view of the fact that the eligibility list had to be revised in the light of the judgment in Ranjit Singh's case (supra) and Arjun Lal Chitkara, JE v State of Haryana through Secretary, Irrigation, 1990(1) RSJ 75.
Shri Raina also relied on the decision of this Court in Vallu Ram Mehndiratta v. Director, Agriculture, Haryana, Sector 17, Chandigarh and others, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 375.
He then argued that their Lordships of the Supreme Court had protected the promotions made strictly in accordance with the rules and not those which were made in violation of the rules, and therefore, the promotions of the petitioners, which were contrary to the provisions of the rules had to be revised on the recommendations of the Public Service Commission.
Shri Raina further argued that the principles of natural justice have not been violated in this case because a general notice was issued to all the Engineers on 171992 and those who had submitted objections were given opportunity of personal hearing before the issue of the impugned list.
Shri Raina argued that even if opportunity of hearing was not given to the petitioners by indicating that there was a proposal to revise their promotions, no prejudice has been caused to them and, therefore, the court could not interfere with the impugned list.
17.
Regarding the first contention of Shri Jagia and Shri MM Kumar it must be stated that although the promotions to the posts of S.D.Os.
are required to be made in accordance with the provisions of 1970 Rules, the function of the Government in preparing the select list and making promotions on the basis of the select list is purely administrative and there is no bar against the review of the administrative decisions.
The principles of law which govern the review of judicial decisions does not apply to the administrative/executive functions and in all cases where an administrative decision is found to be vitiated by apparent mistake or the violation of the provisions of law, the competent authority has got an inherent right to review/revise the earlier decision.
The only restriction on the exercise of the power of review by the administrative authority is that the revision of the earlier decision should be made for good and sufficient reasons and should be bona fide.
If a subsequent decision is based on extraneous reasons or is devoid of cogent reasons or is otherwise contrary to the principles of natural justice, the Court may upset such subsequent decision but it cannot be said that the administrative authority is not possessed with the power to revise its earlier decision.
In Bhagwan Shukla v Union of India (supra) the Supreme Court has not laid down a proposition of law that the administrative authority cannot review its decision.
What has been held is that before an order adversely affecting a person could be passed, the competent authority is under a duty to give an opportunity of hearing to such person.
Similarly, in Sayeedur Rehman v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1973 SC 239, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have implicitly recognised the right of an administrative authority to review or revise its decision.
The only limitation which in the opinion of their Lordships of the Supreme Court applies in the exercise of power of review of adminsitrative decision is that the competent authority must act in consonance with the rules of natural justice.
The decision of the Privy Council in RT Rangachari v. Secretary of State (supra) does not lay down a propositional of law that the administrative decision cannot at all be reviewed.
What has been held in that case is that once a decision is taken by a competent authority, the successor in office cannot revise that decision which is an honest decision.
That principle has been followed in General Manager, Northern Railway v. Madan Lal Chopra (supra).
Therefore, neither of those decisions is of any help to the petitioners.
Similarly, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rana Randhir Singh's case (surpa) is of no help to the petitioners.
That judgment does not contain any observation indicating that the administrative decision is not subject to review or revision at a subsequent point of time.
Therefore, that first contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners must fail.
18.
Second contention of the learned counsel regarding scope of the Supreme Court's judgment is also untenable.
No doubt their Lordships of the Supreme Court protected the promotions which were made earlier but such protection was available only in case the promotions were made in accordance with the rules.
Apparently, the respondent-Government has revised the promotions made between the year 1971 to 1982 on two grounds.
Firstly on the ground that the Public Service Commission was not consulted before the issue of order dated 1511984 and, therefore, that order was contrary to the provisions of 1970 Rules.
Secondly the Government has made an attempt to implement the judgment of this Court in Ranjit Singh's case (supra).
Whether this exercise is correct or not is a different thing but there can be no doubt that the Government has not acted in contravention of the protections given by the Supreme Court.
If that was the position, their Lordships of the Supreme Court would not have relegated the parties to the remedy before this Court.
It is not possible to hold that the Supreme Court would have ignored the violation of its own order by the Government while making promotions on the basis of the revised ranking list.
19.
However, the third contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners merits acceptance.
Prima facie Shri Jagia is right in contending that the Government has not given a true picture of the number of vacancies in the cadre of the Sub-Divisional Officers.
The additional affidavit filed in C.W.P.
3219 of 1993 clearly shows that the Government has given a different picture in different cases in regard to the number of vacancies.
In the affidavit filed before this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1529 of 1981 a particular figure of the total number of vacancies was disclosed.
In the list issued on 1511984 38 persons have been shown as promoted against the year 1974.
This position was repeated in the lists issued in the years 1990 and 1991.
However, in the final list the number of vacancies against the promotion quota of 1974 has been shown as 3.
In the additional affidavit the petitioner has highlighted the vacillating figure of the number of vacancies, given out by the respondent-Government.
This is one factor which lends sufficient credibility to the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that if an opportunity of hearing was given to them it could have been possible for them to demonstrate that they have been treated arbitrarily.
The petitioners could have shown to the Government that number of vacancies against the promotions quota of 1974 is much more than indicated in the order dated 30111992.
That apart, it is clearly revealed from the record that the petitioners have been enjoying promotions on the posts of Sub-Divisional Officers since 1974 and nearabout.
All the petitioners were promoted on regular basis vide order dated 1511984.
The Government was seeking to alter their positions after more than eight years of the issue of order dated 1511984.
Therefore, even though the challenge to the right of the Government to revise the promotions may not be well-founded, the petitioners are justified in making a grievance that the Government was duty bound to hear them before aversely altering their positions.
The petitioner Sarwan Kumar Munjal, who was assigned the year 1974, and a large number of similarly situated persons do not at all figure in the ranking list of 1992.
This obviously means that they are to be treated as promotees of the years subsequent to the year 1992.
In my opinion, before finalising the ranking list on 30111992 the Government was under an obligation to give a notice to all the affected persons indicating its proposal to change the year of their promotions and should have passed the final order after considering their representations, if any.
20.
In State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that even where a purely administrative order affects the rights of an individual, principles of natural justice must be complied with before an adverse order can be made.
In Smt. Mankea Gandhi v. Union of India (surpa), Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojo Natha Ganguly(supra) and various other judgments, on which the learned counsel for the petitioners have placed reliance, the principles of natural justice have been held to be applicable in varied situations.
It is now a well settled proposition of law that principles of natural justice must be followed even where the statute does not require compliance thereof.
In the instant case the seniority of the petitioners, which is their civil right, has been sought to be altered to their prejudice and this has been done by the respondents Government without giving them a notice proposing a change in their year of promotion and, therefore, the action of the Government is liable to be declared as void.
21.
Shri Raina's argument that the impugned list has been issued in compliance of the Supreme Court's order and, therefore, the petitioners must be deemed to be aware of the proposed change in their position, is without any substance.
The Supreme Court did not direct that the ranking list should be revised without affording any opportunity of hearing to the affected persons.
Their Lordships did not indicate any particular position to be assigned to any particular promoted officer.
Therefore, it was incumbent on the respondent- Government to have issued a notice to all those who were going to be affected by the revision of the ranking list.
22.
Similarly, the argument of Shri Raina that the principles of natural justice must be deemed to have been complied with the issue of a general notice cannot be accepted.
May be that some officers made representations in response to the general notice dated 171992 and some of them may have appeared personally before the Secretary concerned, but that cannot be treated as a sufficient compliance with the principles of natural justice.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioners were made aware of the proposed changed in the rank list and they were possessed with the relevant material on the basis of which they could make representations.
Thus the mere issue of a general notice cannot be treated as a substitute of the requirement of principles of natural justice that the affected persons should have been told of the proposed action and should have been given a reasonable opportunity of making effective representation.
Unless the petitioners were informed that the Government proposes to restrict the promotions against the 1974 quota only to 3 vacancies, the petitioners and other affected persons could not have submitted effective objections against the proposal of the Government.
23.
Another objection of Shri Raina is that looking to the large number of affected persons it could not have been possible for the Government to give notice to each one of them individually.
In my opinion, this argument is misconceived.
Merely because the Government was required to give notice to about 40 to 50 persons, it cannot be laid that the compliance of the principles of natural justice was an unbearable burden on the respondent- Government and, therefore, the Government's action should be justified even though it is in flagrant violation of the rules of natural justice.
24.
In view of the above, it is declared that the ranking list prepared by the Government, excluding the names of the petitioners/changing their year of promotion is nullity qua the petitioners.
Normally the ranking list should have been quashed on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice but having regard to the peculiar facts of this case, I am of the opinion that ends of justice would be served by directing, the Government to give a notice and an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners and other affected persons, giving out details of its proposal to change their positions and after considering the objections, if any, filed by the affected persons, determine their positions afresh in consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission.
If the position of the petitioners or any other affected person, as indicated in the list dated 30.11.92 is changed to their/his advantage then such persons must be given all consequential benefits.
25.
The writ petitions are allowed in the manner indicated above.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed