GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed by the petitioner for the quashing of order, Annexure P-1, by which he has been retired from service under rule 532A(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, read with rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I.
He has also challenged order, Annexure P2 by which he has been relieved from the post of Deputy Director of Sports in the afternoon of 22.5.1992.
2.
Petitioner's case is that he joined service as District Sports Officer on 25101963 and was lastly promoted in October, 1989 as Deputy Director, Sports, a post which he held till the date of compulsory retirement.
Regarding his service record, the petitioner has stated that he had rendered 29 years meritorious service except some adverse remarks in the confidential reports for the years 1981-82, 1982-83, 1985-86 and 1986-87, which were expunged by the Government on his representations.
He has also made a reference to an order of warning which was administrated to him on the basis of a departmental enquiry held under rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1951.
The petitioner has further stated that his promotion was challenged by one Sh. JK Rana in C.W.P.
No. 9869 of 1989 but the same was dismissed by the High Court after considering the reply filed by the respondents wherein they had justified the petitioner's promotion notwithstanding the punishment of warning.
The petitioner has made a detailed reference to his performance in the field of sports and has asserted that the Governor of Haryana had honoured him by awarding a Commendation Certificate for his outstanding performance in the field of sports.
He further says that respondent No.2 was personally prejudiced against him because he had been elected as Honorary General Secretary of Haryana Veteran Athletic Association and respondent No.2 did not want the petitioner to continue his participation in the working of that Association and in order to wreak his vengeance, the respondent No.2 manipulated the petitioner's record which was placed before the Screening Committee for the purpose of considering the petitioner's case for premature retirement.
3.
In reply, the respondents have stated that the entire service record of the petitioner was considered by the Screening Committee at the time of the scrutiny of his record for retirement and on the basis of an overall evaluation of the petitioner's case the Committee opined that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in service.
Consequently, the Government issued the impugned order of retirement of the petitioner.
4.
Arguments in this case were heard on 1111995, 12.1.1995, 13.1.1995, 1611994 and 2311995.
Thereafter, the order was reserved.
While going through the record of the petitioner, it was revealed to the Court that a minor punishment had been awarded to the petitioner vide order dated 131983 but this fact was concealed by the petitioner as well as by the respondents.
Therefore, on 3111995, the Court directed the parties to file affidavits as to why this important fact had been withheld from the Court.
In response to the direction of the Court the petitioner as well as the respondents have filed their respective affidavits.
5.
I have again heard Shri Malik and Ms. Bahri and perused the service record of the petitioner.
6.
The record which has been produced before the Court by the respondent government shows that between the years 1963-64 to 1980-81 the petitioner has been given 'Average' remarks for four years, 'Good' for eight years, 'Very Good' for four years and 'Outstanding' for one year.
For the period between 1981-82 to 1990-91, the petitioner has earned two 'Average' reports, eight 'Good' reports and one 'Very Good' report.
It is also revealed from the record that adverse remarks made in the confidential reports of the petitioner for different years were expunged on the basis of the representations made by the petitioner or different occasions.
The record also reveals that three punishments have been awarded to the petitioner between 1982 and 1991.
One enquiry was initiated against the petitioner under rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 vide Memo.
dated 8111982 on the allegation that the petitioner had not taken interest in his work and had not cared to do his duty during the inauguration of the Mini Secretariat by the Chief Minister of Haryana on 22.1.1982.
He was also charged with the allegations of having disregarded the orders of the superior officers and having shown scant regard for the directions given by the superior officer.
After considering the reply filed by the petitioner, the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Sports Department, imposed the penalty of stoppage of one grade increment without cumulative effect on the petitioner vide his order dated 131983 and also directed that for the period of suspension the petitioner shall not be entitled to pay and allowances except the subsistence allowanealready paid.
Another enquiry was initiated against the petitioner under rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules on the allegation of having submitted two false TA Bills for Rs.1895.70 and Rs. 984/-.
After receipt of the reply, the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Sports Department, passed order dated 2211989 and gave a recorded warning to the petitioner by taking a lenient view on the ground that although the petitioner has been found guilty of the charges, the Government has not suffered financial loss.
Yet another departmental enquiry was initiated against the petitioner vide Memo.
dated 30.9.1990 for his having gone abroad to participate in the international veterans' meet without prior permission of the Government and vide order dated 20121991 a recorded warning came to be administered to the petitioner.
A first information report has also been registered against the petitioner on 1321991 with the Intelligence Bureau for the alleged embezzlement of Rs. 104115 and Rs. 286385 during the period of his posting as District Sports and Youth Welfare Officer, Sonepat.
7.
First contention of Shri Malik is that the impugned order of retirement is wholly arbitrary and unjustified because the Screening Committee did not consider the service record of the petitioner in its totality.
He argued that only adverse part of the record of the petitioner had been placed before the Screening Committee and a decision taken by the Screening Committee on the basis of incomplete record of the petitioner cannot but be termed as arbitrary.
Shri Malik submitted that if a proper evaluation of the service record of the petitioner had been made, the Screening Committee could not have formed an opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in service.
He relied on the observations made by the Supreme Court in Sh. Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, 1992(2) SCT 92(SC) : 1992(2) S.L.R.
2.
Ms. Bahri argued that a High Powered Committee consisting of the Chief Secretary, the Financial Commissioner (Revenue), the Financial Commissioner (Finance), the Administrative Secretary concerned and Head of the Department had considered the entire service record of the petitioner with particularly emphasis on his record of the past ten years and opined that the petitioner should be retired from service.
This decision of the Screening Committee was approved by the Chief Minister and thereafter the impugned order of retirement has been passed.
According to Ms. Bahri, such a decision cannot be characterised as arbitrary, irrational or unjustified.
8.
Before I examine the merits of the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of retirement is vitiated on the ground of non-application of mind and arbitrariness, I consider it necessary to take note of the fact that the petitioner has, while painting a rosy picture about his service record, concealed an important fact namely that the penalty of stoppage of one grade increment without cumulative effect was awarded to him vide order dated 181993.
The charges found proved against the petitioner related to lack of interest in the work, casual approach to the work assigned to him, insubordination, and disregard of the departmental norms.
This order of punishment was certainly relevant to judge the claim of the petitioner that his performance has been meritorious throughout his service career.
A reading of the order dated 131983 together with the two orders of punishment of recorded warnings against the petitioner would have certainly made a serious dent in the claim of the petitioner that he had a clean record of service and that the respondents have retired him for extraneous reasons.
The petitioner cannot plead innocent ignorance about the order dated 131983 because he has made a conscious reference to all those documents which are favourable to him.
He has referred to the various orders passed by the competent authorities expunging adverse remarks recorded in his confidential reports.
He has also made a reference to various Commendation Certificates issued in his favour.
It is, therefore, not possible to believe that the petitioner was unaware of the order of punishment and his duty to place it before the Court or atleast to make a reference of the same while trying to project a clean image of his working.
In his affidavit dated 421995 the petitioner has made an attempt to justify the non-mentioning of the order of punishment dated 1383 on the ground that he was given selection grade vide order dated 1931984 and this was sufficient to prove that the Government had itself not considered the punishment to be of any significance.
The petitioner has also stated that the criteria for grant of selection grade was merit and, therefore, the punishment awarded to him vide order dated 131983 will be deemed to have been substantially diluted after the grant of selection grade.
9.
After having given thoughtful consideration to the matter, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is guilty of concealment of a very relevant and important fact from the Court and by his bad conduct the petitioner has disentitled himself from any relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The disguised innocence pleaded by the petitioner cannot be accepted by the Court for the simple reason that the petitioner is a well educated person and he knew that if he was to disclose before the Court that he had been punished with the stoppage of one grade increment without cumulative effect for various acts of delinquencies and if the Court was to peruse the nature of allegations levelled against him the writ petition may not even be admitted.
By concealing this fact he succeeded in persuading the Court to think that he has been treated arbitrarily by compulsory retirement despite his good service record.
The claim made by the petitioner that grant of selection grade vide order dated 1931984 (Annexure P37) reduced the gravity of punishment is without any substance because a bare look at the order Annexure P37 shows that the benefit of selection grade was given to the petitioner with effect from 15.4.1982 and as on that date the Government had not even charge-sheeted the petitioner what to say of punishing him.
The case of the petitioner for grant of selection grade was required to be considered on the basis of the record available as on 15.4.1982 and, therefore, the subsequent charge-sheet issued on 811982 or the order of punishment dated 131983 were not available for consideration by the competent authority while deciding the question of grant of selection grade to the petitioner.
10.
It is a settled proposition of law that a person who approaches the High Court for grant of relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India owes a duty to the Court to disclose all the facts.
He is also under a duty to make all efforts to find out all the connected facts and place them before the Court.
If he shows lack of diligence or makes any attempt to withhold facts from the Court, there is every justification for the Court to decline relief to such a person.
In Jai Bhagwan Jain v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Punchkula, district Ambala, C.W.P.
No. 15448 of 1993 decided on 2191994 a Division Bench of this Court has dealt with the question relating to the contumacious conduct of a petitioner who files a writ petition.
The Division Bench referred to the law laid down by the Supreme Court and other High Courts as well as the British Court and then held -  "...it is the duty of the party seeking relief under Article 226 or under Article 136 of the Constitution to make full and can-did disclosure of all the facts and leave it to the Court to determine whether relief deserves to be given to the petitioner or not.
The petitioner is also under a duty to make all efforts to find out full facts of the case before filing the petition and he cannot be heard to say that he is not aware of the facts concerning him.
The petitioner has to demonstrate his bona fides before seeking relief from the Court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction.
It is not for the petitioner to decide as to which of the facts are relevant and which are not relevant.
The petitioner cannot become a judge on the question of relevancy of facts.
Non-disclosure of all the facts in a candid and straightforward manner will necessarily warrant dismissal of a petition."
The Court further held -  " We may further add that a petitioner will not be entitled to be heard on the merits of the case where he is found guilty of concealment of facts or of making misstatement before the Court only on the ground that no stay order has been passed by the Court.
It is to be remembered that the Court considers a petition with the assumption that the averments made in the petition are true and correct.
In a given situation, the Court may finally decide a petition ex-parte where the non-petitioner does not appear despite service of notice.
If a party suppresses facts from the Court, such ex-parte decision may be rendered on the basis of incorrect or incomplete facts.
Therefore, it is no answer to the charge of suppression of facts or misstatement of facts before the Court to say that no interim relief has been given to the petitioner or that he has not derived any benefit.
In our opinion, the very issue of a notice on a petition is a benefit derived by the petitioner.
If subsequently it is found that the petitioner has misled the Court or persuaded it in issuing notice by concealment of true facts of the case there will be ample justification for dismissing the petition."
In the light of law laid down in Jai Bhagwan Jain's case (supra), it must be held that the petitioner has disentitled himself from claiming relief under Article 226 of the Constitution because he has deliberately concealed an important fact relating to his service record.
11.
On the merits also, the argument of Shri Malik that the respondents have passed the order of retirement without application of mind to the service record of the petitioner is without substance.
The material which has been placed before the Court by the learned Assistant Advocate-General clearly shows that in the Memo.
prepared by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Government, Sports and Youth Welfare Department, it has been clearly disclosed that the petitioner has earned one 'Very good', 7 'Good' and 2 'Average' reports during the last 10 years.
It has also been noted that the integrity of the petitioner has not been doubted in the confidential reports.
Reference to various punishments and allegations of embezzlement has also been made in the said Memo.
The Screening Committee considered the overall service record of the petitioner and then formed opinion that the petitioner should be retired from service after giving three months' notice.
This shows that the 'good' as well as 'bad' record of the petitioner was placed before the Screening Committee and the same was considered by the said Committee before recommending compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
In my opinion, such a decision cannot be termed as arbitrary or capricious nor can it be said that respondent No1 took the decision to retire the petitioner without application of mind to his service record.
12.
I am also of the opinion that a person who has been punished in three departmental inquiries held during 10 years calculated with reference to year of retirement cannot with any justification complain that the competent authority has not applied its mind or that the opinion formed by the Screening Committee regarding his retirement suffers from any illegality.
The punishment of stoppage of one grade increment and two recorded warnings afforded a sound basis for concluding that the petitioner has outlived his utility for public service and it was not in public interest to allow him to continue in service.
13.
Argument of Shri Malik that the punishments awarded to the petitioner must be deemed as totally washed off with his promotion as Deputy Director of Sports is also without any substance.
In Sh. Baikuntha Nath Das's case (supra) on which Shri Malik has placed reliance, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that while undertaking an exercise for premature retirement of an employee the competent authority must make an overall evaluation of the service record of the employee with particular emphasis on his past ten years' record.
The Supreme Court also held that promotion of a person will not completely wash off the punishment or the past adverse record, but where the promotion is made on the basis of merit the gravity of the punishment will stand diluted.
14.
In so far as the petitioner is concerned, he has been awarded punishment thrice over, one of which was awarded to him after his promotion to the post of Deputy Director.
It is, thus, clear that even after his promotion the petitioner has been found guilty of misconduct.
This being the factual position, the competent authority was fully justified in taking into consideration his past punishments in order to form an opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be continued in service.
This course is fully justified in the light of the observations made by the Supreme Court in D Ramaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, A.I.R. 1982 SC 793.
15.
Mr. Malik's argument regarding mala fides of respondent No.2, which according to the learned counsel constituted the foundation for the decision of the Screening Committee, is being mentioned by me only to summarily reject it.
No doubt the petitioner has levelled allegations of mala fides against respondent No.2 and there is no reply to these allegations but a careful scrutiny of the record produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General leaves no manner of doubt that respondent No.2 had no role to play in the process of the retirement of the petitioner.
The profile of the service record of the petitioner was prepared by the Financial Commissioner-cum- Secretary, Haryana Government, Sports and Youth Welfare Department.
Moreover, the entire service record of the petitioner was available before the Screening Committee and it is not possible to believe that the members of the Screening Committee were pressurised by respondent No. 2 to make a recommendation for retirement of the petitioner.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
The petitioner shall pay costs of Rs. 5,000/- to respondents No1.
16.
However, before parting with the case, I consider it necessary to express disapproval of the manner in which the respondents have tried to help the petitioner.
But for a careful scrutiny of the record of the case by the Court, the fact that the petitioner was punished vide order dated 131983 would have escaped the notice of Court and this may have even influenced the final outcome of the case.
Failure of respondent No1 to incorporate all the facts in the reply speaks volumes of the negligence on the part of departmental officials in general and the officer incharge in particular.
Prima facie, this seems to have been done with the object of helping the petitioner.
This is something extremely serious and deserved to be probed by the Government in order to take appropriate action against all those who are responsible for such a lapse.
I, therefore, direct the respondent Government to make an enquiry in the matter and take appropriate disciplinary action against the erring officials so that in future the Government officials remain careful while filing reply etc and do not act contrary to public interest.