BA Khan, J - These petitions raise common question of law and fact and are disposed of by a common judgment.
Individual cases will be dealt with wherever required.
The principal question involved is whether consideration was accorded to the petitioners for regularisation of their services before their removal, true to the mandate of the consent order passed by this court on 1141991, disposing of a group of petitions between the parties.
Before adverting to this order, it would be appropriate to notice some material facts leading to the present controversy.
2.
Incidentally this is the third round of litigation between the parties.
It all seems to have started somewhere at the fag end of 1988 when Government of the day decided to appoint 128 teachers in the wake of some agitation in Poonch town following complaints of irregularities in the selection of teachers.
It is not known what mode was adopted to fill up these vacancies, but it certainly comes out from the confusing situation that the then District Education Officer one MY Kohli went on a recruitment spree of his own and appointed as many as 261 teachers including the petitioners on ad-hoc basis subject to final selection by the competent authority.
While this recruitment drive was on, the Government took some significant steps which have a crucial bearing on the controversy.
It referred the available vacancies of teachers to the Service Selection Board.
It also imposed a general ban on ad-hoc appointments with effect from 29th Dec 1988 vide Circular No. 64-GAD of 1988.
This was followed by Notification No. SRO:291 dated 2871989 amending Rule 14 if CCA Rules providing for ad hoc appointments to be made only in special circumstances and with the prior approval of the Chief Minister in co-ordination.
Then came controversial Govt. order No:1220-GAD of 1989 dated 1191989, more or less as a validating Act, envisaging regularisation of ad hoc appointments in certain circumstances specified therein.
3.
It was in or around this time that petitioners were appointed by the District Education Officer Poonch and it becomes necessary at this stage to refer to their dates of appointment in relation to measures taken by the Govt. referred to hereinabove to tighten the noose on ad hoc appointments.
They can be broadly placed in three categories:  Category I: Those appointed before 29th Dec 1988 (prior to the ban imposed on adhoc appointment).
Category II: Those appointed between 29th Dec 1988 and 28th July, 1989 (between the ban imposed and amendment of Rule 14); and  Category III: Those appointed after 28th July, 1989 (after amendment of Rule 14).
Only thirteen petitioners fall in the first category and others, in the second and third category.
When these appointments came under scrutiny of the new Government, an inquiry was ordered in the matter and Kohli was placed under suspension.
He is said to be facing departmental inquiry on charges of making the appointments in disregard of the rules and for extraneous considerations.
Be that as it may, petitioners sensing danger launched their first round of litigation before this court praying for regularisation of their services and in the least for their continuance till the selection for the posts was made by the competent authority.
They continued in service on the strength of stay orders passed by the court till their petitions were finally disposed of as settled by order dated 27th June, 1990, the relevant portion whereof is reproduced as under :-  "...Mr. VK Gupta, learned Advocate General appearing for the respondents has made a statement that the petitioners may be allowed to continue in service till formal selection is made by the competent authority and he wants this court to dispose of the petitions as settled.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, however, pray that the petitioners be permitted to participate in the selection and according to them while making the selection in the above categories/disciplines various Government orders as well as the law propounded by the Supreme Court are required to be considered by the competent authority.
"Considering all the facts and circumstances of the cases and also the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties all the above said petitions are disposed of as settled with the direction that the petitioners shall continue in service till final selection is made by the Competent authority who shall while making such selection allow the petitioners to participate in the selection, if eligible under rules, and also while making selection the competent authority shall consider various Government orders passed earlier and also the pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Jammu:, Sd/- June 27, 1990., Hon'ble Judge."
As would be seen from the terms of aforesaid order, the Government, through a statement made by the learned Advocate General, agreed to petitioners' continuance till selection was made by the Competent authority in which they had a right to participate.
4.
So far so good.
But no sooner the Selection Board started conducting interviews, petitioners challenged its constitution in the second bout of litigation.
This court stayed the selection process and the second round ultimately ended in a consent order dated 1141991, the relevant portion whereof reads as under :-  "In implementation of order dated June 27, 1990, passed by this Court, the respondent-State shall consider the petitioners for appointment keeping in regard the terms of Govt. Order No:1220-GAD of 1989 dated September 11, 1989 and any other Govt. order relevant on the subject having bearing on the petitioners' case and giving them benefit of the same.
Besides, while according consideration, the respondent State/appointing authority shall also take into consideration the judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts having bearing on the subject, including the judgments passed in cases titled Piara Singh v. State of Haryana (CWP No. 72/1988), reported in Service Judgments Vol.
I 1989 page :465 and UP Income Tax Department v. Union of India and others (Supreme Court Service Law Judgments, 1952-1988 Vol. 1.
Page 544).
Respondent-State/appointing authority shall finalise the consideration of the petitioners' cases within a reasonable time.
Wherever necessary the process of consideration may take within its ambit the outcome of selection process conducted by the Service Selection Board in case of those petitioners who have participated in such selection.
However, this is to clarify that consideration accorded to the petitioners by the State/appointing authoirty will be over and above the process of selection conducted by the Service Selection Board in respect of the post of teachers.
Till the process of consideration by the State/appointing authority is finalised, the service of the petitioners shall not be terminated.
The State shall, however, be at liberty to process and finalise the selection conducted by the Service Selection Board for the posts of teachers.
The interim orders passed by this Court staying the declaration of results of said selection shall stand vacated.
The undertaking furnished by the counsel for the respondent-State shall stand discharged."
The whole controversy revolves round this order and, therefore, it is imperative to undertake its indepth examination only to find out its true ambit and mandate vis-a-vis the rights of the parties.
Before doing so, reference to Govt. Order No. 1220-GAD of 1989 is necessary as it constitutes the focal point of the consent order aforementioned.
The relevant order in so far as it is material for our purpose is extracted as under :-  "Govt. Order No :1220-GAD of 1989 dated 1191989: (1) All ad hoc appointments to non-gazetted posts recruited from time to time upto 29121988 who are still in service be treated to have been appointed on regular basis, on probation or trial as the case may with effect from the date of issue of this order dispensing with reference of posts held by them to the Service Selection Board or District Level Committees in the case of Class-IV employees constituted in persuastion of General Administration Department's Circular No: 64 GAD of 1988 dated 29121988 provided that: (i) An incumbent working on ad hoc basis was fulfilling all the pre-requisites of eligibility i.e qualification and age limit etc. as on the date such ad hoc appointment was made.
(ii) Where as incumbent was over-aged upto one year on the date of such ad hoc appointment, but otherwise fulfil all other pre-requisites of eligibility, the age limit be deemed to have been relaxed to the extent of period calculated upto the date of this order.
Provided further that in case, the post of an incumbent was proposed to be mentioned has already been referred to the Service Selection Board, the post shall be withdrawn from the Board.
Provided also that the orders of regularisation shall be issued only with the approval of the Administrative Deptt.
concerned and a copy of such regularisation order shall be endorsed to the General Administrative Department.
(2) ...... (3) ..... (4) Ad hoc appointments made by various Deptts.
during the period following between the issuance of the ban viz 29121988 and the date of issue of Govt.
Notification No: SRO:290 dated 2871989 amending rule 14 of the Civil Services Classification (Control and Appeal) Rules 1956 and are still continuing without break shall be submitted for orders through the General Administrative Department with detailed reasons for making such appointments in disregard of the ban imposed."
It is these two orders which are the bone of contention between the parties.
The orders are interpreted differently by the two sides in support of their respective claims.
5.
Petitioners' case put at its best, is that they have been denied consideration for regularisation of their services in conformity with consent order dated 1141991 and consequently Govt. Order No: 1220-GAD of 1989 and if any consideration is claimed to have been given to them, it has been illusory in disregard to the intent and spirit of Govt. Order No:1220-GAD of 1989 and not in any case over and above the selection process conducted by the Board which is interpreted to mean subsequent to publication of the selection list by the Board.
It is submitted that the whole exercise adopted by the respondents in supposed compliance to consent order dated 1141991 was only an eye-wash designed to get rid of petitioners pursuant to a pre-conceived plan.
Much is sought to be made in this regard by placing whole hog reliance on terms of Govt. Order No:1220-GAD of 1989 which is construed to confer an automatic right of regularisation on petitioners.
Interpreting clause (4) of the order, it is contended that overall intention of the Govt. being to accommodate all those who had been appointed subsequent to the ban imposed on ad hoc appointments, all it required was to seek information from the concerned appointing authority regarding circumstances under which appointments were made in violation of the ban.
Where circumstances could be justified the Govt. had no choice but to regularise the services of appointees and where no justification was or could be offered, they were still entitled to the regularisation though action could be taken against the appointing authority for defying the ban.
Lastly, it is urged that if petitioners had been accorded due consideration, they would have still qualified for regularisation, given regard to various judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and various High Courts particularly in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana (CWP No. 72/1988) and UP Income Tax Department v. Union of India (Supreme Court Service Law Judgments 1952-1988, Vol.
I page 544) which lay down a general principle that all adhoc appointees who have put in more than one year service are entitled to automatic regularisation.
6.
The respondent's case as put forth lucidly by learned Attorney General and also as gathered from their reply and record is that due consideration was accorded to petitioners for regularisation in consonance with the mandate of consent order dated 11th April, 1991, Govt. Order No:1220/GAD of 1989 and the ratio of the judgments in the two cases referred to hereinabove, but having done all that they fell short of the requirement and could not qualify for regularisation.
In case of petitioners appointed prior to the ban i.e 29th Dec 1988 and who would be entitled to automatic regularisation under clause (1) of Govt. Order No:1220-GAD of 1989, it is alleged that their appointment orders were found ante-dated and forged and regarding those falling in second category (i.e appointed between 29th Dec 1988 and 28th July, 1989), it is submitted that no reasons existed nor were any advanced by the appointing authority for their appointment in contravention of the ban.
Similarly, in respect of third category (i.e those appointed after 28th July, 1989), it is pointed out that since their appointment was per se illegal for want of prior approval by the Chief Minister in co-ordination as per amended Rule 14 of CCA Rules, there was no question of their regularisation.
It is also submitted that petitioners' case was considered in the light of judgments in Piara Singh's case and the other case, but even this did not advance their case.
7.
Learned Attorney General, Mr. G Ramaswamy, appearing for the respondent- State, contended that the two orders i.e consent order dated 1141991 and GO No :1220-GAD of 1989, envisaged nothing except according consideration to the petitioners in accordance with the terms thereof and once it was done they were not found entitled to regularisation.
He refuted the charge that the consideration given to them was illusory or pre-conceived by any standard and asserted that the same was accorded over and above the selection process keeping in regard the relevant Govt. Orders and the judgments of the Courts.
8.
Dwelling on clause (4) of GO No : 1220-GAD of 1989, he submitted that on a fair interpretation of its terms, it cannot be said that the Govt. ever intended to regularise the services of those appointed in disregard of the ban, thus putting premium on the illegality.
If anything, it contemplated processing of such cases only to get rid of the appointees.
He argued that jurisdiction to take cognizance of the cases falling under this clause would arise only where the appointing authority advanced reasons to justify the appointment in disregard of the ban and where no reasons were furnished or none existed no obligation was cast on the competent authority to process such cases through General Administration Department or otherwise.
According to him, there was no question of regularisation of cases falling in third category i.e. appointed after 2871989 as their appointment orders were void under amended Rule 14 of CCA Rules.
He sought support from 1979(3) SLR 116 to show that no regularisation could be effected in exercise of executive power where the appointment itself was made in contravention of statutory rules.
He was emphatic that consent order dated 1181991 never intended to make the judgment in Piara Singh's case or the other case a part of decretal order and even assuming it to be so the two judgments nowhere laid down that an ad hoc appointee was entitled to automatic regularisation after putting in one year's service.
9.
It is in this scenario that I am called to examine the rival contentions.
In my view, it all converges on the true interpretation and mandate of the consent order dated 1141991 and GO No :1220-GAD of 1989.
What did these two orders provide for is the moot question.
If it can be held that these orders did not confer a right of automatic regularisation, all that remains to be seen thereafter is whether petitioners have been accorded requisite consideration in accordance with the terms thereof.
10.
Taking up the consent order first, I do not think it can be any body's case that it guaranteed automatic regularisation of petitioners' services.
It indeed guaranteed their right of being considered for regularisation keeping in regard the terms of GO No:1220-GAD of 1989 or any other Govt. Order having bearing on the subject and also the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and various High Courts, particularly, in Piara Singh's case and the U.P.
Income Tax Deptt.
case.
This consideration had to be over and above the selection process conducted by the Board and had to take within its ambit the outcome of such process.
In other words, they were required to be considered in the light of provisions of GO No:1220-GAD of 1989 and the judgments referred to hereinabove, of course, over and above the selection process which meant irrespective of their performance before the Board or the outcome of such process.
Therefore, all that falls to be determined is whether they were so considered ?
To answer this question, it becomes necessary to refer to the provisions of GO No:1220-GAD of 1989 which has received varying interpretation from the parties and which seems to be at the root of the controversy.
11.
As mentioned elsewhere, the controversial order was preceded by a ban imposed on ad hoc appointments on 29121988 and also amendment in Rule 14 of CCA Rules providing for a stringent procedure and prior approval of the Chief Minister for making ad hoc appointments in future.
The Govt. Order appears to have been passed thereafter more or less as a validating act in an effort to regularise ad hoc appointments made prior to the ban and in the post ban period upto 2871989.
It does not deal with any such appointment made after 2871989 and to that extent petitioners falling in third category can't claim any benefit under it.
Clause (1) of the Govt. Order provided that all the ad hoc appointments to the non-gazetted posts made from time to time after 29th Dec 1988 in cases where incumbents were still in service as on 191989, be treated to have been appointed on regular basis, dispensing with reference of post held by them in the Selection Board provided the incumbent was eligible and not overaged and so on and even if the post in question, in case already referred, had to be withdrawn from the Board.
Clause (4) dealt with appointments made in disregard of the ban after 29th Dec 1988 upto 28th June, 1989 and envisaged that cases of such appointees who were still continuing without break at the time of passing of the order, shall be submitted for orders through General Administration Deptt.
with detailed reason for making such appointments in disregard of the ban.
12.
There is no dispute over the interpretation of the terms of clause (1) and common ground is that those appointed prior to 29th Dec 1988 are entitled to be regularised provided they are eligible and satisfy other conditions laid down therein.
Amongst the petitioners 13 fall in this category (category-1) and they have been denied regularisation on the ground that their appointment orders were found ante dated and forged.
Of these 12 are writ petitioners in SWP No:447/91 Mohd.
Bashir & Ors v. State of J&K and Ors and one (petitioner No:3 in SWP No: 504/91, Farooq Ahmed & Ors v. State of & ors).
The question that arises is whether they could have been thrown out of the service on the charge of holding ante-dated and forged orders without any inquiry into the matter.
So long as the allegation casts a stigma on them, respondents are obliged to hold an inquiry into the matter and to establish truth or otherwise of the charge after observing principles of natural justice and giving them an opportunity of being heard.
It is not anybody's case that any such inquiry was even held in the matter or that petitioners were provided any right of hearing.
As a result their removal from service is both arbitrary and illegal as no orders could have been passed to their detriment and at their back without holding an inquiry into the genuiness or otherwise of their appointment order and without associating them with such inquiry.
Learned Attorney General has fairly conceded this position.
I, therefore, quash the impugned orders passed against them and direct respondents to reinstate them in service with all consequential benefits.
13.
This leaves out the cases of petitioners falling in second category which were required to be considered in terms of clause (4) of GO No:1220-GAD of 1989.
What is the true import of this provision ?
What does it offer to the petitioners appointed between 29th Dec 1988 and 28th July, 1989 ?
Does it entitle them to automatic regularisation, as is perceived by them or it only provide for processing of such cases so as to weed out those appointed in disregard of the ban imposed on ad hoc appointments.
All these questions seek an answer more so in view of the controversy generated by the conflicting interpretations placed on the provision.
I for one do not find any ambiguity in the provision.
To me it appears plain and free from any confusion and is aimed at giving a right of consideration for those appointed in the post-ban period upto 28th July, 1989 in violation of the ban imposed.
It provides a mechanism for this and requires of the appointing authority to submit such cases for orders with reason for making such appointments in contravention of the ban.
It neither guarantees regularisation nor anticipates termination.
It only offers a consideration which could neither lead to regularisation of the appointees or his termination from service depending upon the quality of justification offered by the appointing authority for defying the ban.
Where such justification is lacking or is non-existent, the result is obvious and no obligation is cast on the competent authority to regularise the services of any appointee in such an event.
14.
I find myself in disagreement with the submission made by Mr. Lehar that once an appointment had been made in disregard of the ban, it had of necessity to be justified by the successor appointing authority.
Going by this reasoning all such appointments would earn automatic regularisation irrespective of whether the first authority had any compelling reason to violate the ban or not.
That, to my mind, is not and could not be the intention behind the provision.
15.
In the present case 48 petitioner fall under the second category and were required to be considered under clause (4) of GO No:1220-GAD of 1989.
The appointing authority had to submit their cases for orders with detailed reasons for making their appointments in disregard of the ban imposed.
I have examined the record and it transpired that pursuant to the orders passed by this court on 1141991.
District Education Officer Poonch submitted a report to the Commissioner/Secretary, Education Department pointing to a move to happy situation obtaining in the Education field in the Poonch District and the dubious manner in which her predecessor Mr. Kohli had made ad hoc appointments of teachers in various schools.
The DEO did not offer any justification for appointments made in the post-ban period in disregard of the ban.
Therefore, no reasons were advanced for appointment of petitioners falling under the second category.
Acting upon this, the concerned authorities seem to have found them disentitled to regularistion after considering them under clause (4).
It is not for me to substitute my satisfaction for that of the competent authority in this regard.
All I was required to see was whether requisite consideration was accorded to the petitioners and whether any error had been committed in the process.
I have satisfied myself and I find that petitioners were duly considered.
It is a different thing that they were not found suitable for regularisation.
16.
Coming to the cases of petitioners falling in third category (i.e those appointed after 2871989), I am convinced that no amount of consideration, however effective or sympathetic, could have saved the day for them.
Any action to regularise their service would be per se illegal as their appointment was admittedly made in violation of amended Rule 14 of CCA Rules and, therefore, they could not be regularised by an executive order in contravention of a statutory Rule.
17.
This brings me to the last limb of the petitioner's case i.e whether they could be regularised pursuant to any judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court or the High Courts or for that matter the judgments rendered in Piara Singh's case (1988 SLR 739) or the UP Income Tax Employees' case (AIR 1988 SC 517).
This raises a question whether any judgment lays down as a dictum that an ad hoc employee is entitled to automatic regularisation, if he has put in more than one year's service.
Petitioners believe so and their case is that since they have been in continuous service for more than one year by now, they are entitled to regularisation as a matter of right by virtue of the judgments referred to hereinabove.
I am afraid, their submission in this regard seems wholly misdirected.
For one thing, there is no judgment passed by any Court which lays down as a principle that an ad hoc employee is entitled to automatic regularisation if he has been in service for more than one year.
Even Piara Singh's case does not hold so, not to speak of UP Income Tax Employees' case.
I have gone through these judgments and I have not come across any such proposition laid down.
In Piara Singh's case, the judgment proceeded on a wholly different premise viz on the policy instructions formulated by the Haryana Government upon which the court directed regularisation of employees who had been in service for one year or more.
The judgment, even though distinguishable and assuming it to have any application to the present case is no longer a good law after the recent Supreme Court judgment in a group of appeals laying down guide-lines governing regularisation of ad hoc/temporary employees in Government service.
The apex court has said that the Govt. may sometimes appoint an ad hoc employee but the effort should always be made to replace such employee by a regularly selected employee.
Even in UP Income Tax Employees' case all that the Supreme Court directed the Government was to prepare a scheme to absorb those employee who had been continuously working for more than one year.
Mr. Salaria cited a number of judgments (AIR 1991 SC 309-1286, AIR 1992 SC 677, AIR 1988 SC 517-2133 and 1985(2) S.L.J 437) to point out the tilt shown by the Court in favour of the ad hoc employees.
It is true that courts have lately deprecated ad hocism in Government services and have directed absorption of such employees in peculiar facts and circumstances of each case.
But all this can't be taken as a dictum holding an ad hoc employee entitled to automatic regularisation after one year.
In this view, it is not possible to hold that the judgments (supra) entitled petitioners to regularisation.
It is not in dispute that these judgments were taken in regard while considering petitioners' cases.
I have perused the record and I find that there was analysed and found distinguishable while considering petitioners for regularisation.
18.
Mr. Lehar's contention that the consideration given to the petitioners was illusory, is not borne by the record, though it is true that it preceded submission of select list to the Govt.
I find from the record that Commissioner/Secretary submitted her report to the Advisor concerned on 151991 who in turn obtained approval of the Governor on 351991.
The matter was thereafter referred to the Advocate General for opinion on 751991 and termination orders were passed on 951991.
The selection list was meanwhile prepared by the Govt. on 251991.
Considering this sequence of events, it may perhaps be correct to say that basic consideration preceded receipt of Selection List, but it was also not intended otherwise nor did the expression "over and above the selection process" mean subsequent to publication of selection list.
19.
In the light of aforesaid discussion, I hold as under :-  (i) That the consideration was accorded to the petitioners for regularisation or their services in accordance with the mandate of consent orders dated 2761980 and 1141991 keeping in regard the terms of Government Order No:1220-GAD of 1989 and the judgments relied upon them.
(ii) That services of thirteen Petitioners (petitioners 1 to 11 in Mohd.
Bashir's case - SWP No:467/1991 and petitioner No. 3 in Farooq Ahmed's case-SWP No. 504/1991) falling in first category - have been arbitrarily and illegally terminated without holding any inquiry into the genuineness of their appointment orders and without complying with the principles of natural justice.
In Hafiza Begum's case (SWP No.477/1991) also petitioner has not been accorded due and effective consideration.
20.
After this, I do not consider it necessary to deal with the preliminary objection raised by learned Attorney General relying upon AIR 1985 SC 167 challenging the maintainability of these writ petitions on account of petitioners' failure to implead candidates selected by Board for posts of teachers as party respondents.
As no adverse orders as being passed against the selected candidates, it would be futile to examine this objection.
21.
In the result, I allow the writ petitions of fourteen petitioners and quash their termination orders.
Respondents are directed to reinstate them and to treat them in service from 10th May, 1991 and to give them all consequential benefits.
At the same time, I dismiss the writ petitions of all other petitioners with connected C.W.Ps and vacate stay orders passed, if any, in their cases.
To avoid any confusion, the result in each writ petition is indicated hereunder :-  1.
SWP No: 397/1991: Mohd.
Hussain & Ors. v. State of J&K and ors., 1995(3) SCT 713 : 1995(3) SCT 713 (J&K)  There are 23 petitioners in this petition.
They all fall in third category having been appointed after 28th July, 1989.
Their writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
2.
SWP No:432/1991: Mst.
Suraya Begum v. State This writ petition is filed by 16 petitioners all of whom stand appointed either after 29th Dec 1988 or after 28th July, 1989.
They either fall in second or third category.
Their writ petition stands dismissed.
3.
SWP No: 446 of 1991: Mst.
Salima Bi v. State All 55 petitioners in this petition fall in second or third category.
Their writ petition shall also stand dismissed.
4.
SWP No: 447 of 1991: Mohd.
Bashir v. State.
In this writ petition, there are in all 14 petitioners.
Petitioner - 1 to 11 claim to have been appointed on 3111988 ie before the cut off date given in GO No: 1220-GAD of 1989.
Therefore, their case falls in clause (1) of the aforesaid Govt. order in terms whereof they are to be treated in regular service and in case they have been referred to Service Selection Board the same are required to be withdrawn.
Their termination from service is quashed or being violative of principles of natural justice.
Their petition is allowed and the respondents were directed to continue them in service from 10th May, 1991 with all consequential benefits accrued to them.
Petitioners 12 to 14 are appointed on 30th April, 1989, falling in second category having been appointed after the ban imposed by the Govt. on ad hoc appointments.
For the reasons given in the judgment, their writ petition stands dismissed.
5.
SWP No: 479 of 1991: Nazar Hussain v. State .
(sic) in second category.
His writ petition is also dismissed.
6.
SWP No: 480 of 1991: Tazima Begum v. State.
There are in all 16 petitioners in this petition and all of them are admittedly appointed after 18th July, 1989.
They fall in third category and their writ petition is also dismissed.
7.
SWP No: 445 of 1991: Mohd Salim v State.
Petitioner in this petition falls in third category.
His petition is also dismissed.
8.
SWP No: 477 of 1991: Mst.
Hafiza Begum v. State & Ors.
The petitioner in this writ petition was initially appointed on 1771984 on ad hoc basis.
Her term was extended vide order dated 231985.
Her service was discontinued in between at some stage, constraining her to file writ petition No:772 of 1985, wherein respondent-State was directed to consider her for appointment to the post of teacher given regard to the service rendered by her.
She was again appointed on ad hoc basis on 3171989.
It is at this stage that the seem to have joined the present lot of writ petitioners.
Apprehending threat to her service she also filed writ petition No. 358 of 1990 culminating in consent order dated 3171980, identical to the order dated 2761990.
It is not known whether she was a party to the other order dated 1141991.
From the examination of record, it does not transpire that her case was considered in the light of the order passed by this Court in writ petition No. 772 of 1985.
She appears to have been bracketed with those appointed in violation of the ban, though she deserved to be treated differently.
She has thus been removed from service arbitrarily and in a mechanical manner without being accorded any effective consideration in the light of services rendered by her since 1984.
Had she been given due consideration she might have as well qualified for regularisation in terms of clause (1) of GO No: 1220-GAD of 1989.
The order terminating her services is, therefore, vitiated.
Her writ petition is consequently allowed and respondents are directed to allow her to continue her in service.
9.
SWP No: 471 of 1991: Bhupinder Singh & Ors v. State & Ors.
This writ petition is filed by seven petitioners, who fall either in second or their category.
Their petition is dismissed.
10.
SWP No: 493 of 1991: Hamida Bi v. D.E.O.
This writ petition is filed by six petitioners and all have been appointed after 28th July, 1989, falling in third category.
Their writ petition also stands dismissed.
11.
SWP No: 460 of 1991: Razia Begum v. State of J&K & Ors. Petitioner in this petition falls in third category, being appointed on 691989.
Her petition is accordingly dismissed.
12.
SWP No: 504 of 1991: Farooq Ahmad v. State In this writ petition, petitioners 1 and 3 to 5 fall in second or third categories.
Therefore, their writ petition stands dismissed.
Petitioner No 3, however, claims to have been appointed on 3171988 and thus falling in first category.
Since respondents have not disputed her date of appointment, she is entitled to be regularised in terms of clause (1) of GO No: 1220-GAD of 1989.
Her petition is accordingly allowed.
13.
SWP No: 511 of 1991: Mohd.
Nayeem v. State All five petitioners in this writ petition fall in second category.
Their writ petition is also dismissed.
14.
SWP No: 505 of 1991: Parveen Akhtar & Ors v State & Others.
There are 14 petitioners in this writ petition and all fall in third category, having been appointed after 28th July, 1989.
Their writ petition also stands dismissed.
15.
SWP No: 580 of 1991: Rehmatullah v DEO & Ors. Petitioner in this petition falls in second category being appointed on 251989.
Therefore, for the reasons given in the judgment his petition stands dismissed.
16.
SWP No: 585 of 1991: Virender Kumar & Ors v. State & Ors.
Both petitioners in this writ petition fall under third category.
Their writ petition is accordingly dismissed.