TS Doabia - The cause of one Subhash, a workman in the Banmore Cement Works was espoused by petitioner Union.
The aforementioned workman was a probationer and his services were brought to an end on the ground that his work and conduct was not satisfactory.
An order to this effect was passed on 8th/11th July 1983.
Copy of this order is Annexure P-3.
This order reads as under :-  "You were originally appointed on probation vide appointment order BN/Appt-2274 dated 17-8-1982 for a period of six months but your services were not found satisfactory.
Hence, the probation period was further extended but you did not improve in your work as well as in your conduct.
Hence one more chance was again given to you and the probation period was again extended vide order BN/STF-2/246 dated 1651983 for a period of three months.
But in that period too, you did not improve, and your work, conduct and behaviour was not found satisfactory.
Therefore, your services are no longer required and are terminated herewith with immediate effect.
You are entitled to retrenchment compensation equal to 15 days' wages and notice pay of one month.
This amount of retrenchment compensation and notice pay is also being given with the notice.
You may collect all your dues."
2.
The petitioner-Association as noticed above espoused the cause of the workman.
The matter was put to trial and the Labour Court recorded a finding in favour of respondent No.1.
This finding is to the effect that the workman was in fact guilty of lapses which were sufficient for the purposes of putting an end to the services of the workman, Subhash, during the period of probation.
It was also concluded that the workman Subhash was guilty of certain acts of commission which also warranted his termination from services.
One such act is that he abused his superiors and also tore their clothes.
The fact that the period of probation was extended from time to time was taken note of for coming to the conclusion that the work of the workman was not satisfactory.
A finding was also recorded that compensation was offered to the workman and he refused to accept the same.
It was accordingly held that there was no informity with the order passed by the management in bringing an end to the relationship of master and servant.
3.
I have considered the matter.
I am of the view that there is no merit in this petition.
Where a workman uses abusive language against his superior officer and is even otherwise remiss in his duties and if action is taken against him then no fault can be found with the order so passed by the management and its consequent confirmation by the Labour Court calls for no interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Similar matter was considered by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Punjab Financial Corporation v. Union Territory, Chandigarh, reported in (1991(1) SCT 666 (P&H) : 1991 Lab.
IC 2282).
It would be proper to note the observations made in paras 11 and 12 of the decision.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court took notice of several decisions.
These are as under :-  "The effect of such misconduct on the relationship of employment has been stated by Lopes, LJ in Pearce v. Foster (1886) 17 QBD 536, in the following words at page 542.
"If a servant conduct himself in a way inconsistent with the faithful discharge of has duties in the service, it is misconduct which justifies immediate dismissal.
That misconduct, according to my view, need not be misconduct in the carrying of the service or the business.
It is sufficient if it is conduct which is prejudicial or is likely to be prejudicial to the interests or to the reputation of the master and the master will be justified, not only if he discovers it at the time, but also if he discovers it afterward, in dismissing that servant."
These observations were cited with approval by the apex court in Govinda Menon v. Union of India, (1967) II LLJ 249 (SC) : (AIR 1967 SC 1274) (at 255).
12.
In the instant case, the abusive conduct of workmen, more particularly towards the lady who was the then Managing Director of the Punjab Financial Corporation, did not warrant any lenient punishment except that of termination from service.
The Labour Court was unjustified in holding that the punishment awarded was disproportionate to the charges levelled against the workmen.
The conduct of the workmen only warrants the penalty of termination from service, which was rightly awarded by the Management.
In this context, reference to the decision of the apex court in Workman v. Bharat Fritz Werner (P) Ltd., (1990) 3 SCC 565 : (1990) Lab IC 844) will be useful.
In that case, the High Court of Karnataka, on appreciation of the evidence, recorded the following findings at page 851 (of LIC) :-  "(i) these workmen had gone inside the President's room in an aggressive mood; (ii) they threatened the President with dire consequences if the notice was not removed; (iii) they confined the President to his room and came very close to him with gesticulations and fisted hands; (iv) they did not go out in spite of request and shouted stating that the President should not go out; and  (v) they stayed there till the President gave instructions to Mr. Keshy to remove notice."
After so holding, the Karnataka High Court ordered the reinstatement of the workmen.
On appeal, their Lordships of the apex Court held thus at page 853 (of LIC).
"The misconduct that has been found established against these five workmen involves threatening the highest executive, viz. the President of Company, with dire consequences, wrongfully confining him in his room and compelling him to withdraw the notice.
These acts of misconduct involve acts subversive of discipline on the part of these workmen.
Three of workmen were office-bearers of the Union.
It cannot be said that these workmen had acted at the instigation of somebody.
Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that, keeping in view the interests of the industry, this is a case where it can be said that it is not desirable and expedient to direct reinstatement of these workmen.
In our view, therefore the direction with regard to reinstatement of these workmen cannot be sustained and in lieu of reinstatement they may be paid compensation for loss of future employment."
I am in agreement with the above.
4.
In this view of the matter I do not find any justification to interfere with the order passed by the Labour Court.
Accordingly, this petition is dismissed as without merit.