GS Singhvi, J - Annexure P-1 dated 6th September, 1991, is under challenge in this petition.
The petitioner has approached this court for quashing of the charge-sheet as well as the order of appointment of an Enquiry Officer, Vide P-3.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a Temporary Engineer on 30th November, 1959, he was appointed Sub-Divisional Officer, PWD Irrigation Branch, on Ist March, 1960, he was promoted as an Executive Engineer on 20th December, 1972, and then Superintending Engineer on 13th January, 1988.
In relation to his work as an Executive Engineer during 1977 to 1979, charge-sheet Annexure P-1 has been served upon him and after filing of reply by him, the Government has appointed Enquiry Officer, vide Annexure P-3, dated 26th March, 1993.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the enquiry proceedings on various grounds set out in the writ petition.
However, it is not necessary to make a detailed reference of those grounds because in my opinion the writ petition deserves to be allowed on a short ground namely undue delay in the initiation of the enquiry.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to an order of the Division Bench of this Court in JS Sanghera v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) SCT 628 (P&H)(DB) : 1994(4) Recent Service Judgments 532 and argued that this court had quashed the enquiry proceedings in respect of a Co-delinquent, who had succeeded the petitioner on the post of Executive Engineer.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General conceded that enquiry against Shri JS Sanghera and the petitioner related to the same work and there is a virtual identity in the allegations levelled against the two persons, she however, argued that the delay in the initiation of enquiry is not such as to justify the intervention by the High Court at this stage of the proceedings.
She submitted that only one officer of the Government was responsible for the delay.
When enquired by the Court, learned Assistant Advocate-General stated that as per her information no appeal has been filed against the order dated 28th April, 1994 ie, in the case of Shri JS Sanghera, passed by the Division Bench.
5.
From the above it is clear that the order passed by the Division Bench quashing the charge-sheet against another delinquent has become final.
Holding of enquiry against the petitioner may now lead to anomalous results.
Moreover, there are no compelling circumstances which warrant taking of different view by me in the case of the petitioner.
When a Division Bench of this court has expressed the view that the delay in the initiation of enquiry against the co-delinquent has not been satisfactorily explained, there is every reason to follow the order passed by the Division Bench.
Even otherwise Judicial propriety demands that ordinarily, consistent orders are passed by the same High Court.
Non-predictability of the orders of the High Court seriously erodes the public confidence in the administration of justice.
In view of the detailed reasons given in JS Sanghera's case (supra), which shall be treated as part of this order, the charge-sheet (Annexure P1) is quashed.
Consequently, the order of appointment of Enquiry Officer (Annexure P-3) is also quashed.
The petitioner shall get his retirement benefits, which according to the learned counsel for the petitioner have been withheld on account of the pendency of the departmental enquiry.
The same shall be released immediately.
The parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.