RP Sethi, J - Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2.
Alleging political patronage and extraneous considerations the nominations of private respondents namely Ms. Ravneet Kaur, Ms. Munu, Ms. Radha Mehra, Mr. Samarjit Singh Chatha and Sh. Sharanjit Singh and Mr. Amitoj Singh Multani for admission to MBBS Course have been challenged in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 11372, 11838, 11839, 12041, 12152, 13110, 12238.
12438, 12529, 12697, 12794, 12927 and 12993 of 1994 with a prayer for issuance of a direction to the respondents to nominate the petitioners in these petitions in stead of the earlier nominated candidates.
The nomination of the private respondents is the offspring and made in pursuance to the "guidelines for the nomination on the discretionary seats" which provides to make nomination on the following lines :-  1.
The candidates of such families which are related to political workers/publicmen/officers who are bearing responsibility for dealing with law and order problem directly or indirectly; 2.
Such candidates for whom it is difficult or impossible to go out of the State due to security reasons under the law and order problem; 3.
Such candidates who are connected with the terrorist affected families; 4.
Such candidates whose families are unable to send them out of the State for education due to financial problems; 5.
Besides the above, any candidate who is considered fit and eligible for nomination, Admission will be given to such candidates who fulfil the minimum prescribed qualifications."
It is alleged that the guidelines are unconstitutional, illegal, without any basis and tailored to suit the heads of those only who have been nominated vide the orders impugned in these petitions.
3.
After referring to catena of authorities of the Supreme Court, a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3763 of 1993 "Anter Preet Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others", 1995(2) S.C.T.
377, decided on September 26, 1994 and broadly held that no reservation by way of nomination can be made.
It held, "in fact, no provision of the Constitution has been referred by the learned counsel for the respondents to support the policy of nomination."
It further concluded by holding.
"Even if for a moment it is conceded that the Government can make nomination for admission to the post-graduate courses, such nominations must withstand the test of reasonableness and fairness.
The doctrine of 'equality' which is all pervasive will have to be kept in view even while making nomination.
Nomination in favour of the candidates, who are related to the political workers, Public men or officers who are bearing responsibility for dealing with law and order problem directly or indirectly, or the candidates who cannot go out of the State for education due to financial problems, has got no nexus whatsoever with the selection based on merit.
This policy of the object of selection.
The last category of nominations takes within its fold all types of candidates.
A total free hand has been given Government does not bear any rationality with the to the Government to nominate anybody according to its choice.
It is impossible to discern any rational principle or policy behind nomination of the candidates at the sweet Will of those in power.
Merely because one happens to be a Member of a family which is related to a political worker or public men or an officer, who is dealing with law and order or who is connected with the terrorist affected family or one who cannot go out for studies on account of financial problems, cannot be a ground for giving admission to the post-graduate course so as to stultify the chance of a pre meritorious candidate.
The unfettered, unbridled and unguided power which the Government has assumed in the garb of nomination is a total antithesis to the doctrine of 'equality'.
We can do not better than quoting the observation of the Supreme Court in EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555, while giving a new dimension to the doctrine of 'equality' embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court observed : "From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness.
In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary it is implicit in it that it is unequal both accord, political 10 and constitutional law and is, therefore, violative of Article 14" (emphasis supplied) In his inimitable while Krishna Iyer, J dissected Article 14 in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, 1978(2) SCR 621 and held that :  "That article has a pervasive processual potency and versatile equality, egalitarian in its soul and allergic to discriminatory diktats.
Equality is the antithesis of arbitrariness and ex-cathedra ipse dixit is the ally of demagogic authoritarianism.
Only knight-errants of 'executive excesses' - if we may use a current clinche-can fall in love with the Dame of despotism, legislative or administrative.
If this Court gives in here it gives up the ghost.
And so it is that I insist on the dynamics of limitations on fundamental freedoms as implying the rule of law; Be you ever so high , the law is above you.
New domination given to Article 14 in Maneka Gandhi's case (supra) reached its peak when in Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of UP, AIR 1991 SC 571 : 1991(1) SCT 575 (SC), the apex Court declared that every State action, including that falling in the field of contract, must be free from arbitrariness and must be fair and legality of the State action is liable to be tested on the touch-stone of fairness.
The Court further held that if the State action is found to be arbitrary, it will be presumed to be contrary to Article 14 of the Constitution."
We agree with the conclusions arrived at by the Division Bench in Anter Preet Singh's case (supra).
4.
We do not agree with the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that this Court has no jurisdiction to examine the respondent's right, power and its extent so far as nominations are concerned.
In the constitutional system which we have in our country it is our bourden constitutional obligation to act according to law and give appropriate directions for restoring confidence amongst the people in the institution of judiciary and allay their apprehensions or misgivings conceived in their minds regarding the impartiality of the judiciary, supremacy of law and establishment of the society, free from extraneous interference.
The concept of the rule of law is not a myth but a reality being a living concept of our constitutional system to achieve the rule of law in this country which requires that every governmental authority which does some act, must be able to justify its action as authorised by law which means that every act which affects the legal rights, duties or liberties of any person must be shown to have a strictly legal pedigree.
It has been held time and again that executive actions have to be performed within the framework of recognized rules and the principles and cannot be left to the whims and caprice of any authority of the executive, however, high it may be, as has been done by such authorities in the instant case.
In Director of Rationing and Distribution v. The Corporation of Calcutta, AIR 1960 SC 1355, the Supreme Court held that in our country, the rule of law prevails which has been guaranteed in our constitution by virtue of the provisions contained in Part III thereof as well as by other provisions in other parts.
It was further held that the State, no less than its citizens, were bound by the laws of the land.
The Courts in this country have to follow the ordinary principles of construction that no one is exempted from the operation of a statute unless the statute expressly guaranteed the exemption or the exemption arose by necessary implication.
In a State which has a written Constitution and where the pattern of Government is democratic, as we have in our country, the one outstanding feature of it is the supremacy of law in the realm, commonly known as the rule of law.
The term "rule of law" in brief connotes the undisputed supremacy of law and envisages a state of things in which every one respects the law and where law has to be followed by every one collectively and individually.
This supremacy of law is designed to give security to the rights of individuals who are the citizens of a freed democratic State.
The law has to be followed and if transgressed by any one, whether by the State or the individual would destroy the very fabric of the democratic system.
The Supreme Court in Mohd.
Rashid Ahmed v. State of UP, AIR 1979 SC 592 relied upon its earlier judgment in AK Karipak v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150, wherein it was held :  "Under our Constitution, the rule of law pervades over the anti-field of administration.
Every organ of the State under our Constitution is regulated and controlled by the rule of law.
In a welfare State like ours, it is inevitable that the jurisdiction of the administration bodies is increasing at a rapid rate.
The concept of the rule of law would lose its vitality if the instrumentalities of the State are not charged with the duty of discharging their function in a fair and just manner.
The requirement of acting judicially in essence is nothing but a requirement to act justly and fairly and not arbitrarily or capriciously.
The procedures which are considered inherent in the exercise of a judicial power are merely those which facilitate if not ensure a just and fair decision.
In recent years the concept of quasi-judicial power has been undergoing a radical change.
What was considered as an administrative power some years back is now being considered as a quasi-judicial power."
It was further held :-  "This court pertinently drew attention to the basic concept of natural justice vis-a-vis administrative and quasi-judicial enquiries, and stated that any decision, whether executive, administrative or judicial or quasi-judicial is no decision if it cannot be 'just', i.e. an impartial and objective assessment of all the pros and cons of a case, after due hearing of the parties concerned."
In a developing society like ours, the Government has been found to be pouring wealth, money, benefits, service, contracts, quotas and licences.
It was held in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority and ors., AIR 1979 SC 1628 :  "Today the Government, in a welfare State is the regulator and dispenser of special services and provider of a large number of benefits; including jobs, contracts, licences, quotas, mineral rights etc.
The Government pours forth wealth, money, benefits, services, contracts, quotas and licences.
The valuables dispensed by Government take many forms, but they share one characteristic.
They are steadily taking the place of traditional form of wealth.
These valuables which derive from relationship to Government are of many kinds.
They comprise social security benefits, cash grants for political sufferers and the whole scheme of State and local welfare.
Then again, thousands of people are employed in the State and the Central Government and local authorities.
Licences are required before one can engage in many kinds of businesses or work.
The power of giving licences means power to withhold them and this gives control to the Government or to the agents of Government on the lives of many people.
Many individuals and many more businesses enjoy largess in the form of Government contracts.
These contracts often resemble subsidies.
It is virtually impossible to loss money on them and many enterprises are set up primarily to do business with Government.
Government owns and controls hundreds of acres of public land valuable for mining and other purposes.
These resources are available for utilization by private corporations and individuals by way of lease or licence.
All these mean growth in the Government largess and with the increasing magnitude and range of governmental functions as we move closer to a welfare state, more and more of our wealth consists of these new forms.
Some of these forms of wealth may be in the nature of legal rights but the large majority of them are in the nature of privileges.
But on that account, can it be said that at they do not enjoy any legal protection ?
Can they be regarded as gratuity furnished by the State so that the State may without, grant or revoke it at its pleasure ?
Is the position of the Government in this respect the same as that of a private giver ?
We do not think so.
The law has not been slow to recognise the importance of this new kind of wealth and the need to protect individual interest in it and with that end in view, it has developed new forms of protection.
Some interests in Govt. largess, formerly regarded as privileges, have been recognised as rights while others have been given legal protection not only by forging procedural safeguards but also by confining/structuring and checking Government discretion in the matter of grant of such largess.
The discretion of the Government has been held to be not unlimited in that the Government cannot give or withhold largess in its arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will.
It is insisted, as pointed out by Professor Reich in an especially stipulating article on "The New Property" in 73 Yale Law Journal 733, "that Government action be based on standards that are not arbitrary or un-authorised."
The Government cannot be permitted to say that it will give jobs or enter into contracts or issue quotas or licences only in favour of those having grey hair or belonging to a particular political party or professing a particular religious faith.
The Government is still the Government when it acts in the matter of granting largess and it cannot act arbitrarily.
It does not stand in the same position as a private individual."
The Supreme Court agreed with the observations of Mathew, J in V. Punna Thomas v. State of Kerala, AIR 1969 Kerala 81(FB), to the effect that the Government is not and should not be free as an individual in selecting the recipients for its largess.
Whatever its activity, the Government is subject to restrains inherent in its position in a democratic society.
A democratic Government cannot be permitted to lay down arbitrary and capricious standards for the choice of persons upon whom the largess are to be bestowed.
Their Lordships also approved their earlier decision in Erusion Equipment and Chemicals Ltd v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 266, wherein the then Chief Justice had held that, "the democratic form of the Government demands equality and absence of arbitrariness and discrimination in such transactions ....
The activities of the Government have a public element and, therefore, there should be fairness and equality".
It is now established that the Govt. cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will and like a private individual deal with any person it pleases but its actions are required to be in conformity with the standards or norms which are not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
The power of the Govt. in the grant of largess including award of jobs, contracts, and quotas, licences or even admission to professional courses must be confined and structured by a rational, relevant and non-discretionary standards and norms, in any particular case or cases, the action of the Govt. is liable to be struck down unless it can be shown that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principles which were not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory.
5.
Right of equality enshrined in Part III of the Constitution is, in fact, heart and soul of our Constitution system.
Article 14 enshrines that the State shall not deny to any person equality before law or equal protection of laws which means the right to equal treatment in similar circumstances both in the privileges conferred and the liabilities imposed.
Any State action, legislative, judicial or executive shall be void if it contravenes Article 14.
Article 15 provides prohibition of discrimination on the ground or religion, race, caste, sex and the place of birth and Article 16 guarantees equality of opportunity in the matters of public employment.
The guarantee of equal protection has been held to embrace the entire realm of the State action and is attracted not only when an individual is discriminated against in the matter of exercise of his rights or in the matter of imposing liabilities but also in the matter of granting privileges (AIR 1979 SC 1628).
Equality before law cannot be achieved unless equality of opportunity is ensured.
State is, however, authorised to make permissible classifications provided such classifications are tested upon at least two conditions, namely; (i) that the classification must be found on an intelligible differentia which distinguished persons or things those are grouped together from other left out of the group; and, (ii) that the differentia must have rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Statute in question.
There must be nexus between the basis of the classification and the object of such classification under consideration.
Courts cannot insist that classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete and would interfere only when the classification results in the pronounced inequality.
Article 14 has been held to be not merely a prohibition but confers right of equality and its violation is justifiable by this Court in exercise of the powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Right to equality and equal protection of laws under Article 14 are genus and the right to non- discrimination under Articles 15 and 16 are species.
It was held in AIR 1987 J&K 2, that Article 14 seeks for every citizen equality of law and equal protection of laws and this concept is based on rule of law which ensures fairness in action which should be free from arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and mala fides generally render an action unconstitutional being violative of Article 14.
In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bharat Singh, AIR 1967 SC 1170, it was noticed "Our federal structure is founded on certain fundamental principles, (i) sovereignty of the people with limited Govt. authority i.e., the Govt. must be conducted in accordance with the Will of the majority of the people.
The people govern themselves through their representatives whereas the official agencies and the executive government possess only such powers as have been conferred upon them by the people; (ii) there is discrimination of power between three organs of the State-Legislative, executive and judiciary - each organ having some check direct or indirect on the other; and (iii) the rule of law which includes judicial review of arbitrary executive action".
The Supreme Court in this judgment approved what Diecy had stated in his "Introduction to the Study of Law of the Constitution" (10th Edn.
P. 202).
6.
Dealing with similar circumstances, the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in 'Qazi Yusra Aslam and others v. State of ors., KLJ (Special Supplement) 1993, page 1, held as under :-  "The object and purpose of making selection to the MBBS/BDS courses is admittedly to select the best for imparting education and training for children who are supposed to become doctors to perform the duties for the service of the society.
Such students selected for undergoing the MBBS/BDS courses are supposed and expected to deal with the suffering masses and to prevent the disaster to the humanity eschewing it on account of diseases and matters relating to health and welfare of the people.
To achieve the object of having professionals in the medical field, an effort is always made to select the meritorious by ignoring the extraneous considerations.
The State has, however, in its wisdom thought it proper to give some representation to the socially and educationally backward class of citizens or for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
The selection/nominations to the professional courses particularly the MBBS/BDS cannot be equated with the ordinary largess or as a reward for the alleged service rendered by the parents of a candidate.
The object of selection being to select the best cannot be permitted to be made the conferment of benefits upon politicians and bureaucrats ignoring the object of selection to MBBS/BDS courses.
The object of making selection and appointment is to recruit doctors and not pay reward to the persons who are alleged to have suffered on account of insurgency, militancy or law and order problem.
Unless the categories of reservation are referred to the nexus with the object of selection the best or promoting socio economic backward class conditions or to the other deserving unrepresented categories, such classification has to be set aside being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
7.
In the instant case, the allegations have been made that the largess in the form of nominations has been conferred on the private respondents for extraneous grounds and irrelevant considerations.
The children of highly placed bureaucrats and politicians connected with the ruling party have alone been nominated to undergo MBBS course.
It is true that merely because a person is a relation of either a bureaucrat or a politician is no ground to quash his nomination but it is equally true that if such a nomination is made and the same is challenged, the respondents are under an obligation to allay the apprehension of the people in general and the petitioners in particular that such nomination were neither motivated nor intended to be state patronage for the benefit of such nominated candidates.
It cannot be a co-incidence that all the respondents in the instant case are related either to the bureaucrats or to politicians or the persons in authority connected with the ruling party.
Respondent Samarjit Singh Chatha is the son of Shri A.S. Chatha, Chief Secretary of the Punjab, Ms. Ravneet Kaur is the daughter of ruling party M.L.A., Ms. Radha Mehra is the daughter of former Chief Minister of the State, Mr. Amitoj Singh Multani is son of sitting M.L.A.
of the ruling party, Ms. Munu is the grand daughter of the ruling party M.L.A.
Similarly Gagandeep Singh is related either to a politician or a bureaucrat or is an associate of the ruling party politician.
It is also shocking to note that respondent Ravneet Kaur had obtained 1591%, Ms. Munu had obtained 1900%, Samarjit Singh Chatha had obtained 1875%, Amitoj Singh Multani had obtained 1767% and Gagandeep Singh had obtained 2100% in the P.M.T.
- 1994 whereas the petitioners, who have approached us, have obtained more than 6300% marks in the P.M.T.-1994.
Conferment of State largess upon the respondents cannot therefore, be held to be reasonable or genuine.
It is also not acceptable that the aforesaid respondents were nominated either on merit or on the basis of the criterion laid down.
8.
In view of the fact that the guidelines under which nomination of private respondents were made have already been declared to be unconstitutional and void, action taken thereunder cannot be upheld on any ground.
Consequently, the nominations of Ms. Ravneet Kaur, Ms. Munu, Ms. Radha Mehra, Mr. Samarjit Singh Chatha, Mr. Sharanjit Singh, Mr. Amitoj Singh Multani and Gagandeep Singh, private respondents made vide the orders impugned in these Civil Writ Petitions is hereby set aside and the seats held by them are declared to have fallen vacant with immediate effect.
The concerned department of the respondent-State shall immediately and not later than one week intimate the concerned Principals of the Medical Colleges that nomination of the aforesaid private respondents has been set aside.
The concerned Principals shall not allow the aforesaid private respondents to pursue or continue their studies in their medical colleges after the period of one week in any case.
The seats held by the private respondents may be diverted to the open merit category and filled up accordingly.
Consequently, all the writ petitions bearing CWP No. 11372, 11838, 11339, 12041, 12152, 12238, 12438, 12529, 12697, 12794, 12927, 13110, and 12993 of 1994 are partly allowed and the petitioners are held entitled to costs which are assessed at Rs. 100/- for each petition.
A copy of this order be given dasti to Shri ML Sarin, Sr. Advocate, who appeared for the State of Punjab, for communication to the concerned for immediate compliance of the directions.
Petition partly allowed.