VK Bali, J - The petitioner-Krishan Kumar Rao, who came to be employed as a Godown Keeper by the respondent Haryana Warehousing Corporation on 1671985, ever since his first order of retrenchment seems to be in protracted litigation with the respondent-Corporation.
The challenge herein is with regard to the appointment of Enquiry Officer which order was passed after issuing show cause notice and the statement of allegations and after prima facie holding that the reply given by the petitioner was not satisfactory.
Before, however, the precise challenge to the aforesaid proceedings is noticed any further, it shall be useful to notice the facts that culminated in the order of appointment of the Enquiry Officer.
2.
The petitioner, after passing Matriculation examination from the Central Board of High Education, initially sought employment as a clerk in the Haryana State Industries & Export Corporation, Chandigarh.
He was appointed with the said Corporation on a consolidated salary of Rs. 450/- pm on 631985.
Thereafter on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Haryana State Industries & Export Corporation, the surplus staff was asked to quit, as a result of which the petitioner was also rendered jobless.
It is thereafter that he applied for his appointment as Godown Keeper with the respondent - Corporation and was so appointed on ad hoc basis for a period of 12 weeks on 1671985.
On the expiry of the period referred to above, he was once again appointed for a period of 12 weeks vide orders, a copy whereof has been annexed as annexure P-2.
On the expiry of this period as well, he was further appointed for another period of 12 weeks and for yet another period of 12 weeks vide order dated 1651986.
It is pleaded that the petitioner was discharging similar functions and duties as of regular employees and was transferred from Hansi to Bhiwani vide order dated 24.5.1986.
The services of the petitioner were terminated on 24.3.1986.
This constrained him to raise industrial dispute in the Labour Court and after resultant trial on the issues framed by the Labour Court, he as reinstated vide award dated 711988 (annexure P-5).
The order of termination was obviously set aside and he was ordered to be reinstated forthwith with continuity of service and back wages.
The award thus attained finality and that being so, petitioner was reinstated vide orders dated 2641988.
He took the charge of his office in State Warehousing Corporation, Mallekan District Sirsa.
While in service there, which according to him, was to the total satisfaction of his superiors there being no complaint against him regarding work and conduct, one Shri Gopi Ram resident of the same place, however, made a complaint to the respondent-Corporation on the basis of which he was placed under suspension vide orders dated 28.2.1989 (annexure P-7).
He had, prior to the order of termination, been employed for a period of over 240 days and after reinstatement, for a period of little more than 9 months.
After suspension, he was also given a memo dated 381988 with statement of allegations, a copy whereof has been placed on the records of this case as annexure P-8.
He was asked to submit reply/representation.
Consequently, he gave a detailed reply inter alia stating that after coming to know that some vacancies of Godown Keepers were lying vacant, he had applied for the said posts along with certified copies of the documents pertaining to his educational qualifications.
The concerned official checked these documents and thereafter on 1671985, he was appointed as Godown Keeper with the Corporation at Bhiwani.
He submitted joining report on 25.4.1985 and he was issued orders from time to time till 22.4.1986 and the Labour Court had given award in his favour in compliance whereof, he was reinstated and he submitted joining report at State Warehousing Corporation, Mallekan.
A copy of the representation has been placed on the records of this case as annexure P-9.
The various pleas raised by the petitioner in his reply, however, did not satisfy the respondent-Corporation and he was once again ordered to quit the job on 2.6.1989.
Aggrieved against the same, the petitioner came complaining about his dismissal from service in this Court vide C.W.P.
No. 9301 of 1989.
The writ petition was admitted and the operation of the orders impugned therein was stayed by a Divisional Bench of this Court on 2471989.
This left no choice with the respondent-Corporation but for to take him back in service regarding which the orders were actually passed on 2471989.
However, during the pendency of the writ petition, the Managing Director of the Corporation withdrew the order annexure P-10 dismissing him from service vide order dated 9101989.
The first writ petition thus became infructuous and was accordingly dismissed.
On the basis of the order vide which the first writ was dismissed as infructuous, the Managing Director of the Corporation passed the order dated 511990 which was, however, issued on 1111990 vide which the Enquiry Officer was appointed to hold departmental enquiry into the charges mentioned in the charge-sheet dated 831989.
It is this order of appointing an Enquiry Officer and proceedings thereafter that have been called into question as mentioned in the earlier part of this judgment.
3.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it would be significant to mention that in pursuance of the orders passed by this Court on 27.1.1990 admitting the writ petition and staying the enquiry during the pendency of the petition, however, and application for vacation of stay was filed by the respondent-Corporation and the order dated 27.1.1990 was modified.
The respondent-Corporation was permitted to go ahead with the departmental proceedings initiated against the petitioner but passing of final order was stayed.
It is thus clear that ever since the petitioner was taken back in service in consequence of the order passed by the Labour Court, he continues to be in service and in that manner, has put in more than six years of actual service by now.
To further clarify, it is mentioned here that this period of six years is excluding the period when litigation inter se the parties was going on before the Labour Court.
4 The order appointing an Enquiry Officer to go into the charges levelled against the petitioner has been mainly challenged by the petitioner on the ground that he did possess the minimum qualifications which were pre-requisite for the appointment to the post of Godown Keeper, i.e. Matriculation and Matriculation Certificate produced by him for obtaining employment was issued by the Central Board of High Education.
It is also pleaded and so argued by the learned Counsel that the petitioner came to be employed as Godown Keeper in July, 1985.
As his appointment was made after verification of the qualifications that he possessed before joining his duties, there was no concealment of facts by the petitioner for obtaining the order of appointment, as also that the Matriculation Certificate obtained by him was not a fabricated document, as was the solitary allegation levelled against him in the article of charges issued to him by the respondent-Corporation.
5.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed by the Haryana Warehousing Corporation, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objections that the writ petition is premature as the same has been directed against the appointment of Enquiry Officer to conduct regular departmental enquiry as also that the petitioner has deliberately concealed material facts.
It is also pleaded that the allegations of mala fide extraneous consideration of harassment were all vague and that nobody had been named in the petition who, according to the petitioner, might be working against his interest.
On merits, as far as bare minimum facts detailed above are concerned, the same have been admitted but it is further stated that a complaint was received by the respondent-Corporation that the Matriculation certificate produced by the petitioner was fraudulent inasmuch as no such Central Board of High Education, East Patel Nagar, New Delhi was in existence or has been recognised by the Haryana Government for service and higher education.
This complaint was sent to the respondent-Corporation by the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa for immediate necessary action.
On the basis of this complaint, the petitioner was suspended pending investigation.
It is further the case of the respondent-Management that the petitioner was not eligible for appointment as he had not passed the Matriculation examination from a recognised institution.
The certificate produced by the petitioner was accepted as valid initially as it was not checked.
When enquiries were made only after the receipt of a complaint and on the basis thereof, it was established that the Central Board of High Education is not recognised by the Haryana Government.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel representing the respondent-Corporation, during the course of arguments, has placed on record a copy of the order dated 6.3.1991 passed by Shri GD Rattan, IAO-cum-Enquiry Officer holding the petitioner guilty of the charges levelled against him by returning a finding that the certificate on the basis of which the petitioner was appointed, was obtained from an institution which was not recognised by the Government.
Learned counsel, on the basis of the enquiry report, thus, contends that the petitioner was not eligible to be appointed as a Clerk/Godown Keeper being not a Matriculate and procured appointment by producing a fake certificate, was not entitled to carry on the job and that the respondent was well within its rights to proceed against him and terminate his services in consequence of the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is, however, of the considered view that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is proved on the records of this case that before the petitioner came to occupy, the post presently occupied by him, he was appointed as a Clerk in the Haryana State Industries & Export Corporation, Chandigarh vide order dated 631985 on a consolidated salary of Rs. 450/- pm After he had to quit the job in the circumstances referred to above, he applied for the post of Godown Keeper when he came to know that some such posts were lying vacant with the Corporation.
He submitted application for appointment along with the certified copies of the certificates of educational qualifications, that he possessed.
As per his case which has to be true, the certificates were scrutinised and it is thereafter that he was given the appointment.
It is correct that the respondent Corporation, in the written statement, has mentioned that the Matriculation certificate of the petitioner was not checked by the officers/official of the respondent-Corporation and the matter came to the notice of the Corporation only on a complaint received by it but this plea cannot be accepted for the simple reason that it cannot be expected that anyone could be employed by the Corporation without checking the certificates pertaining to bare minimum and essential qualifications for the posts available under the Corporation.
The respondent-Corporation even though initially appointed the petitioner for 12 weeks, extended his period on various occasions as referred to above and only thought of enquiring into the authenticity of Matriculation certificate produced by him after it had lost the case in the Labour Court and re-employed him in consequence of the order passed in the award reinstating the petitioner with continuity in service and the back wages.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, a finding thus has to be returned that the petitioner did not misstate anything nor obtain employment from the respondent-Corporation by concealment of facts or by fraud.
The facts of the case referred demonstrate that it was not a case of producing a forged or fake certificate but was, at the most, a case of producing a certificate of having passed the Matriculation examination from an institution which was not recognised by the Government.
7.
In these circumstances, coupled with the fact that the petitioner is now in the employment for the last more than six years of actual service, it will be too inequitous and unjust to tell him to pack up and search for another job which may be very difficult at this age, if not impossible.
The Court has gone through the report of Shri GD Rattan, IAO-cum-Enquiry Officer.
It appears that after some proceedings wherein the respondents participated, the matter was proceeded ex parte on account of non-further participation of the petitioner despite various notices sent to him.
The Enquiry Officer has given initially the facts of the case and a list of documents and evidence that had to be produced by the either side and after elaborately giving reasons for proceedings ex parte against the petitioner, the Enquiry Officer concluded the matter by observing "that on the basis of the facts on record, it is established that Shri KK Rao, GK SWH, Mallekan intentionally did not bother to participate in the enquiry proceedings.
The documents, i.e. court rulings, award of the Labour Court, experience certificate etc. submitted by him speak of his efforts as to how his appointment in HWC could be regularised and he could be retained in service and not to prove that the charges levelled against him are false.
The defendant, in fact, had nothing with him on the basis of which he could prove that the charges are false.
The defendant's ray of hope appears only the court's verdict whether he could be retained in service or he warrants some deterrent punishment for his fraudulent act of securing his appointment in HWC on the basis of a fake certificate which has not been recognised by the Government so far.
The undersigned could say without hesitation that the certificate on the basis of which the defendant was appointed, is not recognised by the Government, as contended by the PO in his argument available at NP48-49.
Hence the charges stand proved beyond doubt."
8.
A perusal of the enquiry report would not make it out a case of applying mind by the Enquiry Officer.
No document or evidence led either by the Management or by the petitioner came to be focussed or discussed.
This Court, however, is not concerned with the validity of the report but it requires to be mentioned that the Enquiry Officer was himself conscious on the basis of various documents produced by the petitioner that even though the Matriculation certificate produced by him was not from a recognised University or Board, he had yet a case for continuing in service.
This aspect of the matter was, however, ignored on the ground that it was not the scope of enquiry and thereafter concluding that the certificate on the basis of which the petitioner was appointed, was not recognised by the Government, it was held that the charges stand proved beyond doubt.
Assuming that the stand of the respondent-Corporation that Matriculation done by the petitioner is not from an institution which was recognised by the Government, this Court still is of the view that the petitioner should not be asked to quit at this stage when he is in the service of the respondent-Corporation from 1985 for all practical purposes but, in any case, has experience of the post for more than six years' actual service.
This coupled with the fact that the petitioner has not concealed any material fact from the respondent-Corporation while seeking employment and that it is not a case of fake/forged certificate, as is the case of the Corporation, but is at the most, a case of obtaining a certificate from an institution which is not recognised by the Government, the petitioner deserves to continue in service.
The Apex Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, A.I.R. 1990 SC 371 held as under :  "Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is not so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once appointments of petitioners were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
It can be said that three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the Management, in circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is allowed.
The Show Cause Notice annexure P-9 and the order appointing the Enquiry Officer as also the report of the Enquiry Officer which has also been placed on record during the course of arguments, are all set aside and a direction is issued to the respondents to permit the petitioner to carry on with the job that he is doing.
The respondent-Management shall, however, always be entitled to proceed against the petitioner if there be any other charge, i.e. the charge other than one disclosed in the article of charges, but on the basis of the charge-sheet subject matter of the present case, the petitioner's services cannot be terminated.
The petition is thus allowed in the manner indicated above but there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.