GS Singhvi, J - Despite several decisions of this Court on the question of entitlement of Headmistresses employed in the Government schools in pursuance of Government Notification No. 1/17/2PR(FD)-80 dated 18111980, the respondents have not discharged their constitutional obligations to give similar benefit to the persons like the petitioner and this is the precise reason which has compelled the petitioner to file this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The facts of the case, which have remained uncontroverted on account of the non-filing of the reply by the respondents show that the petitioner joined service as Math.
Mistress in Government School with effect from 1581963.
She was promoted as Headmistress of Government High School with effect from 891973.
In the provisional gradation list of Headmistresses (State Cadre) as on 111985 the name of the petitioner appears at Sr. No. 131.
The Government of Haryana has revised pay-scales of the Headmistresses of the Government High Schools from time to time.
The last revision was made effective from 1.4.1979.
Regular time scale of Rs. 700-1250 came to be prescribed for the posts of Headmistresses and 20% of the total posts were to be filled by grant of selection grade (Rs.800-1600) as per notification dated 18111986.
Petitioner's plea is that although in terms of the notification dated 18111980 Annexure P.1 it was obligatory for the respondents to have taken into consideration the total number of posts of Headmistresses for determining the ratio of 20% posts to be filled by grant of selection grade, the respondents restricted this consideration to the posts which were in existence for the last three years.
This decision of the respondents drastically curtailed the number of available posts which could be filled by grant of selection grade.
3.
Petitioner has made reference to an order passed by this Court in Ram Nath Chandok and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986 (2) SU 41, wherein a learned Single Judge of this Court accepted the case of the similarly situated persons and allowed the grant of selection grade against the total number of vacant posts of Headmistresses.
Letters Patent Appeal No. 135 of 1986 filed against the order of the learned Single Judge was dismissed by a Division Bench and the petition for leave to appeal was also dismissed by the Supreme Court.
This order of the learned Single Judge has found approval of a Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 16879 of 1991 decided on 241992 as well as C.W.P.
No. 4998 of 1992 titled as Smt. Chameli Devi and others v. The State of Haryana and others, decided on 1491992.
Further assertion of the petitioner is that in pursuance of the decisions of this Court respondents have passed orders dated 611993 and granted the benefit of selection grade to the persons named in the said order.
It was further pleaded that notwithstanding the fact that the respondents have accepted the decisions of this Court rendered in different cases, the benefit of selection grade has not been given to the petitioner despite the fact that she fulfils the conditions of eligibility for grant of selection grade.
4.
The only argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner, which in my opinion merits acceptance, is that once the Court has interpreted the ambit and scope of the notification dated 18111980 and has ordered the grant of selection grade, there is not reason as to why the respondents should deny the similar benefit to the petitioner.
Learned counsel argued that once the earlier order passed by this Court has acquired finality, it.
is the mandatory duty of the respondents to give effect to the orders passed by this Court in the cases of similarly situated persons.
5.
I have carefully gone through the contents of the writ petition and the enclosed documents as well as the orders passed by this Court of which reference has been made hereinabove.
This Court has after careful examination of the contentions advanced by the State regarding the interpretation of the notification dated 18111980 held that benefit of selection grade cannot be restricted qua posts which are available for a period of three years.
A learned Single Bench as well as a Division Bench of this Court has held that the respondents should have taken into consideration total number of permanent as well as temporary posts while granting selection grade irrespective of the existence of the temporary posts.
These orders of the Court have become final.
The Government has issued order dated 611993 in compliance with the orders passed by this Court.
This being the factual situation, there is hardly any ground for denying benefit of selection grade to the petitioner.
In my considered view, by sheer inaction the respondents have created a situation in which the petitioner has been subjected to hostile discrimination and her fundamental right of equality before law in the matter of employment has been infringed.
6.
In the light of the orders passed by the Single Bench as well as the Division Bench, this writ petition succeeds and it is hereby allowed.
The respondents are directed to give relief to the petitioner by grant of selection grade in terms of the orders passed by a Division Bench on 241992 and 1491992.
The respondents must give effect to this order within a period of two months from the date of filing a certified copy of this order.
If the respondents fail to give effect to this order within the stipulated period, the petitioner shall get interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount of arrears with effect from the date of this order.