D P Hiremath and C Shivappa, JJ.
- These writ appeals arise out of a common order passed by the learned single Judge in a batch of writ petitions challenging the promotions made and rankings given to the petitioners and respondents by the respondent - Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd ("Power Corporation" hereafter for short).
In the year 1970 the Power Corporation was established for the State of Karnataka and the initial appointment in the Corporation of the petitioners and respondents was as Engineers between August 1971 and March 1972.
Thereafter promotions came to be made to the cadre of Group Engineers and thereafter to that of Divisional Engineers from the Group Engineers.
When the petitions came to be filed the Power Corporation had the cadres of Group Engineers (GE), Divisional Engineers (D.E.
), Superintending Engineers (S.E.)
and Chief Engineers (C.E.).
Promotions were effected as and when the Engineers in one cadre became eligible to be promoted to a higher cadre on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
Though appointments were made between August 1971 and 1973 of the petitioners and respondents as Engineers promotions to the cadre of Group Engineers were made between 1974 and 1976 from amongst these Engineers.
The provisional list of Group Engineers was published on 11.6.1981 and in that list the petitioners were shown at Sl.
Nos. 36, 34, 35, 41, 40, 43 and 44 respectively.
The petitioners contended that the Engineers who had been recruited in KPC subsequent to their appointment had been shown as senior to petitioners.
Thus in the provisional list the Group Engineers placed above them were juniors to them and the rankings assigned to them and the promotions given were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Even the final list of Group Engineers published on 24101981 did not remedy the defect and illegality pointed out by the petitioners in their objections.
Three of them promoted later as Divisional Engineers from the cadre of Group Engineers were also junior to one of the petitioners by name Basavarajaiah.
The contentions summarised by the learned Judge from the petitions are as follows :  "(i) The maintenance of seniority not on the basis of merit list or the select list by which the petitioners were selected to the cadre of Engineers but on some ad hoc basis;  (ii) the respondents who had their entries in the Power Corporation (KPC) subsequent to the petitioners' appointment had got the benefit of their promotions to the cadre of Group Engineers earlier than the petitioners which was clearly illegal;  (iii) when the promotion to the cadre of Group Engineers itself was illegal the seniority list showing such promotions was also illegal."
The petitioners therefore sought review of promotions of the respondents in their petitions and reassignment of rankings to them and also subsequent promotions to the higher cadres.
They requested that maintenance of rankings assigned in the select list in the entry level be made and assignment of inter se promotions on the basis of seniority be made.
2.
The Power Corporation (KPC) and other respondents while admitting that initial appointment was made as Engineers between 1971 and 1973, urged that in the year 1975-76 the KPC promoted by selection on various dates the petitioners and respondents to the cadre of Group Engineers and review of these promotions at the stage at which it was sought to be done amounts to quashing of promotions themselves or get orders altered after their promotions were given effect to and therefore the petitions are liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches alone.
It was however admitted by the KPC that in the year 1970 when it was in formative stage no seniority list was published nor was followed.
Appointments to various positions with high responsibilities were made on the basis of selection of in-service candidates possessing requisite qualification considering their suitability and their performance.
Though Engineers were appointed at different times and in batches their work and suitability were assessed on a comparative evaluation of Group Engineers.
The Managing Director made a final selection for appointment and appointed them to the posts of Group Engineers on due consideration of the reports of the Assessing Officers and the Service Records of all the eligible Engineers.
Promotions were also made in the same manner.
In the cadre of Group Engineers the names of selected candidates were arranged in the order of merit as assessed by the Managing Director in the cadre of Group Engineers.
Therefore the seniority is governed by the places assigned to them on merit and the date of their appointment to the cadre of Group Engineers.
Therefore the contention of the petitioners that the seniority among Group Engineers should have been made on the basis of their seniority in the entry cadre is not tenable.
3.
The KPC published a list on 23.5.1975 for the purpose of compilation of service data in relation to Officers and on that basis a seniority list was published on 24101981 after objections were invited from all concerned.
Before preparing this seniority list objections raised by various persons were duly considered.
Though some guidelines were prepared later they had only prospective effect.
By the time these guidelines came into force the petitioners as well as respondents 2 to 36 had all been appointed as Group Engineers.
Because the three persons, namely, Lingadevaru, Maddikar and Dorairaj were promoted to the cadre of Divisional Engineers by that time their names did not find place in the list of Group Engineers.
The KPC therefore contended that the contentions raised by the petitioners were not tenable.
4.
The learned Judge formulated the following for consideration :  "(1) Whether there are any laches on the part of the petitioners in approaching this Court in seeking various reliefs ?
(2) Whether the ranking assigned to the petitioners and respondents 2 to 36 is correct ?
(3) Whether as contended by the respondents the appointments made to the cadre of Group Engineers were by selection after considering the cases of all eligible including the petitioners ? "
The learned Judge found that even prima facie no case was made out by the respondents that the petitioners are guilty of such laches as disentitle them to seek reliefs in the hands of this Court.
On merit he was of the view that there were no settled Cadre and Recruitment Rules initially and later though the Managing Director laid certain criteria for assessing the suitability of the Engineers in different cadres for promotion there is nothing to show that the cases of the petitioners and respondents were together considered and a comparative merit of each of them was evaluated for the purpose of selection to the post of Group Engineers.
Similarly there is no material forthcoming to show that criteria was applied in respect of the Engineers to bring out a comparative evaluation of the merit of persons who needed to be promoted.
In the opinion of the learned Judge, therefore, in the absence of the same the conclusion became irresistible that promotions were made without considering the cases of the petitioners and hence are not valid.
He however felt that in view of the promotions having taken place and the Engineers working in different promotional cadres it was unnecessary to quash the promotions effected by the KPC and found it fit to direct the KPC to review the entire promotions made between 1975-76 for the purpose of assigning of proper ranking to the petitioners and the respondents.
So observing and making the Rule absolute the following direction was made :  "These petitions are allowed with a direction to the respondents to reconsider the cases of the petitioners and respondents 2 to 36 and review their promotions in the light of the observations made above and in accordance with the law and assign them proper ranking and make further adjustment in the higher cadre as far as possible.
If any promotions have been effected to any of the posts, the same shall not be disturbed but continued at the same time necessary adjustments be made in regard to their ranking."
5.
The Corporation and the respondents in challenging this order of the learned Judge have filed separate appeals.
Writ Appeals 1488 to 1490/91 are filed by the Corporation (KPC) against 16 persons whereas Writ Appeals 1494 to 1500/91 are filed against 42 persons working under it in different cadres.
Writ Appeals 1348 to 1353/91 are filed by some of the respondents against the KPC and other respondents in the writ petition.
Writ Petition 1011/88 is filed against KPC and 10 persons seeking a declaration that the petitioner therein is senior to R-2 to R-11 in the cadre of Project Engineers in the KPC All the appellants have made a common grievance against the order of the learned single Judge.
It is generally contended that the petitioners are guilty of serious laches and on that ground alone the writ petitions ought to have been dismissed.
There is enough material on record to show that the superior officers followed the guidelines given by the then Managing Director while evaluating the merit of the Engineers in one cadre on comparative basis for promotion to the higher cadre.
The admissions of the petitioners that assessment of all the Engineers was made go to show that they ought not to have made a grievance of the kind that they have now made in the writ petitions.
If the promotions are to be reviewed at this distance of time the entire working of the Organisation would be seriously affected as subsequent to 1974 number of promotions have been effected in different cadres.
A large number of other employees who would be affected are also not made parties in the writ petitions.
A number of seniors who would have worked in higher positions would become juniors to those who had worked under them for long years and they may seek legal remedy for restoring seniority over the petitioners.
This would seriously affect the morale of large number of employees.
If the promotions already made need not be disturbed as directed by the learned Judge a large number of posts will have to be created in the Corporation for which there is no justification.
The method in which an employee is assessed for promotion should be left to the Corporation as it is the best judge to determine the mode of assessment for promotion.
No mala fides have been attributed to any Officers who assessed the respondents and others to whom promotions were given.
Therefore the bona fide assessment made does not call for interference.
No case has been made out to show that no proper procedure was followed.
It could not be possible to assess merit retrospectively for the sake of seniority-cum-merit as directed in the order and hence the direction becomes unimplementable.
In short it is contended that proper and due assessment and evaluation were made on comparative basis and there was no need for the learned Judge to make the Rule absolute.
6.
The points that arise for determination in these appeals as well as the writ petition are :  "(1) Whether the petitioners are guilty of laches as disentitle them to the relief claimed ?
(2) Whether the direction of the learned single Judge to review the promotions effected by the KPC adopting the basis stated in the order is not sustainable ? "
The main contention of the KPC has been that the petitioners and respondents were appointed as Junior Engineers in 1971, 1972 and 1973 and were appointed to the cadre of Group Engineers by selection on various dates in 1975.
As they have filed the writ petitions challenging these appointments after 6 or 7 years they are guilty of laches and therefore on that ground alone the petitions are liable to be dismissed.
The KPC published a list of Officers in various cadres for the first time on 2531978 for the purpose of compilation of the service data in relation to Officers and further indicated that it is not a seniority list at all and was not conclusive inter se ranking.
Ultimately the seniority list was published on 241081 disciplinewise and the objections were invited from all the conncerned.
In their objections the KPC also stated that in early stages promotions were not made on the basis of seniority, no seniority list as such was prepared and published and muchless followed.
Appointments to posts with higher responsibilities were made purely on the basis of selection of in- service candidates possessing requisite qualification.
However the Corporate Service List was only a fore-runner of the present seniority list dated 241081 published for various cadres.
Prior to publishing of the same a provisional seniority list in different cadres was prepared and published.
It is also their case that before finalishing and publishing the impugned seniority list rules were made and guidelines were issued in September 1981 to facilitate the preparation and finalisation of seniority list in different cadre disciplines.
However these rules were only prospective and not retrospective in effect.
On their own showing it is clear that there were no rules governing criteria to be adopted for promotions or for determining seniority.
The writ petitions were filed in December 1981 and 1982.
It is argued for the appellants that the first selection for two posts of Divisional Engineers was given effect from 1101975 and the candidates selected were R-4 S M Patil and R-5 V A Sirur.
Similarly the selections were made on 8121975, 18121976 and in the year 1977.
Therefore if at all the petitioners were aggrieved it could have been in the year 1975 itself.
In the case of State of Orissa v. P Sampantrav, AIR 1976 SC 2617 : (1976 Lab IC 1679) the representation of the petitioner against his supersession was rejected as far back in the year 1962 and he waited for 11 years to approach the Court for relief.
There was no satisfactory explanation of the inordinate delay.
The Supreme Court held that the petitioner was guilty of serious laches.
Similarly in the case of Bhoop Singh v Union of India, 1992(3) SCT 120(SC) : 1992(3) SCC 136 : (1992 Lab IC 146) there was delay of 22 years after termination of his service claiming of reinstatement on ground of discriminatory treatment.
Similarly in the case of State of M.P. v. Nandlal, AIR 1987 SC 251 : (1987 Tax LR 1830) the Supreme Court pointed out that if there is inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner in filing a writ petition and such delay is not satisfactorily explained, the High Court may decline to intervene and grant relief in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
The evolution of the rule of laches or delay is premised upon a number of factors.
The High Court does not ordinarily permit a belated resort to the extraordinary remedy under the writ jurisdiction because it is likely to cause confusion and public inconvenience and bring in its train new injustices.
What weighed with the Supreme Court was that due to the delay on the part of the petitioners in filing the writ petitions the respondents had acquired in the intervening period, land, constructed distillery and spent considerable time, money and energy towards setting up the distilleries.
However on behalf of the respondents it is emphatically pointed out that the petitioners are not guilty of laches as they could not know their rankings or seniority before the seniority list was published.
That was almost a no rule period and appointments were being made as and when the exigencies arose and promotions were also given.
Therefore until the seniority list was prepared in 1981 they had no occasion to challenge the list.
They relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of G P Doval v. Chief Secretary, AIR 1984 SC 1527 : (1984 Lab IC 1304) in which also there was a complaint of long unexplained delay on the part of the petitioners.
That was case in which the concerned respondents had not finalished the seniority list for a period of more than 12 years and were operating the same for further promotions to the utter disadvantage of the petitioners.
The petitioners continued to make representations after representations which did not yield any result.
Therefore the petitioners who belonged to the lower echelons of service found it difficult to rush to the Court.
The Supreme Court did not consider that there was delay enough to throw the petitions on that ground alone.
Similarly in the case of Joginder Nath v. Union of India, AIR 1975 SC 511 : (1975 Lab IC 847) the first list fixing the seniority of Judicial Officers was issued on 281971 but the revised list was issued only on 2.6.73.
The writ petition filed in September 1973 was held maintainable to challenge the list dated 281971.
The petitioners were not guilty of laches.
In the case of R S Deodhar v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 259 : (1974 Lab IC 165) the Supreme Court very emphatically pointed out the principle on which the Court proceeds in refusing relief to the petitioner on ground of laches or delay is that the rights which have accrued to others by reason of the delay in filing the petition should not be allowed to be disturbed unless there was reasonable explanation for the delay.
The claim for enforcement of the fundamental right of equal opportunity under Article 16 is itself a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 32 and the Supreme Court which has been assigned the role of a sentinel on the qui vive for protection of the fundamental rights cannot easily allow itself to be persuaded to refuse relief solely on the jejune ground of laches, delay or the like.
7.
We have to consider the contentions raised by the appellants in the light of these decisions to find if the petitioners are guilty of laches which disentitle them to approach this Court for the relief if it is otherwise available to them.
As we have already pointed out the KPC had not formulated any rules and had not at all prepared the seniority list till October 1981.
However the respondents were promoted in 1974, 1975 and 1976 whereas the petitioners were promoted in November and December 1976.
They waited till the seniority list was prepared in 1981 and while challenging the legality and validity of that list they have also challenged the promotions of the respondents, which took place anterior to theirs though the respondents were recruited as Engineers after the petitioners were appointed.
The Objection raised by the KPC that the petitioners are guilty of laches is closely linked with the relief claimed in the writ petitions and therefore to see if the petitions have to be rejected on the ground of laches and delay we have necessarily to examine what the petitioners seek to challenge and the effect of granting of the relief claimed invoking the writ jurisdiction.
8.
The main order was passed in Writ Petition Nos. 32094 to 32099/81 and 22461/82 and the order has been challenged in Writ Appeal Nos. 1494 to 1500/91.
The other writ petitions from which Writ Appeal Nos. 1488 to 1490/91 arise were disposed of in view of the main order passed.
Because these appeals have been pending Writ Petition No. 1011/88 is connected with these appeals as the result of this writ petition depends on the result in these appeals.
9.
The earliest of the promotions were in December 1974 when three Engineers, namely, S N Lingadevaru, R B Maddikar and S Dorairaj were promoted to the cadre of Group Engineers.
On 1101975, 27 Engineers were promoted to the cadre of Group Engineers (vide Annexures A-1 and A-2).
The third batch was promoted on 141976 (Annexure-B).
The petitioners however were promoted in December 1976.
It is not disputed that the respondents who were promoted earlier to the petitioners were all juniors to them.
It has been contended for the KPC that this averment in the writ petition clearly signifies that the petitioners were aware of the promotions made from time to time ignoring their seniority.
While respondent-1 was selected as Group Engineer in 1973 and respondents-2 and 3 were promoted even to the cadre of Divisional Engineers in 1977, respondent-1 also became Divisional Engineer in 1977.
It was submitted for the KPC and not controverted by the writ petitioners that presently they are working as Superintending Engineers.
Respondents 1 to 16 in Writ Appeal Nos. 1488 to 1490 were recruited as Group Engineers in different ways, namely, by direct appointment, by absorption and taken from P.W.D.
Respondents-1 to 3 in these appeals became Divisonal Engineers in 1977.
In fact all the respondents in these appeals have become Divisional Engineers.
Thus when these appeals were filed all the respondents had two promotions, namely, to the cadre of Group Engineers in the first instance and then to that of Divisional Engineers.
Respondents 1 to 3 were even promoted to the cadre of Superintending Engineers after the writ petitions were filed.
The grievance of the KPC has been that the learned single judge ought to have considered the merit of these writ petitions independently without basing his conclusion on the order in the other writ petitions.
10.
The fact that there were no rules formulated for guidance at the initial stage is not in challenge.
Even according to the KPC appointments to posts with higher responsibilities were made purely on the basis of selection of in-service candidates possessing requisite qualifications.
Till 2351978 no seniority list was prepared but only on that date for the purpose of compilation of serive data seniority list was published and it was made known that it was not conclusive.
The same however was the basis for seniority list published on 241081.
The affidavits filed by the Managing Director and two retired officials of the KPC namely, a retired Chief Engineer and a Divisional Engineer only aver that as efficiency was the watch word appointment to higher cadre was made purely on the basis of merit.
N G Joshi the then Chief Engineer was working as such from 1971 to March 1978 during which period the impugned appointments had taken place.
He produced a handwritten note of the then Managing Director P R Nayak giving the criteria to be adopted for appointment to higher cadre and performance of all the Engineers were assessed based on the criteria and then appointments made to higher cadre.
The learned single Judge however has pointed out that there is nothing to show that the comparative merit or evaluation was made of all the eligible officers when promotions were made.
Even from these affidavits it is not possible to make out in the absence of any record to the effect that comparative assessment of all the eligible officers was made.
At one stage the learned Judge observed thus :  "In the absence of the same the conclusion is irresistible that promotions were made without considering the cases of the petitioners and are not valid.
Now that both the petitioners as well as respondents 2 to 36 are already Group Engineers and some of them have even gone to higher cadres, it becomes necessary to redo their ranking in the cadre of Group Engineers.
It is not necessary to quash the promotions that had been effected earlier, but to direct the KPC to review the entire promotions made between the year 1975- 76 for the purpose of assignment of proper ranking to the petitioners and respondents.
If the promotions made earlier are quashed now, that may lead to other complications which as some of the respondents who have worked in those positions as Group Engineers or higher positions and drawn their emoluments while the petitioners have not worked in those positions and without working in such positions become entitled to emoluments and, particularly, all these adjustments have to be made at this distance of time would lead to many invidious results."
Having so concluded ultimately the learned Judge has made the direction extracted above.
The necessity of keeping on record the consideration of comparative merit and suitability of eligible officers as to their fitness in the selection post was highlighted by this Court in the case of Devaraju v. State of Karnataka, 1979(2) Kar LJ 85 : (1979 Lab IC NOC 144)(Kant).
If no such record is made it cannot be presumed that there was consideration of comparative merit, from the fact that the names of eligible officers were put up in the file and one of them was appointed.
The recording of reasons for selecting on amongst several eligible officers is necessary and seniority of all eligible officers should be determined at the time of consideration of their cases for selection.
The respondents-writ petitioners have relied on these observations to show that as no such record was made it is not possible to make out that a comparative assessment of all the eligible officers was made.
In the case of Union of India v. M L Capoor, AIR 1974 SC 87 : (1974 Lab IC 338), the Supreme Court pointed out that it is incumbent on the Selection Committee to state reasons in a manner which would disclose how the record of each superseded officer stood in relation to records of others who were to be preferred.
Their Lordships also held at the same time that the selection to select list is primarily on the basis of merit and suitability, seniority being given secondary importance.
In making selection or in reviewing or revising the select list, as a fresh list has to be prepared on the basis of merit and suitability of all eligible candidates including those whose names remain in the previous list, with due regard to seniority, there is no question of notice being given to a senior when he is proposed to be passed over.
No vested right is involved; no interest recognized and protected by law is in jeopardy.
It cannot be laid down as a general proposition that whenever a selection is made on the basis of merit and suitability with due regard to seniority notice to a senior will be required if he is proposed to be passed over in favour of a junior on the ground of the greater merit and suitability.
101.
With the admitted facts that on three occasions i.e. in the years 1974, 1975 and 1976 the petitioners were passed over, they were promoted in the year 1976 as Group Engineers and later Divisional Engineers, a glance at the prayer made in the writ petition is necessary.
The very promotions of the respondents in the writ petitions are challenged by the petitioners.
They say in the grounds enumerated in the petition as follows :  "(a) The promotions of respondents who are entrants in the Corporation subsequent to the petitioner's entry to the cadre of Group Engineers is clearly illegal.
Since the seniority to the cadre of Group Engineers is governed by the seniority-cum-merit, the 1st respondent was bound to consider the case of the petitioners and similar others who have entered the Power Corporation much earlier than who were promoted in 1975-76 to the cadre of Group Engineers.
The promotion of these officials is clearly illegal, unjust and arbitrary.
(b) The preparation of gradation list on the basis of illegal promotions made in the year 1975-76 without adhering to the principle of seniority and date of entry into service is an action which is clearly colourable.
The date of entry to the Power Corporation in the substantive cadre of Engineers should be the guiding factor to make promotions and assign ranks in the seniority list.
Since the action of the 1st respondent is in utter violation of the legal provisions, the same is arbitrary and is liable to be quashed."
11.
Thus, what is sought to be quashed is the promotions earlier made right from the year 1974.
It is argued for the KPC that the invidious results that the learned single Judge was anxious to avoid would certainly follow if the relief granted to the writ petitioners is sought to be implemented and it becomes virtually impossible to redo the list without affecting the promotions.
12.
The main plank of the contentions of the petitioners has been that the principle of seniority ought not to have been ignored.
The earlier promotions and the consequent seniority list is challenged on the ground that their seniority has been overlooked.
While some of the writ petitions were filed in the year 1981 others were filed in the year 1982.
Thus nearly eight years after the first promotions were made in the year 1974 the promotions then made are sought to be challenged.
It is significant and cannot be ignored that even the writ petitioners got the second promotion as Divisional Engineers, without they challenging their ranking in the cadre of Group Engineers to which cadre they were promoted though later than the later entrants.
It is therefore argued with considerable amount of force that having slept over for a number of years and after certain rights have accrued to the officials promoted to the various cadres the petitioners could not have challenged the earlier promotions.
In the case of T R Kapoor v. State of Haryana, (1989) 4 SCC 71 : (1989 Lab IC 2001) the Supreme Court appointed out that if the petitioners remained complacent for a long number of years, they cannot turn round and say that notwithstanding their inaction they should be granted promotion from deemed dates on the basis of seniority.
In the long interval of time that had elapsed before the petitioners chose to fill the writ petitions, several other Class II officers holding engineering degree had been promoted to Class I service in that case before the Supreme Court.
Therefore their Lordships felt that the benefit which had accrued to those persons by reason of their promotions cannot now be disturbed or interfered with by giving the petitioners promotions from deemed dates of eligibility for promotion.
In other words, a settled state of affairs among the Class I promotees cannot be unsettled when the petitions came for disposal.
In the case of Roshan Lal v. International Airport Authority of India, 1980 (Supp) SCC 449 : (1981 Lab IC 1) the prayer in the writ petitions was confined primarily to the seniority list and the consequences flowing from the seniority list.
The respondents were appointed as Airport Officers in 1975 and the writ petitions were filed three years later ie in the year 1978.
Their Lordships felt that they would not be justified in reopening the question of legality of appointment of respondents as Airport Officers several years after their appointment.
Even in a recent decision in the case of Sahdeo Jha v Union of India, 1992(3) SCT 148 (SC) : (1992) 2 SCC 190 on which emphasis was laid by the KPC the Supreme Court took note of laches on the part of the petitioners in approaching the Tribunal and of the fact of some of the selected officers being promoted to higher grades and some of them retired from service during the period intervening before filing the writ petition.
Even in the present case much water has flowed under the bridge ever since the first promotion was made in the year 1974 ignoring the seniority of the petitioners in entering the service.
Practically no reasons are coming forth as to why the petitioners slept over their rights for this length of time if really they were aggrieved.
13.
What is pertinent to note is nowhere they have challenged the criteria adopted for promotions of their juniors nor absence of criteria of merit in making such selections ignoring them.
The only contention raised by them in the writ petitions is that they being seniors to others who were promoted they ought not to have been placed above them.
Even though it cannot be gain-said as rightly pointed out by the learned single Judge that there were no definite rules guiding the appointment to higher cadres and no records available to show that a comparative assessment was made, at this point of time when those responsible for applying criteria evolved by them are no longer in service how the comparative assessment for initial promotions between 1974 to 1976 could be evolved now becomes ununderstandable.
It cannot be said that the petitioners were not aware of the promotions of such a large number of Engineers in the year 1975 as could be seen from Annexure B The promotees were 24.
If the challenge was made immediately after these promotions were made, the Court could have been in a position to examine the criteria adopted and grant relief before the claims became stale and rights accrued to those promoted.
The learned Judge has directed that the promotions already made should not be affected but at the same time the promotions should be reviewed adopting the basis of criteria and if no material is available on the basis on which their promotions could be effected on the basis of the criteria adopted by the Managing Director at the relevant time.
As rightly contended on behalf of the KPC it becomes virtually impossible at this length of time to reassess the comparative merit as on the date of initial promotions of those who were junior to the writ petitioners.
This is how the principle of laches comes in the way of granting relief to the petitioners.
14.
It is generally contended on behalf of the KPC that if the promotions made between 1974 and 1976 were to be reviewed at this point of time the entire work of the Organisation would be seriously affected.
Subsequent to 1974 a large number of promotions have been made in addition to those relating to the respondent and such large number of employees are not parties to these petitions and a chain of reactions is bound to ensue in the event of the order of the learned single Judge being implemented.
This would affect the seniority at the entry level and at all other levels in the higher cadres till that of the Chief Engineers.
A large number of seniors who would have worked in higher positions will become juniors to those who are working under them for long years and they may seek legal remedy of their own asserting their own rights.
If the promotions already made cannot be disturbed as directed in the impugned order a large number of posts will have to be created to accommodate the petitioners.
It was also urged that very significantly the petitioners do not challenge in their prayer the promotions made in the year 1974, but have confined to those made in the year 1975-76.
Substance could be found in this argument if the prayer in the writ petitions in which the main order is passed is seen.
Their prayer is :  "(ii) To review the promotion made in the year 1975-76 and regulate the same strictly on the basis of seniority in the cadre of Engineers."
The three Engineers promoted in the year 1974 were S M Lingdevaru, R B Maddikar and S Dorairaj.
They are also respondents in the writ petitions but their promotion in the year 1974 is not challenged.
The half-hearted approach of the petitioners in this behalf is ununderstandable.
At Annexures D-1 to D-7 are produced the lists of promotions made earlier to the petitioners.
28 Engineers are placed above petitioner 1 Srinivasa, 35 above petitioner No. 2 Basavarajaiah, 28 above Keshva Murthy, 19 above K Vedavyasa, 19 above V C Mohan, 15 above R V Patil and 11 above Shankar Rao who were all petitioners 1 to 7 respectively.
The three respondents whose first promotion took place in the year 1974 were further promoted on 3071980 as Divisional Engineers.
As per Annexures F and G promotions have taken place in November, 1982 and November, 1984 as well.
In the corporate list petitioner's rank is from 35 onwards.
This list obviously appeals to have been prepared keeping in view the promotions effected from time to time.
Admittedly even before writ petitions were filed some were promoted to the higher cadre up to the cadre of Chief Engineer as well.
Thus within a span of seven years after 1974 as contended by the KPC promotions have been effected in all cadres and the petitioners having been promoted later after three batches, did not raise their little finger when they were successively by-passed.
15.
In the case of N S Mehta v. Union of India, AIR 1977 SC 1673 : (1977 Lab IC 904) the Supreme Court succinctly referred to the effect of delay in approaching the Court referring to earlier decisions and explained how delay in invoking the jurisdiction of the Court (under Article 32 of the Constitution) which may create equitable rights of others, may give rational grounds for discrimination so that it would cease to be a case of any violation of Articles 14 and 16 at all.
It was submitted on behalf of the writ petitioners that promotions given to respondents 4 to 7 in the no rule period without any policy be treated as baseless and that the seniority at the entry level of Group Engineers be based on the date of entry.
They also pray for deemed promotion to petitioners 1 to 3 as Executive Engineers on 1.10.75 when their juniors S M Patil and V A Sirur were promoted and similarly to accord promotion to the cadre of Superintending Engineers as a deemed promotion with effect from 771983 on which date those two Engineers were promoted.
They also pray for their case being considered to the promotion on the dates their juniors were promoted.
Such a relief at this point of time has become inconceivable on the ground of laches.
In Nandlal's case, AIR 1987 SC 251 : (1987 Tax LR 1830) the Supreme Court pointed out that under Article 226 the High Court does not exercise its discretion in favour of tardy, indolent and acquiescent because it is likely to cause public inconvenience and confusion and bring in its train new injuries.
This is precisely what the KPC now urges before this Court as pointed out above.
It is patently clear that right from 1974 the KPC had adopted a policy of not giving promotions based only on seniority but the appointments to the higher cadre were by selection and this was to the knowledge of the petitioners.
What the petitioners now urge is that their ranking should he given and seniority fixed only on the criterion of their seniority at the very entry level.
It is apparently clear that the KPC had adopted the rule of by-passing juniors on the ground of merit whenever promotions to the higher cadre were to be effected and the petitioners must be deemed to have known when the promotions were made ignoring them.
Even the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of India v. Mohd.
Mynuddin, AIR 1987 SC 1889 : (1987 Lab IC 1627) very succinctly lays down the limitation for challenging the promotions to higher posts by the aggrieved parties.
Their Lordships pointed out that whenever promotion to a higher post is to be made on the basis of merit no officer can claim promotion to the higher post as a matter of right by virtue of seniority alone with effect from the date on which his juniors are promoted.
It is not sufficient that in his confidential report it is recorded that his services are 'satisfactory'.
An officer may be capable of discharging the duties of the post held by him satisfactorily but he may not be fit for the higher post.
Before any such promotion can be effected it is the duty of the management to consider the case of the officer concerned on the basis of the relevant materials.
If promotion has been denied arbitrarily or without any reason ordinarily the Court can issue a direction to the management to consider the case of the officer concerned for promotion but it cannot issue a direction to promote the officer concerned to the higher post without giving an opportunity to the management to consider the question of promotion.
The Court is not by its very nature competent to appreciate the abilities, qualities or attributes necessary for the task, office or duty of every kind of post in the modern world and it would be hazardous for it to undertake the responsibility of assessing whether a person is fit for being promoted to a higher post which is to be filled up by selection.
The duties of such posts may need skills of different kinds - scientific, technical, financial, industrial, commercial, administrative, educational etc.
The method of evaluation of the abilities or the competence of persons to be selected for such posts have also become now-a-days very much refined and sophisticated and such evaluation should, therefore, in the public interest ordinarily be left to be done by the individual or a committee consisting of persons who have the knowledge of the requirements of a given post to be nominated by the employer.
If there is no allegation of bias or mala fides alleged against the selecting officers then interference in the promotions effected cannot be readily made though in the learned single Judge's order ranking is directed to be redone.
The writ petitioners want to have deemed promotion ignoring the promotions already made keeping in view their seniority at the entry stage.
At this length of time giving such a direction becomes too hazardous, complicated and confusing as well as embarrasing affecting large number of officials who are serving in different higher cadres.
Obviously no mala fides or bias have been attributed to the selecting officers.
In our view therefore the writ appeals have to be allowed.
16.
W.P. No. 1011/88 is also for similar relief and the petitioner therein entered P.W.D.
service in the year 1957 and in March, 1971 he was transferred on deputation to the KPC On 6.7.1971 he was given promotion as a Group Engineer and the equivalent cadre is that of Assistant Executive Engineer in the P.W.D.
Under the Government Order of 481977 the services of the Officers of P.W.D.
who were seniors to the petitioners in the inter se seniority of P.W.D.
were absorbed in the Corporation service with effect from 531977 but they were promoted to the cadre of Divisional Engineers during 1973 and even much before the date of absorption.
Though he challenges the list of 2351978 called the 'Corporate Service List' this ranking at Sl.
No. 24 among Divisional Engineers is not correct Respondents 2 to 11 in his petition are junior to him and his ranking should be above them.
Here again the claim is highly belated as he approached the Court nearly 10 years after the corporate list was prepared.
The reasons we have adverted to disagree with the order of the learned single Judge are equally applicable to this writ petition as well.
17.
At this stage we have considered IA Nos. V to VII which are for additional grounds to be urged or impleading some of the parties and they do not survive for consideration.
Hence the same are rejected.
18.
For the reasons aforesaid we allow the writ appeals, set aside the order of the learned single Judge and dismiss the writ petitions giving rise to these writ appeals.
Writ Petition No. 1011/88 is also dismissed for the same reasons.
No order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.