Bakthavatsalam, J - An interesting question raised in this writ petition is with regard to the construction of sub-section (3) of Section 19 of the Annamalai University Act, 1928 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1929) wherein the petitioner challenges an order of the first respondent dated 19-1-1993.
2.
The facts leading to the tiling of the writ petition are :  The petitioner alleges in the affidavit that he is working as Professor and Head of the Department of Tamil Studies and Research and Dean, Faculty of Indian Languages in the Annamalai University.
It seems that the petitioner is also an ex officio Syndicate Member of the Annamalai University.
The petitioner alleges in the affidavit that he is an internationally known Tamil Scholar and has several publications to his credit.
It is further alleged in the affidavit that under the Annamalai University Act and under the regulations framed thereunder, particularly the powers issued under Section 19(3) of the Act, the Head of the Departments are appointed by the Vice- Chancellor from among the Professors, that the petitioner has been appointed as Head of the Department on 31-3-1984 after the then Head of the Department Dr. N Balusamy, who retired.
It is also alleged in the affidavit that the petitioner was so selected as the Dean of the Faculty of the Indian Languages, that the selection was announced on 6-12-1991 and that the order itself will show that the petitioner will be entitled to hold office till 22-8-1994, and that this was subject to the provisions of Section 33(4) of the Annamalai University Act.
It is also alleged in the affidavit that all of a sudden, by a midnight order, the petitioner has been removed from the post of Head of the Department and made into a Professor, that the consequences are very serious and drastic, that a person is entitled to hold an Annamalai University office, that if he is being posted to another post even though it may not involve any monetary loss, still it would have serious adverse consequences as his responsibilities, powers and the entitlement to participate in important affairs of the University are all drastically reduced and that therefore such an action cannot be taken arbitrarily and in whimsical manner.
It is stated that the petitioner's prospect of using the Syndicate membership is lost.
The petitioner alleges in the affidavit that the second respondent has done the same with a mala fide motive to prevent the petitioner from participating in the Syndicate meeting as the second respondent is not happy with the attitude of the petitioner raising questions in the Syndicate meeting.
It is also alleged in the affidavit that the petitioner is entitled to even as a duty to thoroughly debate and question the actions of the second respondent in the statutory forum of Syndicate and that the action of the second respondent in passing the order on the eve of the syndicate meeting scheduled to take place on 23-1-1993 clearly shows that it is mala fide and a colourable exercise of power.
It is also stated in the affidavit that no reason has been stated in the impugned order, and that if no reasons are stated in an order it will clearly offend Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner further alleges in the affidavit, that the moment a Professor or a teacher is appointed as a Head of the Department, the power of appointment of a Head of the Department, referable to Chapter XII, Section 19(3) which is in effect by the second respondent will not be available to him.
It is also stated that the power of appointment would exhaust itself when appointment is made.
According to the petitioner, there cannot be an appointment of a person as Head of the Department, when already a Head of the Department is functioning as the Head of the Department can only be removed.
It is further stated in the affidavit that Section 19(3) will apply only to a case where there is a vacancy caused by whatsoever nature in a department and that the petitioner is entitled to continue as Dean to the Faculty of Indian Language as per the terms of election and to function in that as Dean up to 22-8-1994.
3.
A supplementary affidavit is filed by the petitioner in which it is stated that the petitioner was appointed as Head of the Department with effect from 1-4-1984 FN "until further order" as he was the senior most Reader then, that he was confirmed with effect from 1-5-1986 as Professor, and as such he has to continue to be the Head of the Department.
The petitioner alleges in the affidavit that he applied to the post of Professor of Tamil in the year 1984, that certain others were also interviewed by a penal, that he was selected and appointed to the said post of Professor, that he was the only Professor in that post and that he subsequently completed the probation.
It is also stated that though he could not remember the dates of the order of the respondent University appointing him as Head of the Department, he could recollect that he is definitely appointed as Head of the Department after the selection as stated supra.
4.
A counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondents 1 and 2 claiming that the relevant provisions of the laws of the University relating to the Head of Department of Study of the Annamalai University is Section 19(3) of the Annamalai University Act, 1928 (Tamil Nadu Act No. 1 of 1929), that as per the said provisions there shall be a Head for every department of study, that the Professor of a Department shall be the Head of the Department, that if there is no Professor, the Reader shall be the Head of the said Department, and that if there is more than one Professor or more than one Reader in the Department, the Vice-Chancellor of the University is empowered to appoint such Professor or Reader as the case may be, as he thinks fit to be the Head of the Department.
It is further claimed in the counter-affidavit that on 14-2-1992 one more Professor was appointed in the Department of Tamil, that consequent to which there were two Professors in the Department of Tamil, and as such it became competent for the Vice-Chancellor to appoint anyone of the two Professors as the Head of Department in terms of Section 19(3) of the Annamalai University Act, 1928.
A reference to letter of the University Grants Commission dated 10-11-1983, is referred to in the counter-affidavit in which certain guidance was issued as per which rotation of Headship in the Departments of the University was suggested.
It is also claimed in the counter-affidavit that the Syndicate of the respondent-University had approved the said decision of the University Grants Commission in principle, as per which the respondent-University had decided to appoint the Heads of Department by rotation in the Departments having two or more Professors authorising the Vice-Chancellor to implement the abovesaid proposal from the academic year 1987-88.
It is also claimed in the counter-affidavit that the petitioner had been designated as Head of Department since he was the sole Professor of the Department and that the question of appointing a Head of Department of Tamil in terms of Section 19(3) of the Annamalai University Act or by following the decision of the University Grants Commission had arisen only after a second Professor in the Department of Tamil came to be appointed.
It is also stated in the counter-affidavit that there is no irregularity or illegality in the impugned order dated 19-1-1993.
It is categorically claimed in the counter- affidavit that the petitioner was appointed as Head of Department in the year 1984, he being the sole Professor of the said department.
It is further claimed in the counter-affidavit that as per Section 33 of the Annamalai University Act, any person nominated or elected in his capacity as Member of a particular body or the holder of a particular appointment shall cease to be a Member of that authority of the University concerned.
It is further claimed in the counter-affidavit that the petitioner came to be appointed as a Dean on account of his being the Head of the Department, that in view of Section 33 of the Act, he would cease to be the Dean, on the third respondent being appointed as the Head of Department.
The allegation of the petitioner that he would be entitled to hold office as Head of the Department or Dean till 22-8- 1994 is denied in the counter-affidavit.
It is also stated that the petitioner had been holding the post of Professor and Head of Department for a considerable period and that having regard to the fact that a second Professor had been appointed and also having regard to the scheme of the University Grants Commission and also other relevant factors into consideration, impugned order came to be passed.
It is also claimed in the counter-affidavit that the petitioner has not been denied his pay or seniority in the University, and that the impugned orders cannot be said to be drastically reducing the prospects of the petitioner.
Allegations made by the petitioner in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the affidavit that by the impugned order the petitioner is prevented from attending the Syndicate meeting and that the impugned order has been passed with mala fide motive are denied in the counter affidavit.
It is reiterated in the counter that the position of the petitioner as Head of the Department had been consequent upon he being the only Professor of Department and that the question of invoking the portion of Section 19(3) of the Act, 1928 did not arise at that time.
It is also stated that there is no question of removal from the post of Department.
5.
A separate counter-affidavit has been filed by the second respondent.
Allegations made in paragraph 8 of the affidavit filed by the petitioner stating that there are mala fide motives for passing such an order, which is impugned herein are denied in the counter affidavit.
It is further claimed in the counter affidavit that the second respondent has nothing against the petitioner and that the impugned order is perfectly valid and is in accordance with law.
In all other aspects, the second respondent adopted the counter- affidavit filed by respondents 1 and 2.
6.
Mr. G Subramanian, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, contends that the order passed in this case, which is impugned herein, is violative of principles of natural justice.
The learned senior counsel further contends that it is a case of reduction in rank and that no opportunity has been given to the petitioner before passing the order, which is impugned herein.
Learned senior counsel points out that the petitioner has been appointed as Professor in the year 1984 and that after the period of one year on completion, he was confirmed in the said post on 15-8-1986.
The learned senior counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner was elected as Dean of the Faculty of Indian Languages, which post he will hold till 22-8-1994, and that when such is the case, the action of the respondent University appointing the third respondent as the Professor and Head of the Department of Tamil Studies as Research under Section 19(3) of the Annamalai University Act, 1928 is illegal.
That apart, the learned senior counsel states that the third respondent is the Professor, Directorate of Distance Education that he cannot be transferred as Professor in the Department where the petitioner is working and as such there is no question of appointing the third respondent herein as the Head of the Department stating that there are two Professors in that Department.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner contends that the said act of the respondent-University appointing the third respondent as Head of the Department is arbitrary.
With regard to the University Grants Commission's Guidelines, 1983, the learned senior counsel contends that they have not been followed and that even the University Grants Commission itself has given them up.
Learned senior counsel relies upon the decision in S B Mathur v. Chief Justice of Delhi High Court, 1989(1) Supp.
SCC 34 in GC Gupta v. NK Pandey, AIR 1988 SC 654, and in Union of India v. PS Bhatt, AIR 1981 SC 957.
In support of his contention that stigma had been attached to the petitioner by the action of the respondent-University and that no opportunity has been given to the petitioner.
7.
Mr. R Krishnamoorthy, the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-University states that the order passed on 30-3-1984 is referable to Section 19(3) of the Annamalai University Act, 1928 and that the order of appointment is not for any particular period.
It is also contended by the learned senior counsel that it is true that the petitioner was selected as Dean and that it is just because he was the only Professor in that Department at that point of time.
It is also contended that when there are two Professors it is open to the Vice-Chancellor to appoint any one of them as Head of.
the Department, exercising the power under Section 19(3) of the University Act, 1928.
According to the learned senior counsel, since the petitioner was the sole Professor at that time, he became the Head of the Department and even the order dated 30-4-1984 states "until further orders".
According to the learned senior counsel, "rotation" is made as per the guidelines of the University Grants Commission.
It is also contended by the learned senior counsel, referring to the files regarding the selection in the scheme of rotation, as envisaged by the University Grants Commission's guidelines, the appointment of the third respondent herein is made.
The learned senior counsel also contended that there is no question of reduction in rank arises in this case and that the petitioner cannot claim permanency to claim to be the Head of Department.
According to the learned senior counsel, by virtue of the petitioner being the Professor at that time, he was appointed as Head of the Department, and since he was being the Head of the Department, he was elected as Dean and the term is for a period of three years and it is subject to the operation of the power under Section 33(4) of the Annamalai University Act.
According to the learned senior counsel, once he ceased to be the Head of the Department, automatically he ceased to be the Dean also, according to the provisions of the Annamalai University Act.
8.
In reply Mr. G Subramanian, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, contends that there was no order appointing the petitioner, subsequent to March, 1984 as Head of the Department, that under Chapter XVII the Faculty is shown as Faculty of Indian Languages which includes Department of Tamil, Department of Sanskrit and Department of Hindi and as such Department of Tamil is different from the Department of Tamil, Directorate of Distance Education.
According to the learned senior counsel when the third respondent herein belongs to Directorate of Distance Education, it cannot be contended that there are two Professors in the Department of Tamil.
Learned senior counsel also states that assuming that the petitioner is appointed temporarily, in view of the term used 'until further orders', it should be taken that he became permanent by reason of acting in that post for nine years.
Learned senior counsel relies upon the decisions in Government Branch Press v. D B Belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429, in Narendar Chadha v. Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 638, in D R Nim v. Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1301, in G S Lamba v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1019 and in Shankar Vijay Saw Mill v. Union of India, 1983(1) SCC 418 (sic).
In support of his contention.
learned senior counsel contends that assuming that the third respondent is a Professor, he is being transferred to the Department of Tamil which is not provided in the Statute.
According to the, learned senior counsel there is no source of appointment of the third respondent and it is being done only by way of transfer which is not provided in the Statute.
Learned senior counsel also draws my attention to the Resolutions of the respondent-University wherein it has been stated that the.guidelines of the University Grants Commission were withdrawn.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner also submits that the petitioner is made to work under the person who has been selected by the petitioner and that it has to be certainly taken for consideration by this Court as a reduced status of the petitioner.
9.
Mr. R Krishnamoorthy, the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-University contends that Section 19(3) of the Annamalai University Act contains two limbs, that when the petitioner was the sole Professor, he was automatically selected as the Head of the Department and that when the third respondent herein comes as another Professor the second limb of Section 19(3) of the Act comes into operation and that the Vice-Chancellor has got power to exercise to appoint any one of them as Head of the Department.
Learned senior counsel also points out the relevant Rules regarding the service Rules of the Directorate of Distance Education and also Resolution 46 dated 28-7-1990 of the Meeting of the Syndicate of the Annamalai University which provides for transfer of academic staff between University Departments and the Directorate of Distance Education and as such it is contended that there is no infirmity in the impugned order.
9A.
I have considered the arguments of learned senior counsel on both sides.
To appreciate the rival contentions of the learned senior counsel on both sides, it is necessary to refer to certain provisions of the Annamalai University Act.
Section 8 of the Annamalai University Act, 1928 (Tamil Nadu Act No. 1 of 1929), (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), provide for the officers of the University and it is thus :--  ".....The following shall be the officers of the University namely :-- 1.
The Chancellor, 2.
The Founder, 3.
The Pro-Chancellor, 4.
The Vice-Chancellor, 5.
The Registrar, 6.
The Deans of Faculties, and 7.
Such other persons as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University ......." Section 14 of the Act speaks of the Authorities of the University thus; 1.
.. "The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely; ....... 1.
The Senate, 2.
The Academic Council, 3.
The Faculties, 4.
The Boards of Studies, 5.
The Syndicate, 6.
The Finance Committee (for the period fixed under this Act), 7.
The Board of Selection, 8.
Such other bodies as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University ...." Section 19 of the Act speaks of "Faculties".
In so far as the issue to be decided in this writ petition is concerned, it is enough to quote sub-section (3) of Section 19 of the Act which runs as follows :-  "......Each Faculty shall comprise such departments of study as may be prescribed by the regulations and shall, subject to the control of the Academic Council, have charge of the teaching, courses of study and research work in such departments.
The head of every department of study shall be the Professor of that department, or, if there is no Professor, the Reader.
If there is more than one Professor, or more than one Reader in a department, as the case may be, the Vice Chancellor shall appoint such Professor or Reader as he thinks fit to be the head of the department.
The head of the department shall be responsible to the Dean for the organisation of the teaching in that department...." Under Section 21 of the Act, the Syndicate shall consist of the following persons, namely, (1) the Vice-Chancellor, (2) the Director of Collegiate Education, Madras and, (3) The Deans of Faculties and other members coming under Class Il.
Sub-section (4) of Section 33 reads as follows :--  ".....Any person nominated or elected in his capacity as a member of a particular body or the holder of a particular appointment shall, if he ceases to be a member of that body or the holder of that appointment, as the case may be, for a period of more than three months or if he goes on leave for a period of not less than six months, cease to be a member of the authority or the body of the University concerned ......" Section 29 of the Act provides for Statutes and Section 31 speaks of Regulations.
Under Statute 30, period of office of the Dean is dealt with and it runs thus :  "....The Dean shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-election.
During the temporary absence of a Dean for periods not exceeding three months or in the interval between the vacating of office by a Dean and the election of his successor, the Vice-Chancellor may appoint a head of a department of study included in the Faculty to act as Dean of the Faculty...." Chapter XII speaks of 'Department of Study', Under Regulation 2(c) the following shall be the departments of study comprised in the Faculty of Indian Languages.
"(c)....(i) Tamil (ii) Sanskrit  (iii) Hindi...." 10.
The issue raised in this case depends upon as to how the Court construes sub-section (3) of Section of the Act.
It is seen that Section 19(3) of the Act, as extracted above, contains two limbs.
The Head of every Department shall be the Professor of the Department or the Reader, if there is no Professor in that Department.
In this case, there is no dispute that the petitioner was the only Professor in the year 1984 and as such he was appointed as the Head of the Department in the year 1984.
If there is more than one Professor in the Department, the Vice-Chancellor has got the power to appoint any person as Head of the Department among the Professors and Readers.
It is seen that under Section 2(f), 'Teachers' means Professors, Readers, Lecturers, Tutors and such other persons as give instructions to or take part in the training of the students.
So Professor comes under the definition of Section 2(f) of the Act.
From the hierarchy in the service as shown in Section 2(f) of the Act, Head of the Department is not a post.
The posts are only 'Professors', 'Readers', Lecturers and such other persons as mentioned in Section 2(f) of the Act.
So I am not able to understand the arguments of Mr. G Subramaniam, the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that there is a reduction in rank, in this case.
Simply because the petitioner had continued to be the Head of the Department for nine years, he is made permanent.
The petitioner still holds the post of Professor.
The third respondent has replaced the petitioner as Head of the Department.
The Head of the Department cannot be said to be a post.
So I am of the view that the arguments of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner based upon the principle of reduction in rank is wholly misconceived.
The arguments of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner, relying upon the decision in Government Branch Press v. D B Belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429.
That the Head of Department is a post is wholly misconceived.
As rightly contended by Mr. R Krishnamoorthy, the learned senior counsel for the respondent-University, there is no reduction in emoluments etc.
It is seen from the order confirming the petitioner as Professor dated 27-10-1986, that the petitioner has been confirmed as Professor with effect from 15-8-1986.
So by virtue of that he is the sole Professor he had the advantage of being the Head of Department under the first limb of Section 19 of the Act.
It is also seen from the Resolution No. 46 of the Meeting of the Syndicate of the Annamalai University, dated 28-7-1990, the transfer of academic staff of the Directorate of Distance Education to other teaching Departments of the University and vice versa for better management and for giving opportunities to the individuals for direct involvement in teaching departments is given and it will be carried out at the discretion of the Vice-Chancellor.
So I do not think that there is any infirmity in transferring the third respondent to the Department of Tamil as Professor.
When once the power of the University is conceded, the transfer of teaching staff from the Directorate of Distance Education to other teaching departments of the University can be done.
There cannot be any doubt that there are two Professors in the Department of Tamil at least from the date of transfer of the third respondent herein to the Department of Tamil.
In such case of transfer, the second limb of Section 19(3) of the Act comes into operation.
A plain reading of the Section 19 of the Act will c1early show that the power to appoint the Head of Department is given to the second respondent, the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
As such, I do not see any infirmity in the order impugned appointing the third respondent herein as the Head of Department in the place of the petitioner herein.
Since I take the view that no question of reduction in rank arises on the facts and circumstances of this case, on a plain reading of the Act and Statutes of the University, I do not think it necessary to consider the decisions referred to by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner in extenso.
In fact, these decisions, relied on by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner will not apply to the facts of this case.
Only when there is post and a person is appointed to the post is reduced in rank, the question of reduction in rank will arise.
Here 'Head of the Department' is not a post.
The post is 'Professor'.
As such as I have already stated, since the petitioner continues to be the Professor even now no question of reduction in rank arises.
11.
It is useful to refer to the decision in K Gopal v. Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1864, which arose under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
In that case, the petitioner therein was confirmed as Inspector-General of Registration and a head of the department in Madras State and he was transferred to the post of "Accommodation Controller" a post carrying the same scale of pay.
The legality of the transfer was challenged on the ground that the transfer resulted in reduction in rank firstly because the later post was not the post of a Head of Department and secondly because the post of Inspector-General of Registration was superior in rank.
This argument was repelled by the Supreme Court and it observed as follows : (at p. 1867)  "......We cannot accept the submission that the mere fact that the post of"Accommodation Controller" to which the appellant has been transferred has not been designated as the post of a head of the department necessarily involves any reduction in rank.
In fact, it is well known that in Government service there may be senior posts, the holders of which are not declared as Heads of Department, while persons holding comparatively Junior posts may be declared as such.
The rank in Government service does not depend on the mere circumstances that the Government servant in the discharge of his duties is given certain powers.
. ."  It is also well settled that the word 'rank' refers to a person qualified not to his particular place in the same cadre for higher hierarchy of the service.
The principle laid down by the Supreme Court in the above mentioned case squarely applies to the facts of this case and the petitioner herein cannot claim as a matter of right to continue as Head of the Department, when another person is appointed as Head of the Department under the second limb of Section 19(3) of the Act, by Vice Chancellor of the respondent-University.
The consequence of another person replacing the petitioner is taken care of under sub-section (4) of Section 33 of the Act which reads as follows :--  ".....Any person nominated or elected in his capacity as a member of a particular body or the holder of a particular appointment, shall, if he ceases, to be a member of that body, or the holder of that appointment, as the case may be, for a period of more than three months or if he goes on leave for a period of not less than six months, cease to be a member of the authority or the body of the University concerned...." When once he is replaced and another person is appointed as Head of the Department, sub-section (4) of Section 33, mentioned above, comes into operation, and the petitioner ceases to be a member of the Dean of the Faculty.
In view of sub-section (4) of Section 33 of the Act, I do not think that the petitioner can claim to be a member of the Dean of the Faculty.
12.
The next point to be considered is whether the impugned order is tainted with mala fides of the second respondent.
The allegations of mala fides are denied by the second respondent by way of filing a separate counter-affidavit.
No material has been placed before this Court to substantiate the point that the impugned order is tainted with mala fide.
The Supreme Court in EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555, has held as follows : (at page 586)  "....Secondly, we must not also overlook that the burden of establishing mala fides is very heavy on the person who alleges it.
The allegations of mala fides are often more easily made than proved, and the very seriousness of such allegations demands proof of a higher order of credibility..." The Supreme Court has further held as follows :  "....The Court would, therefore, be slow to draw dubious inferences from incomplete facts placed before it by a party, particularly when the imputations are grave and they are made against the holder of an office which has a high responsibility in the administration.
Such is the judicial perspective in evaluating charges of an unworthy conduct against ministers and other high authorities, not because of any special status which they are supposed to enjoy, nor because they are highly placed in social life or administrative set-up these considerations are wholly irrelevant in judicial approach-but because otherwise, functioning effectively would become difficult in a democracy...." As such, I am of the view that the impugned order is not at all tainted with any mala fide of the second respondent herein.
There are no merits in this writ petition and accordingly it is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.