Jaspal Singh, J(Oral) - By this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the legality of termination of his services and has prayed for his reinstatement.
2.
First a brief resume of the facts.
3.
On May 3, 1973 the petitioner was appointed as Materials Manager by the Maharashtra State Textile Corporation (hereinafter called MSTC) which was a Government of Maharashtra Undertaking.
Initially, the petitioner was put on probation for a period of six months and on successful completion of the same he was confirmed in service w.e.f.
December 6, 1973.
On September 2, 1974 his salary was raised from Rs. 2,500/- to Rs. 2,625/- per month.
The raise was on account of his performance evaluation and in appreciation of the same.
4.
Following the Sick Textiles Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 (hereinafter called Act) the management of 21 of the 25 sick textile mills was transferred from the MSTC to the National Textile Corporation (hereinafter referred to as NTC) which is a Government of India Undertaking constituted under the Act.
On March 21, 1975 the MSTC wrote to the petitioner that as on account of the said takeover of 21 sick textile mills by the NTC it would not require the services of all its employees, therefore, transfer of some of the employees to the two Subsidiary Textile Corporations set up by the NTC namely Maharashtra North and Maharashtra South, had become necessary.
He was supplied with the terms and conditions of service offered by the NTC and was asked to indicate his option.
Those terms and conditions were as follows :  "1) That the Corporation will place you in the same designation in which you were with MSTC Ltd on 2191974 2) That this Corporation will protect your basic pay and DA as was drawn by you in MSTC Ltd 3) That this Corporation will protect the grade in which you were with the MSTC Ltd on 2191974.
4) That CCA and HRA will be admissible to you as per station of posting and as per such rules of the Corporation as may be determined from time to time.
5) That only the normal increments due after 2191974, in the time scale in existence as on that date, will be protected by the Corporation.
6) That the Corporation will not protect any accelerated or advance increments given to you by the MSTC Ltd after 2191974.
7) That in case on account of the foregoing if your total emoluments are reduced you agree to abide by the same and not to take any steps, legal or otherwise, for the recovery of the difference.
8) That the Corporation will assume liability for payment of your gratuity/pensionary benefit only if the pro rata amount in this respect is paid by the MSTC Ltd to this Corporation for the period of service rendered by you in MSTC Ltd  9) That the Corporation will grant you leave standing to your credit in MSTC Ltd on average pay earned by you during your service with MSTC Ltd only if the MSTC Ltd makes payment of salary for the leave period accumulated in that Corporation.
In the event of MSTC Ltd not making contribution towards leave, you will not be entitled to that leave.
10) That you will be eligible to the membership of Contributory Provident Fund to be operated by the Corporation as per such Rules in this behalf as may be framed by the Corporation from time to time.
11) That in case of your promotion to a higher post in the Corporation you will be governed by the terms and conditions of service of the Corporation.
12) Your services are liable to be transferred to any of the units of this Corporation or to any other subsidiary Corporations (or their units) of NTC Ltd" As the petitioner agreed to the said terms and conditions he was absorbed with effect from April 14, 1975 and was transferred to NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd w.e.f.
April 26, 1975.
However, on June 2, 1976 he received a letter terminating his services.
It ran as under :  "Dear Sir, This is to inform you that your services as Materials Manager are no longer required by the Corporation.
Accordingly, your services as Materials Manager of the Corporation are hereby terminated with immediate effect (i.e. 261976 closing).
The Accounts Department of the Corporation has been instructed to pay all your dues.
Yours faithfully For NTC (S.M.)
Ltd (V A Inamdar) Secretary" On June 25, 1976, the petitioner addressed a letter to the Managing Director of the NTC claiming that he had been performing his duties "sincerely, honestly and efficiently", and had never given any chance to his superiors "of coming across any irregularity or mistake" in his work.
He then proceeded to say :  " Suddenly on 2nd June, 1976 I was called by my Chairman, Mr. D P Kelkar and was informed that my services were being terminated, the reason for this termination which was made out to me was that I failed to mention the particulars of invalid tenders in the comparative statement which was forwarded by me along with the proposal for sale of absolute machinery valuing about Rs.
8,000/-."
My explanations and submissions for this minor omission on my part were not considered at all and the Chairman terminated my services vide his letter dated 2nd June, 1976, a copy of which is enclosed herewith for your kind perusal.
In this connection, I respectfully beg to state that termination of service for a technical omission, not involving breach of any rules or regulations of the Corporation, is too severe a punishment to a person who has served the Corporation dutifully and honestly.
You will appreciate that the sudden and severe action of my Chairman without affording me a proper opportunity or making detailed enquiry in the matter has left me with no alternate but to approach your goodself for the redress to my grievance.
In this connection, I have made a petition to Shri Kelkar, with a request to reconsider my case.
I am forwarding herewith a copy of the said petition with a request that you may kindly go into the matter and see that justice is done to me.
On the same day he addressed a similar letter to Mr. Kelkar, the Chairman-cum-Managing Director, NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. On April 23, 1977, he approached the Minister for Commerce, Government of India wherein he repeated the charge against the Chairman NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. On July 13, 1977 he had a meeting with Mr. Kelkar, the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. wherein he asserted that his services had been terminated by taking advantage of "atmosphere of Emergency" and "without assigning any reason and without following the prescribed procedure of termination of services of any permanent employee" on which Mr. Kelkar suggested arbitration.
The petitioner, however, rejected that offer.
For a change, the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. also wrote a letter to the petitioner containing an account of that meeting.
It referred to the directions received from the Government of India on the review of the cases of termination effected during the period of Emergency and then proceeded to record that since the petitioner was no longer in service, the procedure of enquiry by issuing a charge-sheet could not be followed.
It thus suggested resort to arbitration.
Though the letter bears no date, admittedly it was written on August 4, 1977.
However, the offer of arbitration was withdrawn by a letter admittedly written on August 16, 1977.
It alleged that "as reasonable time has already elapsed since the offer was received by you, we presume you are not interested in our offer".
Thereafter, on August 19, 1977 the petitionr met Mr. P P Singla who was the Managing Director of the NTC.
Mr. Singla renewed the offer of arbitration but the petitioner rejected it on two grounds, namely i) there was no dispute and no arbitration agreement and, ii) the matter of reinstatement was not a "dispute" but a "review matter".
The petitioner again asserted that his termination was "mala fide" and "unjust" and requested that the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd be directed to reinstate him and "if they have anything" against him "they can follow the prescribed procedure".
However, later the petitioner relented and conveyed his acceptance of the offer of arbitration.
This was by letter dated August 23, 1978 but the NTC did not agree on the ground that the offer had already been rejected by the petitioner.
5.
In October 1979, the petitioner filed this writ petition challenging the legality of the order of termination and praying for his reinstatement along with all the benefits flowing from such orders.
6.
Time now to come into grip with the arguments advanced.
However, before I proceed to do so, it may be noticed that it was admitted case of the parties that the NTC and so also the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd are "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution  7.
Since the first limb of the arguments advanced by Mr. S C Gupta, the learned counsel for the petitioner rested on the Sick Textile Corporation (Nationalisation) Act, 1974, a resume of its relevant provisions is called for.
It is an Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the Sick Textile Undertakings, and the right, title and interest of the owners in respect of the sick textile undertakings, specified in the First Schedule with a view to reorganising and rehabilitating such sick textile undertakings so as to subserve the interests of the general public by the augmentation of the production and distribution, at fair prices, of different varieties of cloth and yarn, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
By virtue of Section 3 of the Act on the appointed day every sick textile undertaking as detailed in the First Schedule stood transferred to and vested in the NTC.
Sub-section 1 of Section 6 of the Act empowers the NTC to form Subsidiary Textile Corporations under the Companies Act, 1956 and register them under that Act and to transfer under sub-section 2 any acquired sick textile undertaking to such Subsidiary Textile Corporation.
As per sub- section 4, on the transfer to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation of any sick textile undertaking or any part thereof, the liabilities required to be discharged by the NTC relating to the sick textile undertaking so transferred would be discharged, on and from the date of such transfer, by the Subsidiary Textile Corporation as and when any such liability is required to be discharged.
As regards the employees of the so acquired textile undertakings, Section 14 of the Act makes provision for them.
Sub-section 2 of Section 14 which was referred to and relied upon by Mr. Gupta runs as under :  "Every person who is not a workman within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and who has been, immediately before the appointed day employed in a sick textile undertaking shall, in so far as such person is employed in connection with the sick textile undertaking which has vested in the National Textile Corporation, become, as from the appointed day, an employee of the National Textile Corporation and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity and other matters as he would have held the same under the sick textile undertaking if it had not vested in the National Textile Corporation and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the National Textile Corporation is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly altered by the National Textile Corporation.
Provided that in respect of any sick textile undertaking the management of which could not be taken over by the Central Government under the Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking over of Management) Act, 1972 by reason of any decree, order or injunction of any court, any agent, director (including a managing or whole-time director, by whatever name called) or manager shall not become an employee of the National Textile Corporation."
Section 16 which deals with the transfer of employees to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation also requires to be noticed.
It is in the following terms :  "Where a sick textile undertaking or any part thereof is transferred under this Act to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation every person referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of Section 14 shall, on and from the date of such transfer, become an employee of the Subsidiary Textile Corporation and the provisions of Sections 14 and 15 shall apply to such employee as they apply to an employee of the National Textile Corporation as if reference in the said sections to the National Textile Corporation were references to the Subsidiary Textile Corporation."
8.
On the basis of the provisions of the Act referred to above it was contended by Mr. Gupta that since the petitioner was transferred to and absorbed in one of the Subsidiary Textile Corporations namely the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. formed by the NTC in terms of Section 3 of the Act consequent upon the acquisition of 21 of the 25 sick textile mills, he became an employee of the NTC by virtue of sub-section (2) of Section 14 of the Act and thereafter under the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. by virtue of Section 16 of the Act and that consequently his employment with the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. was under the statute and not contractual and that for that reason termination of his services without following the procedure prescribed was bad.
9.
Needless to say, the argument did not find favour with Mr. Ganesh, the learned counsel for the respondents.
As per his reliance upon sub-section (2) of Section 14 and upon Section 16 of the Act was misplaced and on this aspect I find myself on his side.
It is important to note that the petitioner was not an employee of any of the sick textile undertakings acquired by the NTC under the Act.
He was an employee of the MSTC which was a Government of Maharashtra Undertaking and which, it appears, was managing 25 sick textile undertakings out of which, as already noticed above, 21 were acquired under the Act.
Thus, MSTC was neither a sick textile undertaking nor was it acquired under the Act.
What happened is that on account of acquisition of 21 of the 25 sick textile undertakings being managed by the MSTC, the staff of the MSTC became surplus.
Since the NTC was prepared to absorb some of the surplus staff in its subsidiary Corporations, options were invited and the offer of the petitioner was accepted.
This is how he came to be absorbed in the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd.
Thus, he being not "employed in a sick textile undertaking" immediately before the appointed day, he did not become an employee of the NTC by force of sub-section (2) of Section 14 of the Act.
And, as he had not become an employee of the NTC on the strength of sub- section (2) to Section 14 of the Act, he did not become an employee of the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd by virtue of Section 16 of the Act.
Consequently, the entire edifice raised on the foundation of sub-section (2) of Section 14 and Section 16 of the Act crumbles to the ground.
10.
It was next argued by Mr. Gupta that even if it be assumed that the petitioner's employment was not on account of or under Sections 14 and 16 of the Act, he being a confirmed employee of the MSTC at the time of his absorption and the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. being an instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, his services could not be terminated without following the principles of natural justice more so when his termination was on account of an alleged specific act of misconduct.
11.
Mr. Ganesh, on the other hand, contended that as the petitioner was seeking to enforce a contract of employment, he could not invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution by-passing the normal channels of civil litigation.
Expanding the argument further, Mr. Ganesh submitted that the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. being a limited liability company incorporated under the Companies Act, it terminated the services of the petitioner in terms of the contract of service and while doing so it was not acting in discharge of a public duty.
In other words, the contention was that the impugned order was neither by a public body in discharge of its public functions nor in the sphere of "public law" and that even if it be taken that the act was by a public body it was within the domain of "private law".
12.
The tests for determining whether a particular company is an agency or an instrumentality of the State, so that it can be characterized as "authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution were enunciated in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. IA Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628 and affirmed in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 487.
However, I need not dilate on them since the fact that NTC and NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd are "authority" within the meaning of Article 12 and, therefore, a "State" is beyond doubt and is even otherwise admitted.
I have also no manner of doubt that despite the use of the expressions "transfer" and "absorption" the petitioner did join the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. not by operation of any statute but by virtue of a contract of employment.
And, once this position is accepted, I may proceed to deal with the point so forcefully urged by Mr. Ganesh that even an "authority" within the meaning of Article 12 can enter into a non-statutory contractual obligation and no writ can lie to challenge any action taken in terms of such a contract.
13.
Is NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. a body performing public duties ?
I think I should first seek an answer to this question and in its pursuit I need not burden the order with the formula suggested by Lord Justice Atkin in R v. Electricity Commissioners, ex parte London Electricity Joint Committee Company (1920) Ltd., (1924) 1 KB 171/205, nor dilate upon the point as to how that formula was broadened by Lord Diplock in O'Reilly v Mackman, (1982) 3 WLR 1096/1104, or commented upon by Lord Goddard, CJ in R v. National Joint Council for Dental Technicians, ex parte Neate, (1953) WLR 704/707 or by Lord Denning in his book "The Closing Chapter".
Inspired by all of them and the decision of the Court of Appeal in R v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, ex parte Guinness, (1989) 1 ALL ER 509, I can say with a certain degree of confidence that the Subsidiary Textile Corporation namely the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. created on account of the sanction accorded by Section 3 of the Act and being a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution is a public body with its duties towards the public at large.
The preamble of the Act itself makes it clear.
It reads :  "An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the sick textile undertakings, and the right, title and interest of the owners in respect of the sick textile undertakings, specified in the First Schedule with a view to re-organising and rehabilitating such sick textile undertakings so as to subserve the interests of the general public by the augmentation of the production and distribution, at fair prices of different varieties of cloth and yarn, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto."
It is towards the achievement of this duty towards the public that the Subsidiary Textile Corporations could be established.
The answer, however, does not conclude the matter.
It only leads to the next poser.
14.
Mr. Ganesh argued that even if it be assumed that the NTC and the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. were performing public duties still nothing prevented them from acting in matters subsisting in the realm of "private law" as distinguished from "public law" and that there being no statutory provision regulating, circumscribing and governing the terms of the contract of service and the same having been entered into not in exercise of the executive power of the State, it was a pure and simple contract belonging purely to "private law" filed creating a master and servant relationship.
To such relationship, it was contended, neither Article 12 could be attracted nor any action taken in relation to it could invite judicial scrutiny under Article 226.
In support, my attention was drawn to Kumkum v. Principal, Jesus and Mary College, AIR 1976 Delhi 35; Praga Tools Corporation v. C V Imanual, AIR 1969 SC 1306, and to a Full Bench judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Sri Konaseema Cooperative Central Bank Ltd v. N Seetharama Raju, AIR 1990 Andhra Pradesh 171.
15.
As far as the judgment in Kumkum v. Principal, Jesus Mary College is concerned, my attention was particularly drawn to paragraph 7 of the report which reads as under :  "The basic difference between a suit and a writ petition is that the right of the plaintiff is decided in the former while a relief based on the established right of the petitioner is given in the latter.
A suit lies against a private person the relief against whom is obtained under the rules of private law.
Under Article 226 of the Constitution, a writ petition lies against "any person or authority, including in appropriate cases any Government" the meaning of the word "person" is coloured by the context.
Firstly, it appears in the Constitution which is the basis of public law.
Secondly, it is associated with the words "authority" and "government".
Thirdly, proof of private rights such as those based on contract or tort cannot be confined to rights arising out of the public law and the public law remedies specified in Articles 32 and 226."
In Praga Tools Corporation v. C V Imanual the respondents had filed a writ petition against the appellant claiming a writ of or order in the nature of mandamus.
The High Court held that writ petition was not maintainable and the Supreme Court upholding the decision observed as under in paragraph 6 of the report.
"No doubt, Article 226 provides that every High Court shall have power to issue to any person or authority orders and writs including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus etc. or any of them for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution and for any other purpose.
But it is well understood that a mandamus lies to secure the performance of a public or statutory duty in the performance of which the one who applies for it has a sufficient legal interest.
Thus, an application of mandamus will not lie for an order of reinstatement to an office which is essentially of a private character nor can such an application be maintained to secure performance of obligations owed by a company towards its workmen or to resolve any private dispute."
16.
Coming to the Full Bench judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case cited above it brings home the distinction between "private law" and "public law" and lays down that the mandamus, certiorari and prohibition are public law remedies and are not available to enforce private law rights and that as a "State" may have its private law rights, therefore, its every act would not necessarily belong to "public law" field.
17.
I may mention that during arguments the question as to whether the term with regard to termination of services would be void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1972 as being opposed to public policy and being also void as infringing Article 14 of the Constitution also dropped up and was rightly the centre of much discussion.
It was contended by Mr. Ganesh that the contract of employment entered into by the NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd with the petitioner being just like any other contract entered into between two private parties, the term with regard termination of service could not be struck down either under Section 23 of the Contract Act or under Article 14 of the Constitution on the ground that it was arbitrary or unreasonable or unconscionable or one-sided or unfair.
18.
The life of law has been experience derived from many sources like the felt necessities of the time.
W Friedman writes in "Law in a Changing Society" :  "It would be tragic if the law were so petrified as to be unable to respond to the unending challenge and evolutionary and revolutionary changes in society".
The law is, in Holme's phrase not a "brooding omnipotence in the sky", but a flexible instrument of social order.
Sydney Smith, a 19th century essayist and Wit, said : "when I hear any man talk of an unalterable law, I am convinced that he is an unalterable fool".
Indian law is at the beginning of a dynamic career readying itself to meet the challenges of new humanity and its hunger for real justice.
The changes are pronounced and clearly discernible more so in the matter of Corporations which are instrumentality of the State and their dealings with persons under their employment or otherwise.
19.
When a Corporation which is admittedly a state and is carrying on its functions for the good of the public at large, deals with its employees, can such an employee be distinguished from a person under the employment of the Government ?
In UP Warehousing Corporation v. Vinay Narain Vajapyee, AIR 1980 SC 840, Chinappa Reddy, J said :  "I find it very hard indeed to discover any distinction, on principle between a person directly under the employment of the government and a person under the employment of an agency or instrumentality of the Government or a corporation, set up under a statute or incorporated but wholly owned by the government".
And, in Som Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 212, the Supreme Court observed :  "What we wish to emphasise is that merely because a company or other legal person has functional and jural individuality for certain purposes and in certain areas of law, it does not necessarily follow that for the effective enforcement of fundamental rights under our constitutional scheme, we should not scan the real character of that entity; and if it is found to be a mere agent or surrogate of the State, in fact owned by the State, in fact controlled by the State and in effect an incarnation of the State, constitutional lawyers must not blink at these facts and frustrate the enforcement of fundamental rights despite the inclusive definition of Article 12 that any authority controlled by the Government of India is itself State".
20.
These and such like judgments brought in fresh breeze.
And then came in the judgment in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojo Nath Ganguly (1986) 3 SCC 156.
It was contended in that case on behalf of the employees that the parties did not stand on an equal footing and did not enjoy the same bargaining power, that the contract of service was one which was imposed on them, that the power to terminate the service was arbitrary and uncanalized rendering it to be a void contract and that even if it was not void, it offended Article 14 as it conferred an absolute and arbitrary power upon the Corporation.
The court traced the development of the law, slow but steady and significant and pointed out that, apart from the judicial decisions, the United States and United Kingdom and so also other legal systems had recognised, at least in certain areas of the law of contract, that there could be unreasonableness or lack of fairness in a contract or a clause in a contract where there was inequality of bargaining power between the parties although arising out of the circumstances not within their control or as a result of situation not of their creation.
The court then proceeded to say :  "Should then our courts not advance with the times ?
Should they still continue to cling to outmoded concepts and outworn ideologies ?
Should we not adjust our thinking caps to match the fashion of the day ?
Should all jurisprudential development pass us by, leaving us floundering in the sloughts of 19th century theories ?
Should the strong be leaving us floundering in the sloughts of 19th century permitted to push the weak to the wall ?
Should they be allowed to ride roughshod over the weak ?
Should the courts sit back and watch supinely while the strong trample underfoot the rights of the weak ?
We have a Constitution for our country.
Our judges are bound by their oath to "uphold the Constitution and the laws".
The Constitution was enacted to secure to all the citizens of this country social and economic justice.
Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees to all persons equality before the law and the equal protection of the laws.
The principle deducible from the above discussions on this part of the case is in consonance with right and reason, intended to secure social and economic justice and conforms to the mandate of the great equality clause in Article 14.
This principle is that the courts will not enforce and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are not equal in bargaining power.
It is difficult to give an exhaustive list of all bargains of this type.
No court can visualize the different situations which can arise in the affairs of men.
One can only attempt to give some illustrations.
For instance, the above principle will apply where the inequality of bargaining power is the result of the great disparity in the economic strength of the contracting parties.
It will apply where the inequality is the result of circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or not.
It will apply to situations in which the weaker party is in a position in which he can obtain goods or services or means of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the stronger party or go without them.
It will also apply where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of rules as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or rules may be.
This principle, however, will not apply where the bargaining power of the contracting parties is equal or almost equal.
This principle may not apply where both parties are businessmen and the contract is a commercial transaction."
What is the position of the contract of employment in the present case ?
The petitioner having successfully completed the period of probation and having not only been confirmed but also having won approbation, saw his job in jeopardy.
He could be axed on the ground that the Staff with the MSTC had become surplus with the nationalisation of 21 sick textile mills.
He was warned about it.
He was given an option and was furnished with the terms and conditions for his absorption.
He had no voice in the framing of those terms and conditions and had no choice but to accept what had been offered.
What is more, the original terms and conditions did not contain any term with regard to the mode and method of termination of his service.
That term came to be circulated much later and with regard to it he was not even formally sounded.
It was a one-sided act as if the Corporation was dealing with a herd of cattle.
The Rule with regard termination is contained in the National Textile Corporation (South Maharashtra) Ltd.
Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules.
I am told the Rules are non-statutory.
The Rule says that service of an employee "appointed under a contract or agreement" can be terminated, in accordance with the terms of such contract or agreement".
However, as already noticed by me above, the terms and conditions of the contract with the petitioner contained no term with regard to termination.
If that be so, under which term or condition was the Corporation acting ?
21.
Here is a case of gross inequality of bargaining power.
To borrow the phrase from the case in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojo Nath Ganguly it was a contract "between the lion and the lamb".
It conferred an absolutely arbitrary and dictatorial power upon the Corporation.
22.
To say that the contract of employment fell exclusively within the domain of "private law" as distinguished from the "public law" field and that consequently the only remedy available to the petitioner was by way of a civil suit and not under Article 226, would, to my mind, perpetrate grave injustice to the significant strides made by the Courts in this sphere of law.
I may mention that similar arguments were advanced before the Supreme Court in the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojo Nath Ganguly (supra) and this is what the Court held :  "It was, however, submitted on behalf of the appellants that this was a contract entered into by the Corporation like and other contract entered into by it in the course of its trading activities and the court, therefore, ought not to interfere with it.
It is not possible for us to equate employees with goods which can be bought and sold.
It is equally not possible for us to equate a contract of employment with a mercantile transaction between two businessmen and much less to do so when the contract of employment is between a power employer and a weak employee and; The contesting respondents could, therefore, have filed a civil suit for a declaration that the termination of their service was contrary to law on the ground that the said Rule 9(1) was void.
In such a suit, however, they would have got a declaration and possibly damages for wrongful termination of service but the civil court could not have ordered reinstatement as it would have amounted to granting specific performance of a contract of personal service.
As the Corporation is "the State", they, therefore, adopted the far more efficacious remedy of filing a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution."
23.
As far back as in the year 1979 the Supreme Court had, with respect, made significant observations with regard to the manner in which such Corporations must act.
In Ramana v. IA Authority of India (supra) at page 1642 of the report, the law was summed up as follows :  "Now, obviously where a corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government it would, in the exercise of its power or discretion, be subject to the same constitutional or public law limitations as Government.
The rule inhibiting arbitrary action by government which we have discussed above must apply equally where such corporation is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or otherwise; and it cannot act arbitrarily and enter into relationship with any person it likes at its sweet will, but its action must be in conformity with some principle which meets the test of reason and relevance."
(Emphasis supplied) 24.
Yet another judgment of the Supreme Court which must not escape notice is in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 487.
At page 493 of the report we find the following :  "It is undoubtedly true that the Corporation is a distinct justice entity with a corporate structure of its own and it carries on its functions on business principles with a certain amount of autonomy which is necessary as well as useful from the point of view of effective business management, but behind the formal ownership which is cast in the corporate mould, the reality is very much the deeply pervasive presence of the Government.
It is really the Government which acts through the instrumentality or agency of the corporation and the juristic veil of corporate personality worn for the purpose of convenience of management and administration cannot be allowed to obliterate the true nature of the reality behind which is the Government.
Now it is obvious that if a corporation is an instrumentality or agency of the Government, it must be subject to the same limitations in the field of constitutional law as the Government itself though in the eye of the law it would be a distinct and independent legal entity.
If the Government acting through its officers is subject to certain constitutional limitations, it must follow a fortiori that the Government acting through the instrumentality or agency of a corporation should equally be subject to the same limitations.
If such a corporation were to be free from the basic obligation to obey the Fundamental Rights, it would lead to considerable erosion of the efficiency of the Fundamental Rights, for in that event the Government would be enabled to override the Fundamental Rights by adopting the stratagem of carrying out its functions through the instrumentality or agency of a corporation, while retaining control over it.
The fundamental rights would then be reduced to little more than an idle dream or a promise of unreality.
It must be remembered that the Fundamental Rights are constitutional guarantees given to the people of India and are not merely paper hopes on fleeting promises and so long as they find a place in the Constitution, they should not be allowed to be emasculated in their application by a narrow and constricted judicial interpretation.
The courts should be anxious to enlarge the scope and width of the Fundamental Rights by bringing within their sweep every authority which is an instrumentality or agency of the Government or through the corporate personality of which the Government is acting, so as to subject the Government in all its myriad activities, whether through natural persons or through corporate entities, to the basic obligation of the Fundamental Rights.
The constitutional philosophy of a democratic socialist republic requires the Government to undertake a multitude of socio-economic operations and the Government, having regard to the practical advantages of functioning through the legal device of a corporation embarks on myriad commercial and economic activities by resorting to the instrumentality or agency of a corporation, but this contrivance of carrying on such activities through a corporation cannot exonerate the Government from implicit obedience to the Fundamental Rights.
To use the corporate methodology is not to liberate the Government from its basic obligation to respect the Fundamental Rights and not to override them.
The mantle of a corporation may be adopted in order to free the Government from the inevitable constraints of red-tapist and slow motion but by, doing so, the Government cannot be allowed to play truant with the basic human rights."
At page 494 of the report the Supreme Court lays down :  "We are clearly of the view that where a corporation is an instrumentality or agency of the government, it must be held to be an authority within the meaning of Article 12 and hence subject to the same basic obligation to obey the Fundamental Rights as the government."
25.
And in the year 1990 came yet another judgment confirming once again that this a hopeful, pregnant period.
It is Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Majdoor Congress and others, 1991(1) SCT 675 (SC) : JT 1990(3) SC 725.
In that case it was submitted by the learned Solicitor General of India that the decision in the Central Inland Water Transport Corporations was incorrectly decided as in the ordinary law of contract termination of employment by reasonable notice on either side had never been regarded as unconscionable.
The submission was not accepted, and what is of further importance is that even the minority judgment while noticing the development of law from time to time observed that "arbitrariness and discrimination and acting whimsically must be avoided" (para 103) and that the authorities are "expected to act fairly, objectively and independently".
It further proceeded to hold that "reasons" for the action taken must be recorded (para 122), "in order to ensure effective judicial review in a given case" (para 124) and further that what was in issue was "demonstrably fair play and justice....in the exercise of the power...." (para 127).
26.
Coming to the majority view it would appear that the Supreme Court fully endorsed its earlier view in Central Inland Transport Corporation Ltd v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, Ray, J, after referring to that judgment observed as under :  "The Court has, therefore, the jurisdiction and power to strike or set aside the unfavourable terms in a contract of employment which purports to give effect to unconscionable bargain violating Article 14 of the Constitution."
(para 202) Sharma, J had this to say : "I agree with the learned Chief Justice that the rights of the parties in the present cases cannot be governed by the general principle of master and servant, the management cannot have unrestricted and unqualified power of terminating the services of the employees.
In the interest of efficiency of the public bodies, however, they should have the authority to terminate the employment of undesirable, inefficient, corrupt, indolent and disobedient, employees, but it must be exercised fairly, objectively and independently, and the occasion for the exercise must be delimited with precision and clarity.
Further, there should be adequate reason for the use of such a power, and a decision in this regard has to be taken in a manner which should show fairness, avoid arbitrariness and evoke credibility."
(para 220) K. Ramaswamy, J noticed that the main controversy centered around the question whether the employer, statutory corporation or instrumentality or other authority under Article 12 of the Constitution has unbridled power to terminate the services of its employees in terms of the contract of service (paragraphs 264 and 265 of the report).
The Hon'ble Judge observed that vesting arbitrary power would be a feeding around for nepotism and insolence; instead of observing the constitutional performance it would defeat the very object.
"That apart, the haunting fear of dismissal from service at the vagary of concerned officer would dry up all springs of idealism of the employee and in the process coarsens the conscience and degrades his spirits" (para 277).
It was further observed :  "As a court of constitutional functionary exercising equity jurisdiction, this Court would relieve the weaker parties from unconstitutional contractual obligations, unjust, unfair, oppressive and unconscionable rules or conditions when the citizen is really unable to meet on equal terms with the State.
It is to find whether the citizen, when entered into contracts or service, was in distress need or compelling circumstances to enter into contract on dotted lines or whether the citizen was in a position of either to "take it or leave it" and if it finds to be so, this Court would not shirk to avoid the contract by appropriate declaration.
Therefore, though certainty is an important value in normal commercial contract law, it is not an absolute and immutable one but is subject to change in the changing social conditions."
and that  "To prevent miscarriage of justice or to arrest a nursing grievance that arbitrary, whimsical or capricious action was taken behind the back of an employee without opportunity, the law must provide a fair, just and reasonable procedure as is exigible in a given circumstance as adumbrated in proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
If an individual action is taken as per the procedure on its own facts its legality may be tested.
But it would be no justification to confer power with wide discretion on any authority without any procedure which would not meet the test of justness, fairness and reasonableness envisaged under Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
In this context it is important to emphasis that the absence of arbitrary power is the first essential of the rule of law upon which our whole constitutional system is based."
and further :  "Therefore, I hold that conferment of power with wide discretion without any guidelines, without any just, fair or reasonable procedure is constitutionally anathema to Articles 14, 16 (1), 19 (1) (g) and 21 of the Constitution.
Doctrine of reading down cannot be extended to such a situation."
27.
In conclusion, the Supreme Court held that the ratio in Brojo Nath Ganguly's case was correctly laid and required no reconsideration.
28.
The law being as noticed above what is the position with regard to the case before me ?
Let me recall again.
It is a case where the petitioner, though a confirmed employee saw unemployment staring into his eyes.
He was in distress need and was faced with compelling circumstances to enter into the contract on dotted lines.
He had no meaningful choice but to give his assent.
The bargaining power of the contracting parties was not equal, not even almost equal.
It was also not a case where both the parties were businessmen and let us not forget that the contract was not a commercial transaction.
The terms and conditions of contract did not even contain a clause with regard to termination; the clause was introduced much later and with regard to it there was no mutuality.
Even otherwise, as already observed, the clause did not speak out how and in what manner the service could be terminated.
An unbridled arbitrary and much hated and abused rule of hire and fire reminiscent of the days of laissez faire and unrestrained freedom was assumed - nay usurped.
I have already dealt with it in one of the preceding paragraphs and do strongly feel that the clause was void under Section 23 of the Contract Act and that it gave effect to unconscionable bargain violating Article 14 of the Constitution.
29.
Not only this, for the matter does not rest here, the petitioner was crying hoarse that he had not been afforded reasonable opportunity to show cause.
He was served with no notice and given no hearing.
He alleged that he had been victimized without fault.
The allegation was never rebutted.
The Court cannot keep its eyes shut where a confirmed employees taken on the rolls for an unspecified period is robbed of his bread, butter and dignity by not even following the principles of natural justice and notwithstanding the constitutional guarantee enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
30.
In any case, since there was no term and condition in the contract of service with regard to termination or with regard to the method by which his service could be terminated it was all the more incumbent upon the authorities to at least hold an enquiry, and to not only record reasons for termination of services but to communicate them too.
31.
Mr. Ganesh argued that any encroachment upon the rights of such like Corporation falling within the domain of master and servant relationships would disturb the ecology of long recognised legal principles.
32.
In its pursuit for public good, law draws strength from human wisdom and human experience.
Past, to that extent, is relevant; but it cannot be allowed to stifle the present or strangulate the future.
Law, said Felix Frankfuster 40 American Bar Association Reports 365, 372 (1915), in 1915, is "a vital agency for human betterment.
It is probably for this very reason that Dean Pound said that law cannot stand still.
Quoted in Stability and Change, Law Review Digest, 1964, p.1.
Of course, here and there, there may have been periods of browsing, but it has always been on the move.
It was during this very journey that it danced with the people on the ruins of the Bastille and became party to and celebrated the wresting of rights from King John at Runeymede.
It has been a long and arduous journey along a tortuous parth and it would continue to be so.
And, all along the path, judges with vision and wisdom have provided guarantee of security to the weak against the strong and to the individual against the community, and have presented a shield against the tyranny of power.
The development of law as traced by me in the preceding paragraphs bears testimony to it.
33.
Lest I be accused of skirting the issues I may mention that Mr. Ganesh had also contended that this Court had no territorial jurisdiction in the matter since the employment was under NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. which has no office in Delhi.
However, I feel the objection is devoid of force.
Admittedly, the NTC has its registered office in Delhi.
NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. is a Subsidiary Corporation of the NTC which the NTC had created by virtue of the power conferred by Section 6 of the Sick Textile Undertaking (Nationalisation) Act, 1974.
As per the terms and conditions of service he could be transferred to any other Subsidiary Textile Corporation also.
In any case, after the termination of his services the petitioner had been making representations to the NTC also and the NTC had been taking active part in the matter suggesting even arbitration.
In this respect the meeting of the petitioner with the Managing Director of the NTC Mr. Singla assumes importance.
It cannot, thus, be said that the NTC had no role to play.
And once its role is taken note of this Court gets its territorial jurisdiction.
34.
It was also contended that the petitioner was guilty of laches since the writ petition was filed after about three years of the order of termination.
35.
I have already reproduced in the introductory passages of this order how the parties had been corresponding with each other and making offers and counter-offers.
That would show that much time was consumed thereby though the petitioner had been pursuing the matter with vigour.
Under the circumstances, it cannot be said that he was guilty of laches.
36.
For the reasons recorded, above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order of termination of petitioner's services is hereby set aside.
Since I am informed that the petitioner has already reached the age of superannuation, reinstatement cannot be ordered.
However, it is ordered that he would be entitled to all the benefits which would have accrued to him had he been in continuous service of the Corporation.
No order is made as to costs.
Petition allowed.