Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was working as an officer in the Middle Management Grade Scale II with the Punjab National Bank is aggrieved by the order dated January 9, 1987 by which he was reverted to the post of Assistant Manager in Junior Management Grade Scale I.
His appeal before the Appellate Authority having been rejected vide order dated April 25, 1988, he has approached this court through the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a clerk in the respondent-Bank on July 15, 1955.
In 1976 he was promoted to the rank of a Manager which is in Middle Management Grade Scale II.
On May 24, 1982, he was placed under suspension.
On November 5, 1982 a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
Various charges were levelled against him.
One of the charges was that he "sanctioned a term loan limit of Rs. 40,000/- and CC(H) of Rs. 25,000/- in favour of the party on 611982.
He paid Rs. 25,000/- to M/s Punjab Steel Fabricators for purchase of machinery under the term loan limit.
On verification it has been revealed that no such machinery was ever purchased.
Total amount of Rs. 62,000/- approximately is due from the party as on 24582 which is proving hard of recovery.
M/s Punjab Steel Fabricators were maintaining CC account with BO (Branch Officer) Palsuara and it was not running satisfactorily and this fact was well within his knowledge."
It was also alleged that "while submitting a proposal for sanction of various limits in favour of the party (M/s AB Industries), he did not disclose the relationship of his wife Mrs. Dalbir Kaur who is one of the partners in the above firm (and) concealed the facts from the authorities."
3.
It appears that the enquiry proceedings were not being conducted as expeditiously as the petitioner would have desired.
Accordingly, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 3131 of 1984.
This petitioner was decided by the Motion Bench after hearing counsel for the parties vide order dated October 18, 1984.
Appropriate directions were given by the Bench.
Within a month thereafter, the respondent-Bank passed an order on November 15, 1984 (a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2) by which "the major penalty of reduction of his salary by three stages in the time scale in which he is at present placed" was imposed.
Directions for his immediate reinstatement were also given.
The petitioner was actually reinstated in service of November 16, 1984.
Soon thereafter, another charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on November 21, 1984.
A copy of this charge-sheet has been produced on record as Annexure P-3.
The following charge was levelled against the petitioner :-  "Shri M.S.
Bajwa posted as Manager, BO Palsaura sanctioned loaning facilities to M/s AB Industries, Mohali a firm floated by his wife Smt. Dalbir Kaur and one Shri Surinder Ahuja.
However, he did not obtain permission or sent intimation for starting the business in the name of his wife in the partnership deed.
Shri Bajwa as such, committed misconduct in terms of reg.
3(1) and 6(2) of PNB Officers Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1977."
In the statement of imputation of misconduct the detail as noticed earlier with regard to the charge-sheet dated November 5, 1982 were given.
The petitioner avers that this charge-sheet was served in spite of the fact that the allegations levelled therein had already been enquired into.
It is further averred that on account of extraneous considerations, the respondent-Bank filed a suit for the recovery of loan amount from M/s AB Industries.
The petitioner's wife Mrs. Dalbir Kaur was impleaded as defendant No. 3.
The suit was decided on November 21, 1986.
In this suit, Mrs. Dalbir Kaur had pleaded that even though she was party to the original ending of money by the Bank yet the suit is not maintainable against her as the assets and liabilities had been transferred to Mr. Surinder Ahuja with the knowledge and consent of the plaintiff-Bank.
On this premises, it was contended that she was not liable.
On November 21, 1986, the suit for the recovery of Rs. 1,01,71333 was decreed against various defendants but not against the petitioner's wife.
4.
The Bank had appointed Mr. VP Rangan as the Enquiry Officer on December 7, 1985 to enquiry into the charges levelled against the petitioner in the charge-sheet served on him on November 21, 1984.
The Enquiry Officer found that the charge was proved.
On January 9, 1987 the Deputy General Manager of the respondent-Bank conveyed the order imposing the penalty of "demotion from MMG Scale-II to JMG Scale-I (Assistant Manager).
....I also decided that he should not be given independent charge of any branch for three years from the date of this order."
It appears that the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 593 of 1987 against this order.
A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner had an effective remedy of appeal.
This objection was accepted and the writ petition was dismissed.
Accordingly, the petitioner filed an appeal.
It was dismissed by the Appellate Authority vide order dated April 25, 1988.
A copy of this order has been appended with the writ petition as Annexure P-8.
Aggrieved by these two orders, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4.
It has been averred by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioner has not disclosed the correct facts.
It has been mentioned that he had filed C.W.P.
No. 3131 of 1984 in which he had sought a direction for the respondents to complete the enquiry at the earliest.
This writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn on October 18, 1984.
He had then filed C.W.P.
No. 593 of 1987 claiming that the "charge-sheet dated 5.11.92 and 2.11.84" be quashed and the suspension be revoked.
This writ petition was dismissed on November 12, 1987.
Meanwhile, he had also filed a civil suit for the grant of a permanent injunction restraining the Bank from serving any type of charge-sheet or holding any type of enquiry for the period covered in the first charge-sheet.
On these premises, it has been claimed that the petitioner is not entitled to seek the discretionary relief under Article 226 of the Constitution It has been averred that the petitioner "has mis-stated the facts that the Enquiry Officer is not a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
"On merit, the factual position has not been disputed.
It has, however, been averred that "during the entire tenure of his service in the Bank, the over-all performance of the petitioner has been satisfactory and not excellent as stated."
It has been averred that the petitioner had committed in innumerable illegalities and irregularities resulting in reckless advances and thereby exposed the Bank to great risk.
Accordingly, it was considered in the interest of the institution to place him under suspension.
It has been further averred that "in the charge-sheet dated 5111982 served upon the petitioner, the charge pertaining to the account of M/s AB Industries, was also covered but the same was not looked into by the Enquiry Officer as the charge pertaining to account of M/s AB Industries was registered by the CBI for investigation."
It has been averred that the Disciplinary Authority had issued instructions in pursuance to which the Enquiry Officer had told the Presenting Officer that the charge was not to be enquired into against him.
It has been further averred that "after the receipt of the report from the CBI the petitioner was served with charge-sheet dated 21.11.84 for the lapses/irregularities committed by him while working as Manager at BO Palsaura for having sanctioned the cash credit limit of Rs. 25,000/- and term loan of Rs. 40,000/- on 23.10.1981 to M/s AB Industries Mohali".
On the basis of the finding of the Enquiry Officer, the Disciplinary Authority passed the order dated January 9, 1987.
It has been stated that on the basis of certain letters sent by the firm to the Bank, the Court exempted the petitioner's wife from the liability to pay the amount claimed by the Bank in the civil suit.
It has been further mentioned that in accordance with the circular dated December 20, 1984 (Annexure R-6 with the written statement of the Bank) the Deputy General Manager is competent to impose any of the penalties specified under Regulation 4.
It has been further mentioned that the Appellate Authority "after going through the averment made by the petitioner in the grounds of appeal and taking into account the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellate authority passed the speaking order Annexure P-8".
It has been also mentioned that the petitioner's pay has been correctly fixed and that his grievance in this behalf was untenable.
On these premises, the claim made by the petitioner has been controverted and it has been prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed.
6.
I have heard Mr. Kanwaljit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SS Najjar for the respondents.
Mr. Kanwaljit Singh has contended that the impugned order passed by the Disciplinary Authority is vitiated as it has been passed on the basis of material which was not even a part of the charge against the petitioner.
He further submits that even the appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed by the Appellate Authority without hearing him and in violation of provision contained in Regualtion 17 inasmuch as the authority did not apply its mind to the various relevant matters postulated in the Regulation.
The learned counsel further submits that the action of the respondent is absolutely arbitrary and in fact suffers from the vice of double jeopardy.
An effort has also been made to point out that after the orders, the petitioner's pay has not been correctly fixed and his claim for further promotion has not been considered.
The contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner have been controverted by Mr. Najjar.
He has contended that the petitioner has not challenged the order on the ground that is based on consideration of material beyond the charge levelled against him.
He further submits that the procedure as required under the Regulations has been completely followed; the order is just and fair and thus calls for no interference in the exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution It may be noted that the learned counsel has been pressed any of the preliminary objections raised in the reply to the writ petition.
7.
A perusal of the charge-sheet (Annexure P-3 with the writ petition) which has been reproduced above shows that the petitioner was alleged to have committed misconduct in terms of "regulations 3(1) and 6(2) of the PNB Officers Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1977."
This was the precise charge that the petitioner had to meet.
The Enquiry Officer while considering the matter has found as a fact that "from the documents adduced in defence of Sh. Bajwa I observe that the sanction of term loan of Rs. 40,000/- and C/C Limit (Hyp) of Rs. 25,000/- was made in favour of AB Industries by the R.M.
(Regional Manager) vide his letter Loans-A dated 291281 (Ex.M-4)."
He further observes that "as the said firm AB Industries applied for loan through PNB, Palsaura where Shri Bajwa was posted as Manager it was essential to obtain the permission of competent authority i.e. R.M.
before entering into any agreement in terms of clause 5(3)."
"I observe that Shri Bajwa could not bring any document or witness to show that he made any report in terms of clause 6(2) or sought permission in terms of clause 5(3) in respect of AB Industries."
Ultimately, the Enquiry Officer has declared that the charge that "Shri Bajwa while posted as Manager BO Palsaura sanctioned loaning facilities to M/s AB Industries, Mohali a firm floated by his wife Smt. Dalbir Kaur and one Sh. Surinder Ahuja.
However, he did not obtain permission or send intimation for starting the business in the name of his wife and also accepted the wrong address given by his wife in the partnership deed, as fully substantiated and hence proved."
On the basis of this finding the Disciplinary Authority, after giving the sequence of event has observed as under :-  "The above charge was included in earlier charge-sheet dated 5111982, but as the CBI was enquiring into it, Disciplinary Authority had not considered this charged while deciding the earlier charge sheet.
I also observe from the record of Sh. Bajwa that the committed various irregularities in the past and the following punishment were imposed upon him in respect of the provision misconducts on his part :- - Major penality of reduction of salary by three stage in a time scale vide disciplinary authority order dated 15.11.1984.
- Minor penalty of withholding of one graded increment with cumulative effect vide Disciplinary Authority order dated 2561986.
Looking to the totality of the case and the fact the officers of financial institutions have to display integrity of the highest order, I take the view and decide to impose upon Sh. Bajwa the major penalty of demotion from MMG Scale-I to JMC Scale-I (Assistant Manager).
I also decide that he should not be given independent charge of any branch for three years from the date of this order.
I order accordingly."
On a perusal of the charge-sheet it appears that the only charge against the petitioner was that he had sanctioned loaning facilities to a firm floated by his wife without obtaining permission or sending intimation "for starting the business in the name of his wife in the partnership deed."
He was alleged to have violated regulations 3(1) and 6(2).
In other words, the suggestion appears to be that the petitioner had started the business in the name of his wife.
On this basis, he was alleged to have violative Regulations 3(1) and 6(2) of the Conduct Regulations.
The Enquiry Officer, however, observed that the petitioner had violated clause 6(2) and clause 5(3).
He further held that the petitioner did not obtain or send intimation for starting the business in the name of his wife and "also accepted the wrong address given by his wife in the partnership deed."
The Punishing Authority not only relied on the report of the Enquiry Officer but also took into consideration the fact that the petitioner had committed various irregularities in the past on account of which major penalty of reduction of salary by three stages had been imposed vide order dated November 15, 1984 and minor penalty of withholding of one graded increment with cumulative effect has been imposed vide Disciplinary Authority order dated 2561986.
In view of this position, the Disciplinary Authority awarded the major penalty of demotion from Middle Management Grade Scale-II to Junior Management Grade Scale-I (Assistant Manager) on the petitioner.
It is thus clear that matters beyond the charge which had been levelled against the petitioner had been taken into consideration.
The previous punishments or the misconduct was never a part of the charge levelled against the petitioner.
Consequently, he had no opportunity to meet this aspect of the matter.
The disciplinary authority clearly appears to have been influenced by the fact that the petitioner had been accused of misconduct even prior to the issue of the present charge-sheet.
It has influenced its judgment in determining the quantum of punishment.
In fact it is after mentioning the previous punishments that the authority has looked at the totality of the case.
In my opinion, the Disciplinary Authority should have called upon the petitioner to explain his position if his previous conduct had to be taken into consideration.
If such an opportunity had been granted, the petitioner could have possibly shown that even the Enquiry Officer had erred in finding that there was violation of clause 5(3) of the Conduct Regulations.
He could have further shown that once the petitioner had been punished for a particular misconduct, the fact could not be taken into consideration in a subsequent proceedings especially for the purpose of determining the quantum of punishment.
The action of the authority in not giving the petitioner such an opportunity was violative of the principles of natural justice.
8.
Mr. Nijjar however contends that such a contention has not been specifically raised in the petition.
He is undoubtedly right in his submission.
However, the facts are apparent on the record.
It is a contention based on the admitted facts.
Even otherwise, in spite of being specifically asked, Mr. Nijjar could not refer to anything from the record of the Bank or of this court to show that the petitioner was ever accused to having violated clause 5(3) of the Conduct Regulations or that he was ever informed that his previous conduct and the orders of penalties were likely to be taken into consideration for the final decision of the proceedings.
In view of this, I find no merit in the objections raised by the learned counsel.
9.
Mr. Kanwaljit Singh was at pains to point out that he has been treated very harshly and that the action of the respondents is arbitrary.
He has submitted that the application for loan as forwarded by the petitioner to the Regional Manager on October 21, 1981.
The loan had thereafter been disbursed on October 23, 1981.
Keeping in view the fact that the Bank had objected to the petitioner's action, his wife had retired from the partnership on Mach 31, 1982.
Intimation in this behalf was sent to the Bank soon thereafter.
He further points out that the loan had in fact been ultimately sanctioned by the Regional Manager.
Learned counsel has also tried to point out that even the civil Court has upheld this claim made by the petitioners wife.
10.
A perusal of the charge-sheet shown that the petitioner was accused of having failed to "obtain permission or sending intimation for starting the business in the name of his wife in the partnership deed."
This was repeated in the statement or imputations wherein it was mentioned that "Shri M.S.
Bajwa did not obtain permission or send intimation for starting the business in the name of his wife...".
The accusation against the petitioner thus was that he had started the business in the name of his wife without sending the intimation or obtaining the permission.
This is the precise charge which is held to have been proved against him.
However, in spite of being asked, learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to refer to any evidence, documentary or oral, to show that it was the petitioner who had started the business in the name of his wife.
In fact, Mr. Nijjar, on instructions, has stated before me that there is no evidence indicating that the petitioner had himself started the business in the name of his wife.
Such being the position, it appears that the authorities have erred in holding that the charge was proved.
It is of course correct that the High Court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction cannot go into the evidence.
It is true that if there is some evidence, the court will not examine the evidence and decide the case as if it were hearing in appeal.
However, in a case where there is no evidence and yet the charge is held to be proved, the writ court is certainly entitled to intervene in the exercise of its discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution Reference in this behalf may be made to Union of India v. HC Goel, AIR 1964 SC 364.
11.
It is thus clear that there was no evidence in support of this part of the charge levelled against the petitioner.
Consequently, neither the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer that the charge was proved nor the order of punishment based on this finding can be sustained.
12.
This brings me to the consideration of the order passed by the Appellate Authority.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the Appellate Authority passed the order without hearing the petitioner.
A specific averment in this behalf has been made in paragraphs Nos 14 and 16 of the writ petition.
In reply, it has been stated that the Appellate Authority decided the matter "after going through the averments made by the petitioner in the grounds of the appeal and taking into account the facts and circumstances of the case...".
On this factual premises, learned counsel contends that the order passed by the Appellate Authority is vitiated.
13.
This matter has been considered by the apex court in Ram Chander v Union of India, 1986(2) SLR 608 : AIR 1986 1173 (SC) and it was observed as under :-  "It is not necessary for our purposes to go into the vexed question whether a post-decisional hearing is a substitute of the denial of a right of hearing at the initial stage or the observance of the rules of natural justice since the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case (AIR 1985 SC 1416) unequivocally lays down that the only stage at which a Government servant gets a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him' i.e. an opportunity to exonerate himself from the charge by showing that the evidence adduced at the inquiry is not worthy of credence of consideration or that the charges proved against him are not of such a character as to merit the extreme penalty of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank and that any of the lesser punishments ought to have been sufficient in his case, is at the stage of hearing of a departmental appeal.
Such being the legal position, it is of utmost importance after the forty-second Amendment as interpreted by the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case that the Appellate Authority must not only give a hearing to the Government servant concerned but also pass a reasoned order dealing with the contentions raised by him in the appeal.
We wish to emphasize that reasoned decision by tribunals, such as the Railway Board in the present case, will promote public confidence in the administrative process.
An objective consideration is possible if the delinquent servant is heard and given a chance to satisfy the Authority regarding the final orders that may be passed on his appeal.
Considerations of fair-play and justice also require that such a personal hearing should be given."
14.
In view of the above observations, a Division Bench of this court in SL Loona v. The Punjab National Bank, 1992(1) SLR 250 : 1992(1) SCT 604 (P&H) (DB) has upheld a similar contention raised on behalf of the petitioner in that case.
In view of the above enunciation of the legal position, the order passed by the Appellate Authority also cannot be sustained.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that his pay in pursuance to the order dated November 15, 1984 has not been correctly fixed and that the increments due to him have not been released.
This matter involves fixation of pay.
I have no doubt that if the petitioner makes a representation to the competent authority, the matter would be looked into and the petitioner's pay would be fixed in accordance with the rules and the orders passed by the Bank.
Similar appears to the position with regard to the petitioner's claim for further promotion which would be decided in the accordance with the regulations governing the matter.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The orders dated January 9, 1987 (Annexure P-6) and April 25, 1988 (Annexure P-8) are set aside.
Consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary, consideration for promotion in accordance with the regulations etc. shall follow.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner is due to retire on September 30, 1993.
It will be appreciated if the authority decide the whole claim expeditiously and in any case within 3 months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.