DM Dharmadhikari, J - The order in this case shall decide the preliminary objection raised, in common, in other following connected petitions also.
1.
Misc.
Petition No. 1880 of 1990 2.
-do- 2188 of 1990 3.
-do- 1995 of 1990 4.
-do- 3067 of 1990 5.
-do- 3061 of 1990 6.
-do- 1749 of 1990 7.
-do- 2539 of 1990 8.
-do- 1966 of 1990 9.
-do- 1788 of 1990 10.
-do- 1841 of 1990 11.
-do- 299/91 12.
-do- 1996/90 13.
-do- 1882/90  14.
-do- 4348/89 15.
-do- 356/91 16.
-do- 1801/89 2.
All the petitioners in the above cases are employees in Municipal Corporations and have challenged in this Court the orders of their transfer from the Municipal Corporation in which they are working to the other Municipal Corporation in the State.
3.
During the course of hearing of the petitions jointly Shri NC Jain, learned Advocate General appearing for the State, raised a preliminary objection that the petitioners are holders of 'civil posts under the State' and the exclusive jurisdiction with record to their service matters vests with the State Administrative Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of Section 15(b) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
Reliance has been placed on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Gujarat and another v. Raman Lal Keshav Lal Soni and others, 1983(1) SLR 581 (SC).
Learned counsel appearing for the State while pressing the preliminary objection raised by him took the Court through the various provisions of the MP Municipal Corporation Act and the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
The contention in short in that State exercises effective control on the working, finance and employees of the Corporation and, therefore, the Corporation employees are holders of civil posts under the State.
It is pointed out that two basic tests make the municipal employees holders of civil post under the State under Section 58(1) and (2) of the Municipal Corporation Act certain employees can be appointed only with the approval of the State Public Service Commission.
Under Section 58(5) of the Corporation Act, which is the subject-matter of challenge and interpretation in these batch of petitions, State Government has been conferred with power of transfer on deputation employees of the Corporation from one Corporation to another.
It is submitted that the rule making power with relation to conditions of service of Corporation employees is also with the State Government.
These provisions make the Corporation employees holders of civil posts under the State.
4.
Shri Anoop Choudhary, learned counsel appearing for the Municipal Corporation, Bhopal opposed the preliminary objection stating that Corporation employees are holders of municipal posts are not holders of civil posts under the State within the meaning of Section 15(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
Learned counsel Shri SN Khare, Shri Shaukatali and Shri VK Tankha, who addressed the Court on behalf of the petitioners also opposed the preliminary objection and supported the stand of Corporation.
The learned counsel opposing the preliminary objection pointed out that under the provisions of the Corporation Act, power to appoint and terminate Corporation employees vests in the Corporation.
The entire service conditions of the Corporation employees are governed by the service bye laws framed by the Corporation.
The disciplinary control also vests with the Corporation.
It is further contended that merely because certain Municipal posts under the Corporation can be filled only with the approval of the State Public Service Commission in certain contingencies provided in Section 58(1) of the Act, cannot make the Corporation employees as holders of civil posts under the State.
It was also submitted that merely because the State legislature by a legislative amendment to Section 58 of the Municipal Corporation Act has conferred power on the State Government to transfer on deputation the Corporation employees from one Corporation to another, that will not as a single factor make the Corporation employees the holders of civil posts under the State.
5.
Learned Advocate General while passing the preliminary objection, based on want of jurisdiction of this Court laid much emphasis on the expression used in Section 15(1)(a)(b)-"civil service of State" and "any civil post under the State", to point out a distinction that even holders of civil post in connection with affairs of any local authority, are also governed by the expression "civil posts under the State".
The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Gujarat and another (supra) which was based on the provision of Gujarat Panchayats Act, is sought to be taken aid of in support of the above argument.
Having carefully considered the relevant portions of the Municipal Corporation Act and the Administrative Tribunals Act, we are of the opinion that the preliminary objection has no force and the same is liable to be answered in favour of the petitioners on the basis of the express language of the provisions contained in Section 15 of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
The Administrative Tribunals are constituted with a specific purpose to decide cases on service matters of specific categories of employees and oust the jurisdiction of the constitutional Court i.e. the High Court.
Such a provision which ousts the jurisdiction of a constitutional Court and confers jurisdiction on a special Tribunal has to be strictly construed meaning thereby that such ouster is not to be inferred unless there are express implied words of such ouster made.
The provisions of Section 15 of the Administrative Tribunals Act read as under :  "15.
Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Administrative Tribunals -  (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court (...) in relation to......  (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment to any civil service of the State or to any civil post under the State; (b) all services matters concerning a person (not being a person referred to in Clause (c) of this sub-section or a member, person or civilian referred to in Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 14 appointed to any civil service of the State or any civil post under the State and pertaining to the service of such person in connection with the affairs of the State or of any local or other authority under the control of the State Government or of any corporation (or society) owned or controlled by the State Government; (c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the State concerning a person appointed to any service or post referred to in Clause (b), being a person whose services have been placed by any such local or other authority or corporation (or society) or other body as is controlled or owned by the State Government, at the disposal of the State Government for such appointment.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, apply, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification the provisions of Sub-section (3) to local or other authorities the corporations controlled or owned by the State Government :  Provided that if the State Government considers it expedient so as to do for the purpose of facilitating transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this sub-section in respect of different classes of, or different categories under any class of, local or other authorities or corporations.
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall also exercise on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub-section apply to any local or other authority or corporation (or society) all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable before that date by all courts (except the Supreme Court...)  in relation to  (a) a recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation (or society), and (b) all service matters concerning a person other than a person referred to in Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of this section or a member, person or civilian referred to in Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 14 appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation (or society) and pertaining to the service such person in connection with such affairs.
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall not extend to, or be exercisable in relation to any matter in relation to which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal extends or is exercisable.
6.
It is to be noticed from the reading of the entire Section 15 with all its sub-sections that provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act maintain a distinction between service matters of such employees who are directly employed by the State or working as State employees in local authorities or viceversa.
Such employees who are directly employed by the local authorities constitute a different service and the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act can be made applicable to them only by express notification to be issued under Section 15(2) of the Act.
Similarly by Section 15(3) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, Administrative Tribunal constituted for a State shall exercise jurisdiction in relation to service of employees of such local authorities only after issuance of a specific notification to that effect under Sub-section (3) of Section 15 of the Act.
7.
Provisions of Section 15(2) and (3) of the Act quoted above, in our opinion, clearly indicate that with regard to such employees, who are employed by the Municipal Corporation, being legal authority, the ordinary constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court is ousted only after issuance of notifications both under Section 15(2) and (3) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
8.
The contention of the learned Advocate General cannot be accepted on the face of clear provisions contained in Section 15(2) and (3) of the Act that even without issuance of notifications thereunder, the service matters of Corporation employees will be ousted from the jurisdiction of the High Court.
We also find that the decision of the Supreme Court based on Gujarat Panchayats, Act is clearly distinguishable for the purpose of the present controversy.
In that case, the Supreme Court was dealing with a special State enactment that is, Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961 which provided for constitution of State Panchayat Services.
The holders of posts in such service were employees of the State although working in connection with the affairs of the Panchayats and, therefore, the Supreme Court hold in their favour that they were government servants and could not be deprived of that status by denying them protection of Article 311 of the Constitution  9.
Learned Advocate General may be right in submitting that looking to the sovereign functions of the State exercised through the local authorities, which have to act under the control of the State, the employees working in the local authorities are under the State and hence holders of civil posts in that wider meaning, but since the Administrative Tribunals Act in the matter of taking away the jurisdiction of ordinary constitutional Courts had itself maintained a distinction between the employees directly employed by the State and serving under it and those employees working in local authorities although under the control under various enactments, of the State, it cannot be held that the entire jurisdiction with regard to such corporation employees would vest in the Tribunal even in the absence of issuance of due notifications under Section 15(2) and (3) of the Act.
10.
The preliminary objection, therefore, has no substance and is overruled.
It is held that in the absence of any notification under Section 15(2) and (3) of the Act, the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not stand excluded and these service matters do not lie within the jurisdiction of the State Tribunal.
11.
Since, however, as in some petitions constitutional validity of Section 58(5) of the MP Municipal Corporation Act has also been challenged, which is somewhat connected with the question of true and correct interpretation of that Section, we think it proper to place this petition as also the connected petitions on the subject-matter for decision by Division Bench No. 1  Order accordingly.