JS Sekhon, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 13008 of 1992 and Civil Writ Petition No. 13699 of 1992, as substantially the same controversy is involved in both these writ petitions.
2.
The Punjab Government vide notification dated 2421992 decided that the selection of students for admission to Post Graduate Dental Courses i.e. three years MDS Course for the academic session 1992 at the Government Dental Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar shall be made on the basis of holding a joint pre-enterance test to be conduced by the Punjabi University, Patiala for all the subjects in MDS Courses.
It also provided that out of total number of seats, 25 seats speciality-wise shall be filled through competitive entrance test on All India basis and remaining 60% seats shall be filled in from in-service candidates, who had served for at least five years upto the last date of receipt of the application forms at the University while the remaining 40% seats will be filled from amongst fresh Graduates.
The notification also provided the reservation of 25% seats in each course/collage for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and 5% seats for backward classes, 2% for sportsmen/women, 2% for riot victims and displaced persons/wards of persons killed in terrorists' action in Punjab and 1% for physically handicapped.
After the declaration of the result of joint Entrance Test, the candidates were required to submit admission applications to the Principal of Dental College, Patiala giving their choice of three subjects of Post Graduations and of two Institutions.
The candidates were, thereafter, required to appear for interview and the number of seats in each course/speciality was to be intimated at the time of interview.
In pursuance of the said notification, Dr. Ashutosh Narula and Dr. Adarsh Kaur, the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 13008 of 1992 and Civil Writ Petition No. 13699 of 1992 respectively appeared in the joint Entrance Test from the category of fresh graduates.
Dr. Narula secured 13th position in the joint merit list.
Dr. Narula submitted his application forms for admission giving his preference as under :-  (i) Pedodontia : Medical College, Amritsar  (ii) Periodontia and : Medical College, Patiala  (iii) Operative : Medical College, Patiala  Dr. Adarsh kaur secured 14th position in joint merit list and gave her preference of speciality and Institution as under :  (i) Oral Surgery : Medical College, Amritsar  (ii) Operative : -do-  (iii) Periodaontia : -do-  3.
In all there were 20 seats in the MDS Courses in both these Dental Colleges out of which 11 seats were earmarked to be filled up from 60% in-service quota; 8 seats out of 40% quota of fresh graduates and one seat from All India quota in the speciality of Pedodontia, but ultimately only three eligible candidates were available in-service quota and thus remaining 8 seats of this category were transferred to 40% quota for fresh graduates vide Notification dated 23.7.1992 (Annexure P-3) of the Government.
Thus, due to the above referred Notification, the seats of 40% quota became 16 in number count of which three more seats were given to the All India quota, allegedly arbitrarily.
Out of the remaining five seats, one seat was given to Dr. Rupinder Kaur, respondent No. 6 who has not even appeared in the joint Entrance Test and thus was not eligible for admission to the 1992 - Session and the other seat was given to Dr. Lalit Kapur, respondent No. 7 in the speciality of Periodontia at Government Medical Dental College, Amritsar, although the petitioner was more meritorious in the joint Entrance Test having secured 13th Position.
Dr. Lalit Kapur secured 10th position out on the technical ground that the petitioner has not opted for admission in Periodontia at Dental College at Amritsar.
Thus, Dr. Narula petitioner, contends that he should be given admission in the speciality of MDS Course in Periodontia strictly on merits treating or considering his second preference in Periodontia at Patiala and Periodontia and operative at Amritsar.
4.
Under these circumstances, the petitioner seeks the quashment of admission given to respondent No. 6 in the speciality of Periodontia at Government Dental College and of respondent No. 7 in the speciality of Periodontia in Government Dental College, Amritsar.
It is further averred that para 16. of the Prospectus qua the giving of preference for admission in three courses and Medical Colleges being arbitrary is violative of Article 14 of the constitution should be struck down.
Similar, relief is sought by Dr. Adarsh Kaur in Civil Writ Petition No. 13699 of 1992.
5.
On notice, Dr. Manohar Singh, Principal, Govt.
Dental College and Hospital, Patiala filed return, admitting the above referred factual position regarding the issuing of Notification by the State Government.
He, however, clarified that out of the total 20 seats, initially one seat was earmarked for All India quota as per the distribution of seats in Annexure R-1, but later on receipt of the letter, Annexure R-2 of the Directorate General Health Services (Medical Examination Cell), New Delhi, further three seats were given to the quota of Central Government as the notification provided for reservation of 25% of the total seats.
He further explained that out of the above referred eight seats transferred to 40% quota from 60% quota, due to the non-availability of eligible candidates.
Out of these four seats given to the Central quota, two seats were in the speciality of Pedodontia one in oral surgery and one in Prosthetics.
Out of the remaining five seats, one seat was given to Dr. Rupinder Kaur, respondent No. 6 in the speciality of Periodontia as per direction of the Court, Annexure R-4.
It was classified that respondent No. 7 has secured 15th position in the open merit-list while Dr. Narula, petitioner, had secured 12th position.
However, as the petitioner had given his choice for admission in the speciality of Periodontia at Patiala only, therefore, this seat was given to respondent No. 7, who has given first choice in this respect.
It was further explained that para 16 of the prospectus clearly provides for giving choice of three subjects and of two Institutions in the admission form and some of the candidates had given their first and second choice of both these Institutions in their admission forms, but the petitioners having given choice of only one Institution, his claim for admission in the said Institution was considered.
6.
The private respondents Nos. 6 and 7, however, justified their admission on the strength of the judgment of the Civil Court and on merit respectively.
7.
During the course of arguments, on asking of the court, Dr. Manohar Singh, Principal, Govt.
Dental College and Hospital, Patiala, filed detailed affidavit on behalf of the official respondents giving details of the five vacant seats subject-wise which were transferred from 60% quota to 40% quota.
In the said affidavit, he has stated that one seat in the speciality of operative was offered to Dr. Jaidev Singh who was earlier admitted in Periodontia.
Under these circumstances, this Court vide detailed order dated 17121992 thought it fit to give notice to Dr. Jaidev Singh after arraigning him as respondent No. 8 in both the writ petitions.
Dr. Jaidev Singh the return filed by him stated that he has secured sixth position in the merit list of general category and, therefore, secured admission in the speciality of Periodontia against his third choice.
He further stated that as eight seats in 16% quota were kept vacant at the time of initial admission, he was offered admission in the speciality of Operative against his second preference strictly on merits.
8.
During the course of arguments, Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel for both the petitioners, has confined his challenge to the quashment of admission of respondents No. 6, 7 and 8 only inter alia contending that the merit of a candidate should have an overriding consideration for admission to the Post Graduation courses in different specialities and the conduct of respondents 1 to 5 in not giving admission to the petitioners on merit, but giving admission to respondent No. 7 who was lower in merit in the speciality of Periodontia and to respondent No. 6 on the basis of the judgment of the court, although she has not applied for admission to 1992 - Session and was not eligible for the same having not even appeared in the joint Entrance Test was arbitrary.
It was further maintained that para 16 of the Prospectus providing for giving the choice in three subjects and two Medical Colleges is arbitrary as at the time of submission of admission form, the candidate is not made aware of the availability of number of seats in each faculty college-wise.
It is also contended that as per para 27 of the Prospectus no change of course for migration is permissible once the candidate has joined the course.
Thus, he maintained that since Dr. Jaidev Singh, respondent No. 8 had joined the course in the speciality of Periodontia, he could not be allowed to change his course for admission in speciality of Operative.
9.
Sh. SS Saron, Deputy Advocate-General, on the other hand, maintained that para 16 of the Prospectus was perfectly constitutional as Medical Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar being located in two different Universities, there could not be any other sound criteria for finalizing the admission to these Dental Colleges except on the basis of the preference of the candidate concerned.
Thus, he states that the admission to respondent No. 7 was strictly given on merit as per his choice while respondent No. 6 was given admission on the basis of judgment of the civil Court.
10.
Sh. Anil Malhotra, learned counsel for respondent No. 6, also supported the admission of respondent No. 6 on the basis of the judgment of the civil Court.
Sh. Jatin Salwan, learned counsel for respondent No. 8 also supported the admission of Dr. Jaidev Singh from Periodontia to Operative after the availability of eight more seats in the 40% quota contending that it was not change of courses, but simply giving admission to this respondent on the basis of his better merit and against his second preference.
11.
Regarding the vires of para 16 of the Prospectus for admission to MDS three years courses for the year 1992, it transpires that this prescribes that each candidate should give the choice of three subjects for Post Graduation and of two Institutions i.e. Govt.
Dental College, Patiala and Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar in the application form to be submitted, to the Principal, Government Dental College, Patiala.
This para reads as under :-  "16.
Choice of subjects :  After the declaration of the result, the choice of three subjects for post-graduation and of 2 institutions will be given in the application form to be submitted to the Principal, Govt.
Dental College Patiala.
No change will be entertained/permitted at the later stage."
Apparently, it appears that the provisions regarding the choice of three subjects by each candidate cannot be said to be arbitrary or against the spirit of giving admission to Post Graduation Courses strictly on the basis of merit as it simply requires the candidate to give choice of the three subjects in which he considers himself more proficient or so-called his pet subjects.
Thus, giving admission to a candidate in other subjects than those of his choice would ultimately may not prove fruitful for turning out better Post Graduates in a particular speciality of the Dental Surgery.
According to Appendix-II of this Prospectus, three years MDS course is available in the following five subjects :  1.
Prosthetics including Crown and Bridge Work.
2.
Periodontia.
3.
Operative/Conservative Dentistry.
4.
Oral Surgery.
5.
Pedodontia & Preventive Dentistry.
Thus giving choice in three subjects out of the five of the MDS courses cannot be said to be in any way arbitrary or against the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
12.
The question then arises whether the giving of choice by a candidate for admission to two Institutions i.e. Govt.
Dental College, Patiala or Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar is arbitrary or defeats the criteria of admission to candidates on merits as per para 16 of the Prospectus provides that the number of seats in each course will be intimated to the candidates at the time of the interview.
Thus, at the time of submission of application form for admission after qualifying of the joint entrance test a candidate is not aware of the number of the seats available in each speciality and in each Institution.
Thus, the direction in para 16 of the Prospectus qua the giving of choice of two Institutions in the application form would certainly result in arbitrariness as there is reasonable possibility that in some cases, a candidate having better merit will be ignored for admission in a particular speciality simply on the ground that he has not opted for the Institution where such seat was available.
As a matter of fact in the case in hand, Dr. Narual, petitioner, was not given admission in Periodontia but instead respondent No. 7 lower in the merit fist was given admission as the petitioner had not given his choice in this subject at Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar, but only at Govt.
Dental College, Patiala.
In para 6 of the return filed on behalf of official respondents by Dr. Manohar Singh, Principal Govt.
Dental College and Hospital, Patiala it is stated that some of the candidates had given first preference in one Institution and for second in another, but the petitioner had given choice in the speciality of Periodontia only at Govt.
Dental College, Patiala.
No doubt, the perusal of para 16 of the Prospectus reproduced above simply provides for giving choice for admission in a particular Institution and there is no indication therein that the candidate can give his first and second preferences for admission in any of these two Institutions yet all the same, the proforma of application form (copy Annexure R-6) reveals giving of choice of speciality and place applied for in order of preference.
Anyhow, a candidate being not aware of the availability of the number of seats in each speciality in the particular Institution at the time of giving such choice in the application form, the choice for admission in a particular Institution in a particular speciality shall certainly negate the spirit of giving admission strictly on the basis of merit secured in the joint Entrance Test.
13.
Faced with the above saturation, Mr. SS Saron, Deputy Advocate-General, contended that since Govt.
Dental College, Patiala is affiliated to Punjabi University and Dental College, Amritsar to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and the admission is being made for both the Institutions on the basis of merit secured during the joint Entrance Test, the giving of choice of a particular Institution is a necessary pre-requisite in order to finalize the admission in both these colleges.
There is no force in this contention as a candidate at the outset may give option for admission in a particular Institution keeping in view his convenience like his residence being located in that area or for other consideration, yet all the same since the merit is the basic criteria for giving admission to Post Graduation in Dental Surgery, there is no escape but to conclude that the giving of choice out of two Institutions has certainly resulted in arbitrariness as the candidate having better merit has been debarred of equal opportunity for being considered for admission in a particular speciality and thus Institution-wise classification has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved qua turning out talented Post Graduates.
The above referred view finds support from the findings of apex Court in the following cases.
14.
In Minor P Rajendran v. State of Madras and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1012, in para 11 of the judgment, the Apex Court while settling the controversy whether district-wise allocation of seats for admission to 1st Year integrated MBBS Course in the Medical Institution in the State of Madras is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, has observed as under :-  "It is true that Article 14 does not forbid classification, but the classification has to be justified on the basis of the nexus between the classifications and the object to be achieved, even assuming that territorial classification may be a reasonable classification.
The fact however that the classification by itself is reasonable is not enough to support it unless there is nexus between the classification and the object to be achieved.
Therefore, as the object to be achieved in a case of the kind with which we are concerned is to get the best talent for admission to professional colleges, the allocation of seats district wise has no reasonable relation with the object to be achieved, if anything, such allocation will result in many cases in the object being destroyed, and if that is so, the classification, even if reasonable, would result in discrimination, in as much as better qualified candidates from one district may be rejected while less qualified candidates from other districts may be admitted from either of the two sources.
Ultimately, the Apex Court struck down rule 8 of the Rules for admission to Medical Colleges which dealt with the district-wise allocation of seats.
However, it kept the selection for current year intact, but issued direction that rule 8 will not be enforced when the selection is made hereafter i.e. after the delivery of the judgment.
15.
Again in Minor A Periakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 2303, the Apex Court struck down the scheme of the State of Tamil Nadu for admission to Medical Colleges on the unitwise basis being violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
The facts in that case were after the judgment of the apex Court in Minor P Rajendran's case (supra), the State Government resorted to selection of candidates for admission in Medical Colleges on State-wise basis for the academic year 1968-69, 1969-70.
Thereafter, scheme was framed by which the Medical Colleges located in the city of Madras were constituted as one unit while the Medical Colleges located at Madhurai, Chingleput, Coimbatore and Tirunelveli were considered as a unit each in respect of admission.
Under these circumstances, the apex Court by holding that unitwise classification for admission is not justifiable as it has no reasonable nexus with the objects intended to be achieved by observing in para 12 of the judgment as under :-  "Now coming to the question of delay, we see no reason why there should be any delay in preparing a consolidated list.
At any rate the delay caused not likely to be such as to justify departure from the principle of selection on the basis of merit on a state-wise basis.
Before a classification can be justified, it must be based on an objective criteria and further it must have reasonable nexus with the object intended to be achieved.
The object intended to be achieved in the present case is to select the best candidates for being admitted to Medical Colleges.
That object cannot be satisfactorily achieved by the method adopted.
The complaint of the petitioners is that unitwise distribution of seats is but a different manifestation of the districtwise distribution sought in 1967-68 has some force though on the material on record we will not be justified in saying that the unitwise distribution was done for collateral purposes.
Suffice it to say that the unitwise distribution of seats is violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
The fact that an applicant is free to apply to any one unit does not take the scheme outside the mischief of Arts.
14 and 15.
It may be remembered that the students were advised as far as possible to apply to the unit nearest to their place of residence."
In Dr. Jagdish Saran and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 820, the apex Court after adversely commenting upon the Institution wise reservation in the matter of admission of Post Graduation in the Delhi University, providing 70% reservation of seats to graduates who had done their MBBS Degree from Delhi University while the other 30% seats were kept open directed the University to appoint a time-bound committee to give equality of opportunity but taking into consideration other relevant criteria as indicated in the judgment.
The apex Court, however restrained itself for quashing the said scheme of reservation of Delhi University due to lack of adequate material on the file.
Again in Dr. Pradeep Jain etc. v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1420, while dealing with the question whether admission to Medical Colleges or any other Institution of higher learning situated in a State can be confined only to those who have domicile within the State or who are residents of State for specific number of years or can any reservation be made for them for giving preference over non-resident of that State irrespective of merit, observed as under in para 10 :  "The philosophy and pragmatic of universal excellence through equality of opportunity for education and advancement across the Nation is part of our founding faith and constitutional creed.
The effort must, therefore, always be to select the best and most meritorious students for admission to technical institutions and medical colleges by providing equal opportunity to all citizens in the country and no citizen can legitimately, without serious detriment to the unity and integrity of the nation, be regarded as an outsider in our constitutional set up.
Moreover, it would be against national interest to admit in medical colleges or other institutions giving instruction in specialities, less meritorious students when more meritorious students are available, simply because the former are permanent residents or residents for a certain number of years in the State while the latter are not, though both categories are citizens of India.
Exclusion of more meritorious students on the ground that they are not residents within the State would be likely to promote sub-standard candidates and bring about fall in medical competence, injurious in the long run to the very region."
It is no blessing to inflict quack and medical midgets on people by whole sale sacrifice of tenant at the threshold.
Nor can the very best be rejected from admission because that will be a national loss and the interests of no region can be higher than those of the nation."
The primary consideration in selection of candidates for admission to the medical colleges must, therefore, be merit.
The object of any rules which may be made for regulating admissions to the medical colleges must be to secure the best and most meritorious students."
Ultimately after elaborate discussion in para 22, the apex Court after holding that it was not desirable to provide for any reservation based on residence requirements within the State or on Institution preference for admission to Post Graduate Courses, approved the reservation of the Institution basis upto outer limit of 50% of the open seats except in the super-speciality such its Neurology and Cardiology by observing as under :  "We are therefore, of the view that so far as admission to post-graduate courses, such as MS, MD and the like are concerned, it would be eminently desirable not to provide for any reservation based on residence requirement within the State or on institutional preference, but, having regard to broader considerations of equality of opportunity and institutional continuity in education which has its own importance and value, we would direct that though residence requirement within the State shall not be a ground for reservation in admissions to post-graduate courses, a certain percentage of seats may in the present circumstances be reserved on the basis of institutional reference in the sense that a student who has passed MBBS course from a medical college university, may be given preference for admission to the post-graduate course in the same medical college or university but such reservation on the basis of institutional preference should not in any event exceed 50 per cent of the total number of open seats available for admission to the post-graduate course.
This outer limit which we are fixing will also be subject to revision on the lower side by the Indian Medical Council in the same manner as directed bus in the case of admissions to the MBBS course.
But, even in regard to admissions to the post graduate course, we would direct that so far as super-specialities such as neuro-surgery and cardiology are concerned, there should be no reservation at all even on the basis of institutional reference and admissions should be granted purely on merit on all India basis."
16.
The crusade of not making total reservation for admission to MBBS and Post Graduate Courses in Medical Faculty from general category was further given concrete shape by the apex Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar and others v. Manilal Nehru Medical College, AIR 1985 SC 1050 by explaining the ratio of its earlier decision in Dr. Pradeep Jain's case (supra) that 30% of the total number of seats available for admission to MBBS course pertain to non-reserved categories after reserving seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes etc.
The apex Court further laid down the requirement of holding a common entrance test on All India basis and for granting admission to 30% of non- reserved seats for the MBBS courses on all India basis strictly on the basis of merit.
17.
The concept of making admission to the super-speciality courses in MS General Surgery etc. strictly on the basis of merit and not on the basis of preference of a candidate for eight Colleges and six subjects, was again emphasized by the apex Court in Anand S Biji v. The State of Kerala and others, JT 1993(3) SC 130 : 1993(3) SCT.
268 : 1993(3) SCT.
763 by approving the modified scheme on the suggestion of the Director General of Health Services, New Delhi for future admissions.
The modified scheme reads as under :-  "1.
The All India PG Entrance Examination will be conducted on second Sunday of January.
The candidates will not be required to give any choices at the time of submission of the application forms.
2.
The results will be announced by the third week of February every year.
3.
The merit list will consist of number of candidates equal to the number of seats available for allotment.
A waiting list containing not more than 10% of the merit list will also be declared from amongst the successful candidates who have secured more than 50% marks in the competitive examination.
4.
The allotment by personal appearance will start from the First of March every year and will continue upon 15th.
5.
In the Bulletin of Information the dates for allotment by personal appearance and the venue at Delhi will be notified.
The time schedule for personal appearance will also be notified along with the results in the newspaper.
6.
For personal appearance, the candidates will be called in batches of 150 each day in the order of merit.
7.
The candidates shall have the right to choose any one of the available seats at his/her rank.
The same will be allotted to him/her and the allotment letters will be issued on the next day.
8.
In case a candidate is unable to appear in person on a notified date for personal appearance, he/she can send his/her representative with an authority letter for allotment.
The allotment made to the authorised representative shall be binding on the candidate.
9.
Each candidate shall be given 15 days' time to join the allotted college and course.
The last date of joining shall be 31st March every year.
10.
The allotments made will be firm and final.
11.
The candidates who will not appear for allotment on the notified dates or who will reject the available seats for allotment or those who will not join the allotted course and college by the 31st March shall forfeit the claim for a seat under the All India Scheme.
12.
All the seats remaining vacant after the allotment shall be deemed to have been surrendered back to the respective States."
Before approving the modified scheme, the apex Court clarified the reasons for doing so by observing as under :  "We must make it clear that the modification which we are proposing herewith is only with respect to the procedure to be followed in the matter of making admission and is designed to eliminate unequal results and the delay mentioned above.
In the place of present requirement of a candidate indicating his preference for eight colleges and six subjects, on the basis of which admissions are finalized, we wish to introduce the system of what is called 'counseling' which is vogue in some of the States and is working satisfactorily."
18.
In view of the law laid down by the apex Court in the above referred cases, there is no escape but to conclude that the part of para 16 of the Prospectus requiring each candidate to give choice for admission in a particular Institution is certainly arbitrary and discriminatory having no nexus with the object sought to be achieved i.e. the affording of equal opportunity to the best talent on merit for admission to super-speciality course like the MDS Thus the portion of para 16 relating to Institution-wise classification is, therefore, struck down being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution However, for the sake of expediency, the admissions being already made on the basis of this rule, are not disturbed, because the concerned candidate including respondent No. 7 had already joined the course for sufficiently a long period.
Under the circumstances of the case, there is no justification in striking down the portion of para 16 of the Prospectus qua the giving of choice of three subjects for admission by each candidate as already discussed, yet all the same, it would be advisable for the State Government to resort to the latest scheme for giving admission to the candidates in super speciality, as approved by the apex Court in Anand S Biji's case (supra) for future admissions.
19.
Regarding the admission of respondent No. 6 Dr. Rupinder Kaur, it transpires that undisputably she passed her B.D.S.
Examination from Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar, in the year 1988 and applied for admission in MDS Course 1990-91 Session from the category of fresh graduates.
She was selected in open merit for this course, but her name was put on the waiting list to be absorbed against any subsequently occurring vacancy against 20% of the total seats i.e. four in number, reserved for admission in the MDS course on All India basis.
No candidate was selected/available till 31390.
Later on one Dr. Sanjay who had been selected for one of these four seats was granted time to join till 2511991, but Dr. Sanjay Was allowed to join the course in February, 1991 after approval of his late admission from the Guru Nanak Dev University, although the date for lost admission had expired on 30.6.1990.
The Director General or Health Services, New Delhi released the other three unfilled seats to be filled up on the basis of merit list by the State of Punjab.
The answering respondent then put in a written request Annexure R6/3 to the Director Research and Medical Education, Punjab, Chandigarh for her admission against these three seats on merit from the waiting list.
In response thereto the Principal of the Government Dental College vide letter Annexure R6/4 wrote to the Director, Research and Medical Education for according approval for proposed admission to Dr. Rupinder Kaur and other two candidates in the relevant specialities.
The Director granted permission of this admission vide Annexure R6/5 dated 2561991, but the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar refused to grant admission to the answering respondent and two other candidates on the ground that Part-I of the MDS course 1990-91 Session being already over, the late admission was not justified.
Under these circumstances, answering respondent Dr. Rupinder Kaur filed civil suit for mandatory injunction as also for ad-interim injunction challenging refusal of the Guru Nanak Dev University in not granting the approval to her admission.
The Subordinate Judge Amritsar vide order dated 24101991 (Annexure R6/7) granted ad-interim, injunction directing the defendants in that case to provisionally give admission to Dr. Rupinder Kaur.
In the meanwhile, vide notification dated 18.9.1991 Annexure R6/8, the State Government scrapped the admission to two years MDS Course of Session 1991 in both the Dental Colleges of the State.
The Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, then were in appeal before the district Judge, Amritsar, challenging the above referred interim order of the Subordinate Judge.
The District Judge, Amritsar vide order dated 851992 (Annexure R6/9) while disposing of the appeal of the University, modified the above referred impugned order of the trial Court and directed the University to keep one seat vacant in the MDS Course of 1992-93 and provisionally admit Dr. Rupinder Kaur against that seat.
The University then challenged this order on revisional side before the High Court.
The revision petition was dismissed by the High Court on July 6, 1992 vide order, Annexure R6/10.
In compliance of the said order of the civil Court, Dr. Rupinder Kaur respondent No. 6 was given provisional admission in Periodonita at Amritsar, although she had not appeared in the common Entrance Test for admission to MDS Course in 1992-Session, what to say for qualifying it.
20.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that Dr. Rupinder Kaur being not eligible to MDS, Course 1992 Session, her admission should be quashed, in the exercise of the writ jurisdiction to prevent gross miscarriage of justice.
I fail to agree with him as findings of the civil Court cannot be challenged on the writ jurisdiction side under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The observation of the Single Bench of this Court in Vir Chand v. Hon'ble the High Court of Punjab and Haryana Chandigarh through the Registrar, (1992-2) Punjab Law Reporter 277 (Vol. CII) : 1992(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 231 : 1992(2) R.R.R.
425 can safely be referred to in this regard.
Thus no case is made out for quashing the admission of Dr. Rupinder Kaur.
21.
Whether the grant of admission to Dr. Jaidev Singh, respondent No. 8 in the speciality of Operative against his second preference vide letter dated 23.9.1992 (copy Annexure R8/2), although he was earlier granted admission in Periodonita in Medical College, Amritsar against his third preference would amount to change of speciality against the mandate of para 27 of the Prospectus, it transpires that since Dr. Jaidev Singh, respondent No. 8 had secured better position in the merit list, than both the petitioners in these writ petitions and given admission in Operative due to allocation of eight seats 60% quota to the quota of 40% for fresh graduates subsequent after the original admission, it cannot be said to be a case of speciality but a re-assessment of admission on the basis of merit.
Thus both the petitioners in these writ petitions lower in merit to Dr. Jaidev Singh, respondent No. 8 cannot challenge his admission to the above referred speciality.
22.
The question then arises whether the petitioners should be given admission against any of the three specialities their choice on the basis of their merit, although the Session had already started.
Mr. SS Saron, Deputy Advocate-General relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Prem Kumar Joshi v. Medical Council of India & others, JT 1991(5) 186, contended that therein admission was not granted to petitioners as the academic session 1990-91 was almost over.
I fail to agree with him as the ratio of the above referred case is not applicable to the facts of this case, because said case Dr. Promod Kumar Joshi was seeking admission to Diploma Course of one year in Paediatrics and it was not considered proper to grant him admission as the course was almost over, but in the case in hand, the petitioners seek admission to three years' MDS course and the perusal of Annexure R8 reveals that the Principal of Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar had written to the Registrar of the Guru Nanak Dev University to extend admissions to MDS Course 1992-Session upto 6th October 1992.
Thus, it cannot be said that substance part of the academic session was over.
23.
Keeping in view that the petitioners had secured by merit in the common entrance test than respondent No. 7 and that they were not granted admission in view of the technical hitch of having not opted for admission in particular speciality in particular Dental College, where the seats in that speciality were available, it is a fit case where the respondents shall be directed to give them admission in any of the three specialities opted by them by creating additional seats, if need be, in the academic session 1992-93 in any of the two colleges.
The petitioners shall accept the seats wherever offered and in which of these specialities and shall complete the requisite cause of studies.
It is ordered accordingly.
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, there is no order as to costs.