LM Ghosh, J - Twenty-seven writ petitioners filed application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for certain reliefs against the Port Trust and some of its officers as well as the State of West Bengal and some other statutory authorities.
The National Union of Water Front Workers (INTUC) was also made a party.
The main prayer of the petitioners were for the inclusion of their names in the proposed casual pool of the Port Authorities.
A learned single Judge, as the trial Judge, allowed the application, making some directions.
Against the judgment and order of the learned trial Judge, two appeals have been preferred by two sets of appellants.
FMA 908 of 1987 was filed by the Port Trust authorities.
FMA 909 of 1987 was the appeal preferred by some members of the erstwhile Society whose names were included in the proposed pool of the Port Trust.
These appellants in FMA 909 of 1987 were not parties in the original writ petition.
Accordingly, they have also filed an application for leave to prefer the appeal on the ground that they are parties affected.
There is also a prayer for condonation for delay.
It was directed that this leave matter would be considered alongwith the hearing of the appeal.
2.
The facts of the case are that the writ petitioners were member workers of the Calcutta Port Engineering Workers Co-operative Labour Contract and Construction Society Limited, hereinafter referred to as the Society, duly registered under the West Bengal Co-operative Societies Act, 1940.
As stated by the petitioners, the function of the Society was to supply workmen to the Calcutta Port Trust on hire basis.
The said Society was established in the year 1974.
Because of the dissolution of the Society, it is being run by the Liquidator, appointed by the Assistant Registrar of Co-operative Societies.
In paragraph 6 of the writ petition, it is asserted that the petitioners were duly appointed by the Chairman in different capacities in August and September, 1982.
Subsequently, the petitioners became the members of the Society.
Then it is mentioned that the INTUC represented to the Regional Labour Commissioner, Calcutta, regarding the decasualisation of workmen of the Society in the Chief Engineer's department of Calcutta Port Trust.
A joint discussion to that effect was held between the management and the representative of the Union.
The Port Trust authorities indicated the scheme of setting up a casual pool for the workers of the Society in the department concerned subject to the liquidation of the Society.
Thereafter, it is alleged, the Executive Officer of the Society in connivance with the representatives of the INTUC and the Calcutta Port Trust, retrenched the petitioners alongwith some other member workers illegally and arbitrarily without showing any cause whatsoever.
Ninety five workmen were included in the pool.
In paragraph 10 of the petition, it is spelt out that the Scheme of casual pool was formulated for absorption of those workers of the Society who had worked for 240 days or more in the Chief Engineer's department on a regular basis between 1-2-80 and 20-7-82.
It was also resolved that any increase in the membership of the Society after 20-7-82 would not be taken into consideration.
In the Special General Meeting held on 17-2-83, it was decided to dissolve the Society.
On the same date, there was a settlement between the Port Trust and the member-workmen of the Society regarding absorption of contract labour under the Calcutta Port Trust.
The petitioners made grievance that a casual pool of ninety five workmen of the Society, to the exclusion of the petitioners, was illegally and arbitrarily set up.
The authority of the INTUC, to accept the conditional offer of Calcutta Port Trust is questioned by the petitioners in paragraph 16.
The authority of the Executive Officer of the Society is also assailed.
Aspersions are made against the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) also.
As the petitioner's interest was seriously affected by the non-inclusion of their names in the casual pool of the Port Trust, they filed the writ application, after demanding justice.
As indicated earlier, the petitioners have prayed for relief by way of mandamus for reinstating the petitioners and for including their names in the proposed casual pool.
3.
This application was opposed on behalf of the Port Trust.
An affidavit-in-opposition was filed on behalf of the respondents 5 to 8.
The main submission of the respondents 5 to 8 in the affidavit-in-opposition has been that the Calcutta Port Trust had no concern or connection with the alleged appointment of the workmen of the said Society.
The function of the said Society, according to the respondents 5 to 8, was to supply labour to the Port administration according to the requirement of the department and the Port administration had no responsibilities for the alleged appointment of workmen by the Society or the Union for the purported augmentation of the pool on and from August 1982 onwards.
It is referred to that in the joint discussion with the Regional Labour Commissioner, Calcutta, on 13-8-82, it was pointed out on behalf of the Port Trust that a claim for decasualisation of the workmen of the Co-operative Society by setting up a casual pool, was under consideration of the management.
In the discussion, held before the Regional Labour Commissioner, Calcutta on 30-8-82, the Union agreed to take necessary steps for dissolution of the Society before the casual pool was formally set up by the Calcutta Port Trust.
Again, it is asserted that there was a discussion on the 14th of February, 1983 in the office of the Deputy Chief Engineer, which was duly represented by all the oncerned parties and it was then decided that only those member workers of the Society would be considered for inclusion in the casual pool who had been engaged by the Society in the Chief Engineer's Department on a regular basis for at least 240 days between the first of February, 1980 and the 20th of July, 1982, that is, the date when the Union raised the demand for absorption of the workmen.
Further, it is claimed that a decision was taken that any increase in the membership of the Society after 20-7-82, would not be taken into consideration for the purpose of setting up of the proposed pool.
The Executive Officer of the Society took steps for holding the Special General Meeting of the Society on the 17th of February, 1983 with a specific agenda, namely, liquidation of the Society.
The general members of the Society had unanimously resolved to wind up the Society.
The Executive Officer of the Society having recommended winding up of the Society, the concerned authority formed an opinion that the 'Society should be wound up in the interest of the members and thereafter in exercise of powers under Section 89(1)(b) of the West Bengal Co-operative Societies Act, 1973, the winding up was ordered.
Sri S S Dasgupta, the Executive Development Officer, was appointed to be the liquidator of the said Society.
The respondents 5 to 8 reiterated in paragraph 15 of the affidavit-in-opposition that the memorandum of settlement expressly provided that the pool of casual workers would be set up under the Chief Engineer's Department, Calcutta Port Trust, with 95 members supplied till then by the said Society, who had worked for 240 days or more during the period 1-2-80 to 20-782.
It was also pointed out that according to the admission of the petitioners themselves they were alleged to have been appointed in the month of August, 1982 onwards.
All allegations of connivance between the Executive Officer of the Society and the representatives of the Calcutta Port Trust were denied.
It was urged that the settlement arrived at was binding on all parties who had taken part in the discussions and agreed to the settlement as recorded in the Memorandum of Settlement.
4.
These were the main contentions before the Trial Court.
5.
The Port authorities, the respondents 5 to 8 in the writ petition, have preferred appeal, which is FMA 908 of 1987.
FMA 909 of 1987 has been preferred by some of the worker members whose names were included in the casual pool.
They have preferred the Appeal FMA 909 of 1987, as parties affected, although, in the original writ petition they were not parties.
They made application for leave and for condonation of delay.
Delay was condoned, but so far as the question of locus standi of the appellants was concerned, it was directed that the same would be considered at the time of hearing of the appeal.
6.
The petitioners, in the main writ application, are the respondents in both the appeals.
7.
So far as FMA 908 of 1987 is concerned the appeal has been admitted.
There was prayer for condonation for delay and that was condoned.
So far as FMA 909 of 1987 is concerned, it has already been noted that the delay was condoned but the question of locus standi of the appellants is to be considered alongwith the appeal, as directed by the earlier order.
At the very outset, therefore, the question of the locus standi of the appellants in FMA 909 of 1987 is to be decided.
In that connection, paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the leave application, may be considered.
In paragraph 8 of the leave application, it is mentioned that in the beginning of the month of July, the process for making the petitioners permanent was started.
At that point of time suddenly in the first week of July, the petitioners were surprised to learn for the first time from the Port authorities that the pool set up in pursuance of Memorandum of settlement was set aside by this Court.
The petitioners further state that they came to learn about the judgment and order dated 28th February, 1986, after enquiries.
On the 11th of July, 1986, the petitioners applied for certified copy.
Earlier, in paragraph 7 of the leave petition, it is set out that the petitioners did not know that the settlement and their absorption as regular employees were challenged by the respondents 1 to 27, that is, the petitioners in the writ application.
These paragraphs and the case records speak for themselves as to the locus standi of the petitioners filing the leave application and FMA 909 of 1987.
By virtue of the settlement, their names were included in the pool.
They were absorbed as regular employees.
Now by the order of this Court, which is challenged in the appeals, the pool was set aside.
It is obvious that the petitioners in the leave application are the most affected persons.
If their names were included in the pool, if they were absorbed and if subsequently, the matter of making them permanent was being considered, the cancellation of the pool itself would seriously affect them.
Although the petitioners, in the leave application, were not made parties, by the order of this Court, they arc the most affected persons.
There cannot be any doubt about the position that the petitioners in the leave application have locus standi because they are the most affected persons.
Their locus standi is accepted and the leave is granted.
So that now, we are concerned with the merits of the appeals.
8.
Dr. Banerjee, the learned Counsel appearing for the appellants in FMA 908 of 1987, has argued that the Society was liquidated after unanimous resolution.
The concerned authority also recognised the same.
He has further argued that the tripartite settlement fixed a norm and appeal has been admitted.
There was prayer for pointed a cut off date, which was 20-7-82.
There was rationale behind that settlement.
Further, according to Dr. Banerjee, the tripartite settlement, so long as it stands, is binding on all.
He has cited authority on that point.
His next submission has been that when the persons to be vitally affected were large in number and were not made respondents in the writ petition.
The High Court should not proceed with that matter without insisting on such persons or some of them in representative capacity, being made respondents.
Mr. Bhattacharjee, also appearing for the appellants in FMA 908 of 1987, has submitted that the order of the trial Court is erroneous, because it proceeded on wrong premises when concluding that the Memorandum of Settlement provided for setting up of a pool, before the Cooperative Society was liquidated.
He has pointed out that in fact the settlement provided for setting up a pool after the Cooperative Society was liquidated.
9.
Mr. Pratipto Roy, the learned Advocate appearing in FMA 909 of 1987, has supplemented the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants in FMA 908 of 1987 by submitting that even if the petitioners in the writ application be considered as retrenched persons, under Section 25G of the Industrial Disputes Act, the employer shall retrench the workmen who came last popularly known as "last come first go" principle.
From that point of view, according to Mr. Roy, the settlement and the scheme of the Port authority did not suffer from any infirmity.
10.
Mr. Gopal Mukherjee, the learned advocate, has appeared for the respondents in both the appeals, who were the original petitioners in the writ application.
He has sought to support the order of the learned trial Court.
He has argued that as the provisions of the Contract Labour Act were violated, the Port Trust should be considered as the direct employer of the writ petitioners and so, the services of the writ petitioners could not be terminated.
According to Mr. Mukherjee, if the provisions of the Contract Labour Act were violated, the Port Trust, being considered the direct employer, could not terminate the services of the petitioners in breach of law and such termination would be invalid and of no consequence in the eye of law.
It would be a case of illegal retrenchment of the petitioners and the petitioners would be entitled to be reinstated or be included in the pool.
11.
These are the broad outlines of the arguments advanced on behalf of the learned advocates of the respective parties and we have to examine the same in greater details in due course.
At the outset, however, we find that the order of the learned trial court, as it is, cannot be sustained on the face of it.
The learned trial Judge has allowed the writ petition in part and has set aside the portion of the Memorandum of Settlement, which, according to him, provides for setting up of a pool before the Co-operative Society is liquidated, which has resulted in the termination of the services of the writ petitioners not in accordance with law.
We find that the very assumption of the learned trial Judge is wrong.
The Memorandum of Settlement does not provide for the setting up of the pool before the Co-operative Society is liquidated.
On the contrary, the settlement stipulates that the Society would be liquidated first and after such liquidation, the pool of the casual workmen shall be set up.
Therefore, the very premises of the order of the learned trial Judge are wrong.
The judgment also suffers from another serious infirmity and it is that a supposed relief is given to the petitioners, which they did not even ask for.
If that part of the Memorandum of Settlement, providing for setting up of a pool is set aside, then the petitioners do not get any relief.
The petitioners demand is for being included in the pool and not for setting aside the pool.
If the pool itself is set-aside, the petitioners would get no relief and their position in any way will not be ameliorated.
The only result would be that those who had in fact been included in the pool would also lose their rights under the settlement.
And that is why, the appellants, in FMA 909 of 1987, are the most affected persons by the order.
We may notice that the main prayer of the writ petitioners is for inclusion of their names in the proposed casual pool, and not for setting aside the pool.
The order of the learned trial Judge is not in consonance with the prayer of the petitioners.
Therefore, the order, as it is, cannot be sustained.
12.
Even then, in the writ application, Court has to consider whether the prayer of the petitioners can be considered or whether they can be given some relief, even though they may not have preferred any appeal against the judgment and order.
That would be also in keeping with the principles of the provisions of Order 41, Rule 33 of the C.P.C.
So this Court will examine the matter and consider whether the petitioners can get any relief at all, and if so, in what form.
13.
We first consider the submission as to non-joinder of parties.
As the writ petition stands, the ninety five workmen whose names were included in the pool are not to be affected.
Therefore, the relief that the writ petitioners prayed did not affect the appellants in FMA 909 of 1987.
But they became indeed very much affected after the learned trial Judge passed an order affecting pool.
We have already noticed that part of the order cannot be sustained.
We are left to consider whether the writ petitioners can get any relief in terms of their prayer.
As the prayer of the writ petitions did not affect the appellants in FMA 909 of 1987, as it is, the writ petition is not bad.
14.
As regards the merits of the petition, we find that there is considerable force in the arguments advanced by Dr. Banerjee, Mr. Bhattacharjee and Mr. Roy.
The writ petitioners were not the direct employees of the Port Trust.
If they were the employees of the Society, the Port Trust authorities have nothing to do with them.
Therefore, on the face of it, the writ petitioners cannot make any claim against the port authorities.
Secondly, it appears that a scheme was drawn up for inclusion of the names of some of the casual labourers in the pool.
There was a rational basis in that scheme.
There was tripartite agreement.
An industrial dispute was raised and a settlement arrived at.
That has to be binding upon all.
There is no breach of statutory obligation.
If there is no breach of statutory obligation, the petitioners cannot claim any relief against the principal employer.
And if there was an industrial dispute that was resolved by the tripartite agreement and that is binding upon all, including the petitioners.
Lastly, even if the action complained of be taken as retrenchment, the petitioners who came after a target date, were to be retrenched first on equitable grounds.
15.
Mr. Mukherjee, however, has argued that the Port Trust, as the principal employer, should be considered the direct employer of the petitioners, because of non-compliance with certain provisions of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act.
Therefore, according to Mr. Mukherjee, the petitioners can claim against the Port Trust.
In this connection, Mr. Mukherjee has referred to several provisions of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
First, he has referred to Section 7 of the Act.
That is the provision for registration of the establishment of the principal employer.
Section 9 of the Act prohibits the principal employer from employing Contract Labour without registration or after the revocation of registration.
Section 20 of the Act, next referred to by Mr. Mukherjee, is regarding the liability of the principal employer for providing any amenity required to be provided by the direct employer but not so provided by that employer.
Similarly Section 21 is regarding the responsibility of the principal employer for payment of wages to each worker employed as contract labourer, if the same be not paid by the direct employer or the contractor.
Lastly, Mr. Mukherjee has relied upon Sections 29 and 30 of the Contract Labour Act.
Section 29 is regarding the liabilities of the principal employer and the contractor for maintenance of such registers as prescribed.
Section 30 merely enacts about the effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Contract Labour Act.
On the basis of these provisions, Mr. Mukherjee has submitted that the infringement of these provisions would make the worker the direct employee of the principal employer.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of the Food Corporation of India v. The Presiding Officer, the Central Government Industrial Tribunal, 1988 Lab IC 730.
That decision lays down that every worker who works for a principal employer to whom the provisions of the Contract Labour Act are attracted, is to be treated as the worker of the principal employer unless two conditions are satisfied; (i) that the establishment had secured a certificate of registration for the relevant period; and (ii) that it had employed contract labourer through a licensed contractor.
It has been further held when either of the conditions is missing then the contract labourer employed, through the contractor, shall be treated to be the worker of the principal employer.
On the strength of this decision, Mr. Mukherjee has submitted that the onus of proving that the two conditions are satisfied is on the principal employer and, as in this case the Port Trust has failed to prove that the conditions are satisfied that authority must be deemed to be the principal employer.
We are not impressed by this submission that this consequence would follow on the strength of the decision cited.
Firstly, that was a decision arising out of an industrial dispute.
Secondly, these matters were not raised at any stage.
If a question is not raised at an earlier stage, then the same cannot be raised at a later stage, so as to cause a surprise to the other side.
To the same effect is the decision of the Food Corporation of India Worker's Union, Calcutta v. The Food Corporation of India, 1990 Lab IC 1968 cited by Mr. Mukherjee.
The ratio of the decision is the same, namely, that the workman engaged by a contractor working for a principal employer having no valid certificate of registration under Section 7 of the Contract Labour Act and the contractor having no valid licence under Section 12 of the same Act, must be taken to be a workman engaged by the principal employer itself.
We have already pointed out that as these questions of facts were not raised at an early stage, the same could not be raised now, because the other side will thereby be taken by surprise and there would be serious prejudice.
Therefore, registration or non-registration cannot be questioned or agitated at this stage.
We are not ready to hold, on the basis of the facts not adverted to earlier, that the petitioners in this case, must be considered as having been the workmen of the Port authorities.
16.
Even otherwise the submission that the Port Trust must be considered to be the direct employer on the ground of supposed infringement of the provisions of the Contract Labour Act cannot be sustained.
The decisions that the principal employer must be deemed to be the direct employer of the employees engaged by the contract labours cannot be held to be good laws.
In the case of New Delhi General Mazdoor Union v. Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (Scope) (1991 (1) LLN 1218 : 1991(3) SCT 49), the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court has clearly decided that the workmen employed as contract labour by the principal employer and who were hired by or employed through contractor would not become employees of the principal employer even if the principal employer is not registered under Section 7 and/or the contractor does not possess a licence under Section 12 of the Act.
The Delhi High Court has noticed that if the argument of the petitioners that they ipso facto became the employees of the principal employer be accepted, then, there would in fact be no offence.
It has further been observed that if the petitioners be considered as direct employees of the principal employer for contravention of Sections 7 and 12, then that would amount to their entry into service by back door in contravention of the provisions of service rules.
With respect, we think that that is the correct law.
In the recent decision of Dina Nath v. National Fertilizers Ltd, AIR 1992 SC 457 : 1992(2) SCT 63, the Supreme Court has pointed out that the Contract Labour Act merely regulates the employment of contract labour in certain establishments and provides for its abolition in certain circumstances.
It is further noted that the Act does not provide for total abolition of contract labour.
The Supreme Court has further observed that in any proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution merely on the ground that the contractor or the employer had violated any provision of Act or the Rules, the Court could not issue any mandamus for deeming the contract labour as having become the employees of the principal employer.
After this decision of the Supreme Court, the writ petitioners cannot contend that they became direct employees under the Port Authorities for breach of the provisions of the Contract Labour Act.
17.
Mr. Mukherjee has referred to Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, which is a provision relating to retrenchment of a workmen.
That provision lays down certain conditions before an employee can be retrenched.
Here it is not a case of retrenchment, Even if it may be considered a case of retrenchment, the broad principle that has been settled is that "the last come will first go"  18.
Mr. Roy, the learned advocate for the appellant in FMA 909 of 1987, has referred to this principle and has cited some decisions.
In the case of Management of Jorhat Tea Company and the Workmen, reported in 1980 (2) LLJ 124 the Supreme Court has approved the principle of' 'last come first go' in the matter of retrenchment.
19.
Mr. Mukherjee, the learned advocate for the respondents, has still argued that the respondents termination of service without compliance with the provisions of S. 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act must be considered illegal and nullity.
Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act is regarding retrenchment of workmen.
Relying upon the decision reported in 1980 (2) Cal HN 434, the learned advocate has contended that the Port authorities having terminated the service of the respondents without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, it must be held that the termination of the service of the respondents is illegal.
Further, it is contended that the authorities are therefore liable to reinstate the respondents.
In that decision, it has been pointed out that there is nothing in the definition of the term "workmen" which excludes a casual worker.
We think, that this decision renders no help to the writ petitioners.
Strictly speaking, it is not a case of retrenchment.
It is only a case of non-inclusion of the names of the writ petitioners in the pool.
It is also not a case of termination of service of the writ petitioners/respondents, though the ultimate result might be that they would not get service in future.
20.
Mr. Mukherjee has next relied upon the decision reported in AIR 1987 SC 777.
We find that the ratio of that decision cannot have any bearing upon the facts of the present case.
Thereafter considering all the relevant factors mentioned in Section 10(2) of the Contract Labour Act, the Supreme Court found that those factors were satisfactorily accounted for.
Still, the Supreme Court refrained from issuing mandamus directing the Central Govt. to abolish the Contract Labour System because under Section 10, the Parliament vested in the appropriate Government the power to prohibit the employment of Contract Labour in any process operation or in any establishment.
The Supreme Court directed that the appropriate Government would consult the Central Board or the State Board, as the case might be, before arriving at its own decision.
So the entire context was the abolition of Contract Labour.
Here, the grievance of the petitioners is not that the Contract Labour hits not been abolished.
As a matter of fact, the Scheme evolved by the authorities concerned for setting up of a pool was with the object of regularising the various labourers.
Either the contract labour has been abolished or it is in the process of abolition.
The writ petitioners cannot get any relief by mere declaration of the abolition of contract labour, because steps have already been taken in that regard.
The grievance of the writ petitioners is the non-inclusion of their names in the pool.
That non-inclusion may be on National ground or not, but that is not a case directly linked with the abolition of Contract Labour.
The case reported in 1991 (1) SCC 619, next cited by Mr. Mukherjee, has also got no bearing in our case.
That is a postulation of equal pay for equal work.
The grievance of the petitioners is not that they are getting unequal pay and thus are suffering.
Again, the decision reported in AIR 1990 SC 532, cited by Mr. Mukherjee, is not of any help to him.
There the notification prohibiting employment of contract labour in departments of Indian Iron and Steel Co was considered.
By that notification the benefit of the same was granted to workmen in Bricks department doing works of cleaning and stacking of bricks and other allied jobs, but workmen of the same department doing jobs of loading and unloading, however, were excluded from the benefit of the notification.
It was held that the exclusion of loaders and unloaders was discriminatory.
That was on the basis whether different jobs done by the workmen of the same department could afford the rational basis for treating the different groups separately.
It was found that the difference made on the basis of the different jobs done by the workmen of the same department was not rational.
Such is not the question in our case.
It is nobody's case that the petitioners have been victimised or discriminated against on the basis of their particular jobs.
Therefore, the decision cited has no application to the facts of our case.
21.
Mr. Mukherjee has also cited some other decisions, AIR 1967 SC 1889 cited by Mr. Mukherjee has no application.
That has decided that after absorption of direct recruits and promotees in one cadre, no discrimination can be made for future promotion.
We are not faced with such question here.
Similarly, the decision reported in AIR 1974 SC 1755 : (1974 Lab IC 587) laying down almost the same principle that persons coming or recruited to the service from two different sources, if absorbed into one integrated class with identical service conditions, must be treated equally and cannot be discriminated against with reference to their original source for the purpose of absorption and seniority.
The question of different categories of employees coming from different sources does not arise here.
22.
The next decision cited by Mr. Mukherjee is the decision reported in AIR 1981 SC 1775.
That has also no application here since that was a case for promotion.
It was settled in that decision that similarly situated persons should be similarly promoted after completing same period of service.
The last case cited by Mr. Mukherjee is the case of Surya Narayan Yadav v. Bihar State Electricity Board.
In that case there was representation by the Board to the trainee engineers.
The Board decided to absorb them on permanent basis.
It was decided that the trainee engineers who were already in employment of the Board much prior to 1983 on being taken into regular employment of the Board had to rank above the recruits of 1983 and after.
That was a case for determining the seniority between the trainee engineers and others.
That is not a matter for decision in the appeals before us.
23.
All the contentions of Mr. Mukherjee for convicting the Court that the petitioners have some right enforceable in Court fail.
24.
Mr. Sakti Nath Mukherjee the learned advocate appearing for the appellants in FMA 909 of 1987 in reply to the arguments advanced for the writ petitioners/respondents has submitted that his clients were found eligible on the cut off date and so their names were included in the pool rightly.
There was a rational basis for their inclusion and the right acquired by them could not be wiped out by the order of the Court.
Mr. Sakti Nath Mukherjee has further argued that even if there be any question of retrenchment, the principle "first come last go" should be accepted as the settled principle.
We have already indicated that the appellants in F.M.A 909 of 1987 have good grounds in these appeals because there was no prayer even for deleting their names from the pool.
We have also indicated that the order of the learned trial Judge cannot be sustained under any circumstances, as the same was not in accordance with the prayers of the writ petitioners.
The main prayer of the writ petitioners was for inclusion of their names in the casual pool.
Other prayers were in the nature of interim reliefs.
Under any circumstances, the appellants in FMA 909 of 1987 cannot be affected by the order of the Court.
25.
The arguments advanced on behalf of the writ petitioners/respondents are not acceptable, as already noticed.
We may summarise why the writ petitioners cannot get any relief in these proceedings.
Firstly, an industrial dispute was raised and settled by the tripartite agreement.
The Union, that is, INTUC, espoused the cause of the workmen and thus there was an industrial dispute.
In the case of Standard Vacuum Refinery Company India Ltd, 1960 (2) LLJ 233 : (AIR 1960 SC 948), it was observed that the respondents who raised the dispute had direct interest in the subject-matter of the dispute or a substantial interest therein and so there was an industrial dispute.
Therefore, it was in the nature of an industrial dispute.
In the case reported in 1974 LIC 368, the Calcutta High Court observed that it was settled law that the mere absence of the trade union or the workmen did not absolve the tribunal from proceeding with the reference referred to and making an award.
It was further held that one union could espouse the cause of another.
In the case of Workmen of Indian Express Newspaper Private Ltd reported in 1970 (20) FLR 157 : (AIR 1970 SC 737), the Supreme Court has held that a Union can validly raise a dispute though it might be a minority Union employed in an establishment.
Therefore, we find that a dispute was validly raised.
That dispute was effectively settled by the tripartite agreement dated 17-2-83.
It is a settled law that a tripartite settlement is binding upon all.
That position is settled by the case of Barauni Refinery Pragatishil Sramik Parishad, AIR 1990 SC 1801 : (1990 Lab IC 1481).
Looked from that view point, the writ petitioners cannot challenge the settlement and they are bound by it.
26.
Assuming that it is not an industrial dispute, even then the writ petitioners cannot have any justiciable case against the Port Authorities.
We have found that they were members of the Society and the contractor placed the services of the members to the Port authorities.
The Port authorities, as principal employer, cannot have any obligation towards them.
Even assuming that the petitioners became the direct employees of the Port Trust (which position is not warranted by law) then also the petitioners cannot make any grievance.
It is not a case of retrenchment; it is a case of non-inclusion merely.
And in the matter of non-inclusion of the petitioners in the pool, there was no arbitrariness.
It was on the basis of some objective factors; there was a cut off date, namely, 20-7-82 and the objective test is laid down as work for 240 days.
Even if the petitioners were differently treated, there was rational basis for the differentiation and so not violative of the principles of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
And even if we imagine that it was a case of retrenchment (in fact it was not a case of retrenchment) the principle of "last come first go" must be accepted as a rational basis.
Looked at from any angle we find that the petitioners have not made any justiciable case.
The writ petition must fail.
27.
Before parting, we express the hope that the Port authorities might still consider whether the petitioners can be included in the pool.
The Port Trust comes within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution of India is being a State agency or instrumentality.
In accordance with the directive principles of the State Policy, as enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution of India, the Port authorities may consider whether the petitioner can still be included in the pool.
This would be in accordance with the concept of a welfare State.
However we only express our desire, and are not making any directives.
With these observations, we dismiss the writ petition without making any directives.
28.
The appeals namely FMA 908 of 1987 and FMA 909 of 1987 are allowed.
29.
The judgment and order of the learned trial court are hereby set aside.
The writ petition is dismissed.
We make no order for costs.
Amarabha Sengupta, J - I agree.
Appeals allowed.