KP Bhandari, J - Petitioner = Raj Kishore Sharma is working as Senior Scale Stenographer with effect from 2011984.
His name for nomination to the PCS (Executive Branch) Class I Service was forwarded to the government by the Director Welfare, Punjab, Bhajan Singh, Petitioner No. 2 was serving as Senior Scale Stenographer from 25.1.1978 in the office of the Director, Local Government, Punjab.
His nomination was forwarded by the Director to the Government for nomination to PCS (Executive Branch).
Sham Lal Garg, petitioner No. 3, was serving as Senior Scale Stenographer in the office of Directorate of Fisheries, Punjab, Chandigarh.
2.
The nomination rolls of the petitioners for entering their names in register 'C' was forwarded by their heads of the department, according to Rule 15 of the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Clause I Rules, 1966.
The provisions of Rule 15 of the aforesaid Rules read as under :  "Rule 15 :  Selection of candidates for Register 'C'.
(1) Each of the authorities specified in the first column of the table below may submit to the Government through the Administrative Secretary of the respective Department in Form II attached to the rules the nomination rolls of such number of persons as is specified in such case in the second column of the said table from amongst officers or officials working in its office or offices Subordinate (Sic) who are not covered by any of the categories of officers or officials are mentioned in Rules 9, 10 and 11:-  Nominating authorities Number of Nominations  Minister Incharge of the respective department 1  Administrative Secretary of the respective department 1  Head of the respective Department 1 Provided that during the operation of a nomination issued under clause (1) of the Article 356 of the Constitution of India in the State, the Governor may nominate one person from amongst the officers or officials working in his office or offices subordinate to him who are not covered by any of the categories of Officers or officials mentioned in Rules 9, 10 and 11.
(2) No nomination roll in respect of a person shall be submitted under the provisions of sub-rule (1) unless such person:  (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed 10 years' continuous service under the Government;  (b) was under the age of 45 years on the first day of November immediately proceeding the date of submission of names of the nominating authorities; and  (c) is a Graduate of a recognised University.
(3) The nomination rolls submitted under sub-rule (1) alongwith the Service record of the candidates shall be forwarded by the Government to the Commission which shall consider the merits of each candidate and recommend such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the service.
(4) The names of the persons recommended by the Commission shall be entered in Register 'C' in the order in which they are recommended by the Commission.
According to the provisions of sub-rule 3 of Rule 15, the nomination rolls submitted under Rule 15(1) alongwith service record of the candidate shall be forwarded by the Government to the commission which shall consider the merits of each candidate and recommend such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the service.
The provisions of Rule 15 show that according to this Rule, the head of the department forwards the nomination rolls to the government and the government so to forward the rolls to the Commission considers the merits of each candidate and the suitability of the candidate for appointment to the service.
The nominations recommended by the Commission are entered in Register 'C' in order in which they are recommended by the Commission.
3.
Nomination roll of respondent No. 5 was forwarded by the Chairman, Public Service Commission to the Government.
According to Rule 15(1) the government forward the nomination roll alongwith service record of all the candidates to the Public Service Commission.
The nomination roll of respondent No. 7 was forwarded by the Excise and Taxation Commissioner to the government for consideration of his case by the Public Service Commission for entering his name in register 'C'.
4.
Interviews were conducted by the Public Service Commission on 19th and 20th December, 1991.
The result was declared in the month of January, 1992 and news item in this regard appeared in the newspaper on 7th January, 1992.
The Commission recommended the names of respondent Nos. 6 and 7 for their nomination to the PCS (Executive Branch) Class I Service.
The petitioners have challenged the selection of respondent Nos. 6 and 7 by filing the present writ petition.
5.
The main challenge in the writ petition is that selection of respondent No. 6 is based on the ground that respondent No. 6 was serving as Senior Scale Stenographer with the Chairman, Public Service Commission.
The Chairman of the Public Service Commission, according to the petitioner, was favourably inclined towards respondent No. 6.
Therefore, according to the stand of the writ petitioner, the Chairman should not have presided over the meeting for selection of the candidates.
It is also claimed in the writ petition that Chairman of the Commission cannot consider himself to be head of the department in terms of Rule 15 of the aforesaid rules.
Such an interpretation would impair the impartial functioning of the Commission under Article 320 of the Constitution Selection of respondent No. 7 has been challenged on the ground that Excise and Taxation Commissioner recommended Shri Gurcharan Singh Virk, Excise Inspector, to the government.
The Government considered him ineligible for appointment because he was officiating as Excise and Taxation Officer on ad hoc basis against a vacancy meant for direct recruit.
Gurcharan Singh Virk had filed a separate writ petition bearing civil writ petition No. 9221 of 1990, which is pending in this Court.
Thereupon, the government called upon the Excise and Taxation Commissioner to recommend the name of her suitable candidate for nomination to Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Class 1, Service.
Name of Harjinder Singh, respondent No. 7 was forwarded by the Excise and Taxation Commissioner and his name was forwarded by the Government to the Commission.
It is challenged in the writ petition that Gurcharan Singh Virk was the person entitled to be considered for nomination.
His nomination roll should have been forwarded by the government to the Public Service Commission.
It is submitted that Mr. Gurcharan Singh Virk was entitled to the nomination and the nomination of respondent No. 7 is not in order.
6.
Written statement has been filed to the writ petition by Daljit Rai Chaudhary, Secretary, Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1, 4 and 5.
According to the stand in the written statement the names of the petitioners were not recommended by the Commission as they have not obtained the requisite merit for appointment to the PCS (Executive Branch) Class I Service in Register 'C'.
It is averred that the petitioners were considered and not selected.
Therefore, the petitioners are not entitled to challenge the selection of respondents 6 and 7.
It is also submitted that Chairman of the Public Service Commission is the head of the department and is competent to nominate officials/officers working under him under Rule 15 to the Commission.
It is also claimed that the petitioners appeared in the interview Board which was presided over by the Chairman.
The petitioner did not object and now they are estopped from challenging the selection of respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
7.
S Amarjit Singh, former-Chairman, Public Service Commission has filed an affidavit.
It is stated in the affidavit that the interview was conducted by the Commission.
The Commission consists of Chairman and five members.
It is averred in the affidavit that the petitioners did not object and appeared before the interview Board without any protest.
The petitioners were well aware that Chairman is participating in the interview.
It is averred in the affidavit that the result was declared by the Commission on 6.1.1992, i.e., 17 days after the interview was conducted and the petitioner did not file any writ petition within these 17 days.
The selection was bias had been denied.
It is averred that selection was free from biased or favourtism.
8.
Written statement has also been filed by respondent No. 6 in which he has also been filed by respondent No. 6 in which he has highlighted his academic career and his outstanding service record.
9.
Respondent No. 7 has filed written statement and has controverted the stand taken in the writ petition.
10.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in great detail.
Proceedings of the selection committee were produced for the perusal of the Court.
11.
Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class I) Rules, 1976 provide for appointment to the service through a competitive examination.
A provision is also made in the statutory rules for making appointment by way of nomination by different heads of department out of the specified categories of officers serving in the State.
The candidates nominated, according to the statutory Rules, are interviewed by the Punjab Public service Commission.
The Public Service Commission prepares a merit list of such candidates.
Appointments are made from this category according to the merit list prepared by the Public Service Commission.
According to the petitioners, they were normally forwarded by heads of the department.
It is averred in the writ petition that Manjit Singh Narang (respondent No. 6) was working as a Stenographer in the Punjab Public Service Commission.
It is averred that he is a Stenographer working with the Chairman.
It is also averred in the writ petition that previously respondent No. 6 was working with Mr. Surinder Pal Singh, another member of the Public Service Commission.
The Chairman, Public Service Commission recommended that the name of respondent No. 6 may be entered in Register 'C'.
Respondent No. 7 Harjinder Singh, Taxation Inspector, was recommended by the Excise & Taxation Commissioner for nomination in Register 'C'.
All the petitioners and respondents No. 6 and 7 along with other candidates were interviewed by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The latter selected respondent Nos. 6 and 7 and recommended their names for appointment to the service to the Government.
The petitioners were duly considered are not selected.
After the petitioners were fully considered by the Public Service, Commission, they did not possess the requisite merit so, they were not selected.
After they failed to attain requisite merit in the selection, they have chosen to file the writ petition challenging the selection of respondents No. 6 and 7.
12.
Written statement has been filed by Sh. Daljit Rai Chaudhary, PCS, Secretary, Punjab Public Service Commission on behalf of respondent No. 2 and 3.
An affidavit has also been filed by Shri Amarjit Singh, the Chairman of the Punjab Public Service Commission, explaining that the selection process was just and fair and in accordance with the Rules.
13.
Written Statement has also been filed by respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
14.
The counsel for petitioner contended that the name of the respondent No. 6 was recommended for being included in Register 'C' by the Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission.
the Chairman should not have presided over the interview because he was favourably inclined towards respondent No. 6.
Reliance has been placed on a decision of the Supreme Court in AK v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 170.
Counsel for respondent No. 6 submitted that the petitioner participated in the interview and his case was duly considered by the Public Service Commission.
After he was not selected, he has chosen to file the present writ petition.
He submitted that the petitioner has only a right to be considered for appointment but no fundamental right to be appointed to the service.
If, as a result of the selection he has not been selected, he has no cause of action to file the present writ petition.
It is further contended that the petition very well knew that the Chairman, Public Service Commission, presided over the interview.
He did not object to it at that stage and after he was not selected he has chosen to come to the forum of writ petition.
According to the counsel for respondent No. 6 he is estopped from challenging selection of respondents No. 4 and 5.
It was further contended that the functions of the Public Service Commission in the matter of selection are executive in character.
The nomination by the Chairman Public Service Commission for entry of the name of respondent No. 6 in Register 'C' was in exercise of the executive functions conferred upon him by the Rules.
At that stage, the Chairman only considered the names of persons working on the staff of the Punjab Public Service Commission for being considered for Register 'C'.
But later on, at the time of selection, comparative merit of the candidates for appointment to the PCS from Register 'C' is considered.
The selection process for appointment to the PCS out of Register 'C' takes place at that stage.
15.
Counsel for respondent No. 6 raised a preliminary objection that the name of the petitioner was duly considered for appointment to the PCS (Executive Branch).
The petitioner very well knew that the Chairman was to preside over the Public Service Commission at the time of selection.
According to the counsel, the petitioner is estopped from challenging the selection of respondents No. 6 and 7.
I find considerable weight in the submission made by the counsel for the respondent.
According to Article 16 of the Constitution of India, a citizen has got a right to be considered for appointment to the service.
If after due consideration, a candidate is not selected he has no justiciable cause of action.
The selection is in the exclusive province of the selecting body, i.e., the Public Service Commission.
The Supreme Court has laid down that once a candidate has been duly considered he has got no right to challenge the selection ( High Court v. Anand Kumar, AIR 1962 SC page 1704).
It is significant to notice that the petitioners knew at the time of selection that the Chairman of the Public Service Commission was presiding over the Commission at the time of selection.
They did not object to it at that stage.
After they were not selected they have chosen to file the writ petition.
The Supreme Court has laid down that if at the proper stage, objection is not raised, the aggrieved person cannot be allowed to raise the question of bias subsequently.
See Manak lal v. Prem Chand, AIR 1957 SC 425), so, in my view, the present writ petition should fail on the preliminary objection.
As the case has been argued in detail, I would like to express my opinion on the merits of the case as well.
16.
According to the statutory rules aforesaid, the Head of the Department is empowered to recommended the names of candidates.
As regards the staff of the Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission is the head of the department as per appendix 'C' Punjab Budget Manual.
According to circular letter No. 1716-4C-III-76/8689 dated 631976, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission is listed as head of Department.
The statutory Rules provide that the head of the department may nominate a candidate on Register `C'.
The name of respondent No. 6 was recommended by the Chairman, Public Service Commission in pursuance of the statutory rules.
The staff of the Public Service commission serves in connection with the affairs of the State and in this view of the matter, specified categories of members of the staff are eligible for being considered for submission of their rolls for register 'C'.
So the order of the Chairman, forwarding the rolls of respondent No. 6 for register `C' is in conformity with the rules.
No fault can be found with that.
It was vehemently contended by the counsel for the petitioner that he Chairman is not the head of the Department for the purpose of statutory rules because such an interpretation would impair the independent functioning of the Public Service Commission.
It is true that the Public Service Commission is a constitutional body.
The Public service Commission consists of Chairman and members.
The constitution ensures that the Chairman and the members should act fairly and impartially.
This principle is embodied in the scheme of the Constitution of India.
But the authorise the Chairman of the Public Service commission to recommend candidates of the Commission for forwarding the rolls for Register 'C' does not in any manner affect the independent and impartial functioning of the Public Service Commission.
It is difficult to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Chairman should not be considered as the head of the department.
After due consideration of the matter, I cannot persuade myself to take such a view.
This will deprive the persons working in the Public Service Commission from getting appointment to the PCS (Executive).
The intention of the rules making authority is to provide appointment opportunities to the members of the staff by process of nomination.
This opportunity is provided under the Rules to the staff working in all Government Departments.
It will be unreasonable to interpret the rules so as to exclude the staff of the Public Service Commission from the purview of the rules and deprive them of an opportunity of having their names considered for Register 'C'.
In matters of appointment by nomination, the persons working in different departments of the Government have to be considered fairly, justly and in a non-discriminatory manner.
The interpretation sought to be placed by the counsel for the petitioner would make the rules discriminatory.
So, in my opinion, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission is the head of the department and he is competent to nominate candidates for Register 'C'.
17.
Simply because the Chairman has recommended the name of respondent No. 6 for inclusion in Register 'C' it cannot be said that he is not entitled to preside over the Public Service Commission at the time of interview.
At the time of interview, the Chairman and the members of the Commission have to consider the names of all the candidates whose names are to be placed on Register 'C'.
The name of candidates from different departments of the State are included in this register.
At that stage, the Public Service Commission considers the relative merit of all the candidates whose names are on Register 'C'.
No material has been placed before the Court to show that the Chairman was in any way based against the petitioner.
The plea regarding bias is completely unfounded.
It has been raised in desperation after the petitioner was not selected.
The exercise of the executive functions by the Chairman of the Public Service Commission in recommending the name of respondent No. 6 for inclusion of his name in Register 'C' does not indicate any bias againstt him.
At that stage, the Chairman was exercising statutory functions according to rules.
Recently, an argument was raised before the Supreme Court that an officer who recorded the Annual Confidential Remarks cannot sit to review the case of compulsory retirement of that officer.
The Supreme Court over ruled that objection and held that an officer who has recorded the ACR is entitled to sit and review the case for compulsory retirement (State of UP v. Raj Kishore), AIR 1992 Supp.
(2) S.C.C.
92.
18.
It is well settled principle of administrative law that the question of principle of bias is applicable when the authority is exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions.
When the concerned authority is exercising executive functions, the principle of bias is not applicable.
19.
The Supreme Court has laid down that 'Official' bias is to be distinguished from 'personal' bias.
Where the only case of the petitioner is that a Minister or other official was interested in the subject-matter at any early stage, e.g. in approving a scheme of nationalisation of road transport, he could not hear objections to the scheme in a disinterested manner, the petitioner must adduce reliable evidence to show that the public official was actuated by bias, in fact; his decision will not be called into question merely because he is limb of the Government.
See in Kondala v.
A.P.S.R.T.C., AIR 1961 SC.
82; Govindraja v. State of TN, A.I.R. 1973 SC 974.
For the reason aforesaid, I do not find any weight in the contention raised by the petitioners and the same deserves to be rejected.
20.
In the writ petition there was no challenge to the selection on the ground that the Commission has adopted some system of marking awards for their internal working.
It is only by way of amendment to the writ petition that this system of assessment for determining the merits of the candidate by the commission on the basis of awarding marks has been challenged.
The petitioners have been fully considered by the Public Service Commission and they never objected to the procedures adopted by the Commission before appearing for interview.
They have sought to challenge the selection after they have not been able to secure the requisite merit.
The candidate with higher merits have been selected by the Public Service Commission.
The petitioner are as a matter of fact not entitled to raise this objection after they have not been selected.
Even otherwise I do not find any merit in this objection.
The criterion for assessment is laid down in the statutory rule.
Rule 153 of the Rules provides that a commission shall consider the merits of each candidate and recommend such other candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the service.
It must be noticed that under this Rule the government forwards to the Commission alongwith nomination rolls the service record of the candidates.
The procedure for nomination to the Public Service Commission is more akin to the promotion procedures recognised in the service.
The nominations are made of experienced officers whose case for appointment are assessed on the basis of the record and suitability.
The statutory guidelines to the Commission is to assess their suitability according to Rule 153.
No such marking system is laid down in Rule 153.
The Commission for its internal regulations can regulate its own procedure.
No fault can be found with this procedure.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Ashok Yadav's case 1985(3) SLR 200 the reliance on which was placed by the counsel for the petitioner is applicable to direct recruitment where the entry to the service is based on competitive written examination and interview.
The ratio of Ashok yadav's case is not applicable for appointment by nomination of experienced candidates who are already in the service and whose suitability is to be adjudged in the light of the service record.
The procedure envisaged in Rule 153 is more akin to the appointment by promotion.
In this view of the matter I do not find any merit in this contention.
Procedure laid down by the Commission is not in any manner in contrary to the judgment in Ashok Yadav's case.
21.
Proceedings of the Public Service Commission were produced.
A persual of the proceedings of the Selection Committee shows that record of the selected candidate was far better than the record of the petitioners.
This shows that substantial justice has been done in this case.
The petitioners filed the writ petition after they were not selected.
Nomination roll of respondent No. 7 was duly forwarded by Excise and Taxation Commissioner to the Government.
The Government forwarded the roll and the service record of respondent No. 7 to the government.
He was a duly nominated candidate.
He possesses requisite qualifications for nomination and he was nominated by the competent authority.
No fault can be found with his nomination.
He was fully eligible for consideration of his name for entry in Register 'C' by the Public Service Commission.
The only ground for challenge of the writ petitioner is that Mr. GS Virginia was originally recommended by the Excise and Taxation Commissioner but he was found ineligible by the government.
It is stated in the writ petition that Mr. GS Virk has filed a separate writ petition which is pending in this Court.
The petitioners have no locus standi to challenge the nomination of respondent No. 7.
Whether Mr. GS Virk was eligible or was rightly disqualified or not is a matter entirely for Mr. Virk to raise in appropriate proceedings.
As far as the petitioners are concerned they have absolutely no legal right to challenge the selection of respondent No. 7 on this ground.
It is well settled that the petitioner mist have personal legal right for basing his petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In the matter of forwarding of nomination roll by the Excise Department, the petitioners have no legal right to challenge the nomination rolls.
It was entirely for the government to consider the matter and it was inter-se matter between the department and the Government.
The petitioners who belong to different department have no locus standi in the matter at all.
Moreover, I find that nomination of respondent No. 7 was legal and proper.
He was a duly nominated candidate and has been considered as a result of selection.
The Public Service Commission found him better qualified than the petitioners.
In the matter of selection, the final Judge of the merit of the selected candidates is the selection authority.
The Court cannot sit in judgment over the merit list prepared by the Commission.
This Court does not sit as a court of appeal against the decision of the Punjab Public Service Commission on merits.
The Supreme Court has laid down that selection committee is the best Judge to consider the relative merits of the candidates and the High Court does not sit as a court of appeal over such matters.
See Dalpat Aba Sahab Solunka etc v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc., AIR 1990 SC 434.
No other point has been argued by the counsel for the parties.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs.