AL Bahri, J - The Letters Patent Appeal is directed against the judgment dated January 11, 1984, delivered by a single Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1042 of 1978 which was filed by Dharam Pal Singh and others for quashing order Annexure P-4 February 13, 1978, whereby Megh Raj (the present appellant) and another person were promoted as Assistants, treated them as senior to Dharam Pal Singh and others.
The writ petition was allowed.
Hence Megh Raj is in this appeal.
2.
Dharam Pal Singh and others, writ petitioners, were recruited as Clerks in the office of the P.W.D.
(B&R Branch) during the period June 1968 to August 1971.
Their dates of appointment are mentioned in para 2 of the writ petition.
These appointments were made after inviting recommendations through the Employment Exchange and after holding a test which was conducted by the Employment Officer.
The persons found suitable were recommended by the Employment Officer to the Chief Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R Branch) who further conducted test in the typing and those who passed the test were appointed.
In respect of three persons, copy of the appointment letter was produced which is Annexure P-1.
Punjab Government issued instructions on January 29, 1973 to regularise services of those persons who had put in one year's service as on January 1, 1973.
Before regularisation such persons were to be scrutinised by the Departmental Selection Committee.
Although Dharam Pal Singh and others claim recruitment on regular basis their cases were also placed before the Departmental Selection Committee and they were found suitable vide order March 18, 1974.
Thus they were declared regular with effect from January 1, 1973.
Copy of the order is Annexure P2.
3.
With effect from April 1, 1971, Punjab Government constituted Subordinate Services Selection Board.
This Board invited applications for recruitment of Clerks on June 28, 1971.
Before selection could be finalised, the Board was abolished vide notification dated August 12, 1971.
Thereafter the Government entrusted the duties of the Board to a Deputy Secretary in the Government.
Some persons were selected by the Deputy Secretary.
One of the lists of selected persons were received in the office of the Chief Engineer, Punjab, PWD (B&R).
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Deputy Secretary, respondent Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj were appointed as Clerks vide order dated September 2, 1972.
Annexure P.3 is the order relating to Megh Raj.
These appointments were made purely on temporary basis and these persons were not eligible for regularisation.
The selection made by the Deputy Secretary was successfully challenged in the High Court.
The order of the High Court was made on January 15, 1974.
A Letters Patent Appeal No. 304 of 1974 filed against the aforesaid order was dismissed on August 6, 1974.
The appointment of Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj were alleged to be illegal as the same were made on the basis of selection made by the Deputy Secretary, as aforesaid.
In spite of that Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj were treated as senior and were promoted which order was challenged in the writ petition filed by Dharam Pal Singh and others.
4.
The State has, while contesting the writ petition, filed written statement.
With respect to Ramesh Kumar it was stated that he was recruited against a reserved category post.
However, it was asserted that competent authority had made recruitment of Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj in compliance with the instructions contained in the letter of the Chief Secretary to the Government of Punjab dated June 17, 1974 (Annexure R.1).
Ramesh Kumar joined the service in August 1973 and Megh Raj in September 1972.
It was admitted that Dharam Pal Singh and others were recruited as Clerks but they were made regular with effect from January 1, 1973.
Hence they were treated as juniors to Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj.
The appointment of Dharam Pal Singh and others, writ petitioners, was on ad hoc basis and it was only with effect from January 1, 1973 that they would be deemed to have entered the service when they were made regular.
Copy of the appointment letter of one of the writ petitioners is annexed as Annexure R.2.
It was admitted that the Punjab Public Works Department (Building & Roads Branch), Chief Engineer's Office (Class III and Ministerial) Services Rules, 1967 were applicable.
It was admitted that the Subordinate Services Selection Board was constituted with effect from April 1, 1971 and after its abolition names of Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj were received through different lists for appointment as Clerks, from Subordinate Services Selection Board (defunct).
Reliance was placed on the instructions of the Chief Secretary dated June 1971-Annexure R.1.
The decision made in Ramesh Kumar's case by the High Court was referred to wherein observations were relied upon that the candidates selected by the Deputy Secretary could not be thrust upon the authorities competent to make appointments and the authorities were at liberty to reconsider the matter without being influenced by such recommendations.
It was after this decision that instructions dated June 17, 1974 were issued and in view of such instructions the appointment of Ramesh Kumar and Megh Raj were valid who had preferential right to be considered for promotion against Dharam Pal Singh and others.
Megh Raj filed separate written statement inter alia taking similar stand as was taken by the State.
5.
Dr. Balram Gupta, Advocate, appearing on behalf of Dharam Pal Singh and other respondents, challenges finding of the learned Single Judge, with respect to the relevant dates of entry into service of Dharam Pal Singh and others which is to be considered for the purposes of determining their seniority.
Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate, for the appellant raised an objection to the same that without filing cross-objections, the respondents cannot be allowed to challenge the finding aforesaid.
After hearing counsel for the parties we are of the view that contention of Shri Patwalia cannot be accepted.
The respondents were not required to file any cross-objection as therein they were not seeking any further reliefs which were not granted by the Single Judge.
The respondents in support of relief already granted by the Single Judge could certainly support the same on other grounds.
That being the position the question raised by Shri Balram Gupta, Advocate, on behalf of Dharam Pal Singh and others is determined first.
As already stated above, narrating the facts, it has been noticed that Dharam Pal Singh and others, writ petitioners were initially appointed between the period June 14, 1968 to August 13, 1971, temporarily.
Subsequently they were regularised with effect from January 1, 1973.
Annexure P.1 is copy of the appointment letter of Dharam Pal Singh and two others.
In the body of the letter it was only recited that the post of Clerk was offered on temporary appointment.
It was in the endorsement that it was mentioned that these candidates would be replaced as soon as Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board would be able to recommend suitable candidates in their place.
Along with the written statement filed by the State, copy of appointment letter of Ripu Daman Singh and Ram Lal Wadhwa-Annexure R 2 was filed which recites that they were offered temporary appointment as Clerks on ad hoc basis.
Annexure P2 is the order of the Government dated March 18, 1974.
The Chief Engineer regularised the services of Dharma Pal Singh and others (writ petitioners) with effect from January 1, 1973 in pursuance of the instructions dated January 29, 1973.
In this letter it was mentioned that seniority would be determined with effect from January 1, 1973 and no benefit of service rendered on ad hoc basis will be given towards fixation of seniority.
6.
The Learned Single Judge, relying upon the letter of regularisation-Annexure P2, held that for the purposes of determining seniority of Dharam Pal Singh and others the period spent on ad hoc basis was not to be taken into consideration and their date of entry would be January 1, 1973 and not the different dates when they initially joined the service.
7.
The service condition of the parties are governed by the Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) Chief Engineer's Office (Class III-Ministerial) Service Rules, 1967 (hereinafter called 'the Rules').
Rule 2 sub-clauses (c), (d), (j) and (m) and Rule 10 read as under :-  "2.
Definitions :- In these rules, the context otherwise requires :-  (c) "Appointment to the Service" includes an appointment made according to the provisions of these rules to an officiating vacancy or an excadre post.
(d) "Cadre Post" means a permanent post in the Service; (j) "Member of Service" means an official appointed substnatively to a cadre post; (m) "Ex-cadre post" means a temporary post of the same rank as cadre post;" Rule 10 : "Seniority of Members of the Service :- The seniority inter se of members of Services shall be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in the service : Provided that in the case of members appointed directly, the order of merit determined by hte Commission shall not be disturbed : "Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows : (a) a member recruitued by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise; (b) a member recruited by promotion shall be senior to a person recruited by transfer;  (c) in the case of members recruited by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointment from which they were promoted or transferred; and  (d) in the case of members recruited by transfer from different cadre, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by their length of service in these appointments and if the length of such service is the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member."
8.
The contention of Shri PS Patwalia, Advocate, for the appellant, is that in view of Rule 10, the seniority of members of the Service is required to be determined and member of the Service, as defined under Rule 2(j), means an official appointed substantively to a cadre post.
Since Dharam Pal Singh and others were made regular with effect from January 1, 1973, they became members of the Service only with effect from the aforesaid date and the view expressed by the learned Single Judge of this aspect was correct.
The Learned Single Judge also observed that the order Annexure P2 whereby it was mentioned that no benefit of service rendered on ad hoc basis would be given towards fixation of seniority was not challenged by the writ petitioners earlier and the aforesaid order lays down the conditions of service of such petitioners which amounted to contract as the same was accepted.
We have given due consideration to the approach of the learned Single Judge.
With great respect to the observations of the learned Single Judge referred to above, we do not agree to the same.
A perusal of Rule 10 of the Rules shopws that only seniority of members of the Service is required to be determined and as defined under Rule 2(j) member of the service would mean an official appointed substantively to a cadre post.
But that does not mean that the date of entry into service would be the date of substantive appointment for the purposes of determining the seniority.
Rule 10 provides that seniority inter se of members of the services is to be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in the service and the words "Appointment to the Service" as defined under Rule 2(c) includes an appointment made according to the provisions of these rules to an officiating vacancy or an ex-cadre post.
An 'Ex-cadre post' as defined under Rule 2(m) means a temporary post of the same rank as Cadre post.
'Cadre Post' of course, as defined under Rule 2(d) means a permanent post in the Service.
In view of the Rules, as referred to above, an appointment to an Ex-cadre post i.e. temporary post would mean appointment to the Service.
In between the members directly appointed the order of merit determined by the Board is not to be disturbed and in the case of two such members of the service appointed on the same date the seniority is to be determined : (a) a direct appointee, is to be senior to the member appointed otherwise; (b) a member recruited by promotion is to be senior to the person recruited by transfer.
This mode of fixation of seniority is provided under rule 10, as referred to above.
Since the Rule provides that the period spent on temporary post (Ex-cadre post) has also to be counted towards fixation of seniority.
The Chief Engineer could not provide in order Annexure R.2 such period spent on ad hoc basis would be counted while determining seniority.
Such a condition is obviously contrary to the Rules aforesaid.
It is well-established that the executive instructions or orders cannot over-ride the Rules which are statutory.
9.
Shri Patwalia, learned counsel for the appellant, argued that period of ad hoc service under the general law could not be taken into consideration while determining the seniority.
In support of his contenttion reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in Amar Singh, Junior Analyst and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1983(3) SLR 264.
Judgment of the Full Bench in SK Verma and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1979(2) SLR 164 was referred to.
It was observed that there could be no distinction in the employees appointed on ad hoc basis or temporarily whose services could be terminated without notice.
Such arrangement is for a short duration of fleeting purpose.
The seniority rule which was under discussion in the case of Amar Singh of course provided criteria of date of continuous appointment in the service as the determining factor and a note added thereunder specifically provided that the rule was not to apply to persons appointed on purely provisional basis.
The ratio of the decision aforesaid thus cannot be applied universally in all cases.
In the present case relevant rules governing the service have already been referred to above which provide period of appointment even on temporary post to be taken into consideration for determining seniority.
The Supreme Court in The Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1990(2) SLR 769, referring to the Service Rules of Maharashtra State held that the seniority was to be counted from the date of appointment and not according to the date of confirmation as the relevant rule referred to the date of appointment i.e. length of service.
Relevant observation in para 47 of the judgment need to be noticed as in that case persons initially appointed temporarily were regularised and it was laid down as under :-  "To sum up, we hold that :  (A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
"(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of this service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted."
10.
The facts of the present case are somewhat similar to the facts of the case referred to above.
The writ petitioners though initially appointed temporarily continuously remained in service for years together and subsequently vide order Annexure P2 they were made regular.
In that situation also their entry in service has to be the date when they were initially inducted into service.
The Supreme Court in Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee and others v. RK Kashyap and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 278, observed in para 26 of the judgment on the subject of treating ad hoc period towards seniority as under :-  "If ad hoc appointment or temporary appointment is made without considering the claim of senior is in the cadre, the service rendered in such appointment should not be counted for seniority in the cadre.
The length of service in ad hoc appointment or stop-gap arrangement made in the exigencies of service without considering the claims of all the eligible and suitable persons in the cadre ought not be reckoned for the purpose of determining the seniority in the promotional cadre.
To give the benefit of such service to a favoured few would be contrary to the equality of opportunity enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
This Court also in Kiran Vashisht (Mrs.) Clerk v. State of Haryana and others, 1990(3) SLR 131, held that in the absence of any rules to the contrary while determining seniority on the basis of length of service the period spent on temporary service is also to be taken into consideration.
11.
From the discussion of the authorities referred to above, we are of the firm opinion that in the context of the Rules under consideration when seniority is to be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in the service, the appointment in the service would mean initial appointment either temporary or against the temporary post as such members continue to remain in service till their services were regularised.
Thus, in the case of Dharam Pal Singh and others the dates of their appointment in service would be their initial appointment on temporary basis.
The relevant dates being from 1968 to 1971 as mentioned in the writ petition, they would obviously rank senior to the persons inducted into service after 1971.
12.
Ramesh Kumar joined the service in August 1973 against a reserved post as per stand of the State.
We are not concerned in the present litigation about Ramesh Kumar.
The real contest is to the appointment of Megh Raj who joined the service in September 1972 initially on temporary basis as is clear from Annexure P.3 dated September 2, 1972.
He was in the select list which was prepared by the Deputy Secretary after the Subordinate Services Selection Board had been dissolved.
He had applied to the Board when the Deputy Secretary made the selection.
The same was challenged in this Court in Ramesh Kumar Gupta v. State of Punjab and others, 1974(1) SLR 818.
The High Court held the selection made by the Deputy Secretary as bad in law and quashed it.
It was further observed in para 5 of the judgment that the Superintending Engineer will, however, be at liberty to re-consider the matter without being influenced by the fact that they have to accommodate any person selected by the said Deputy Secretary.
This would show that the person who was selected by the Deputy Secretary could not be thrust upon the appointing authorities.
In that case some persons had been appointed on ad hoc basis in anticipation of the selection to be made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
It was left to the authorities to consider, if any of such persons was to be thrown out or not in order to accommodate the persons from the selected list.
If nobody was to be thrown out no orders were necessary to be passed.
Much arguments have been addressed on the observation aforesaid by counsel for the parties.
The contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that since no further action was taken by the authorities with respect to the service of the appellant, his date of entry in the service would be of September 1972 whereas the contention of Shri Balram Gupta, Advocate for the respondents (writ petitioners) is that since the selection made by the Deputy Secretary was bad in law, the appointment of Megh Raj was also bad or void.
Since 1972 Megh Raj has continuously worked, it is too late to hold his appointment as void and to throw him on the road.
Rather there is no plea in this respect for direction to Megh Raj not to hold the post.
His appointment was never challenged earlier.
Since only question which is relevant for consideration is to fix to date of his appointment in the service, for all intents and purposes in view of the rules referred to above, in his case also the date of appointment on temporary basis would be the date of appointment in service which is of September 27, 1972.
The contention of Shri Patwalia, Advocate for the appellant, that in the case of Dharam Pal Singh and others the date of appointment could be deemed to be of 1974 when they were ordered to be regularised has been repelled as above, Megh Raj obviously cannot be placed higher to Dharam Pal Singh and others in the seniority list.
Learned Single Judge was thus justified in quashing the order of promotion of Megh Raj.
Finding no merits in the appeal, the same is dismissed.
There will no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.