GC Garg, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4567 of 1987 and 10440 of 1988, as the question of law and fact is common in these petitions.
Reference hereinafter is made to the facts contained in Civil Writ Petition No 10440 of 1988.
2.
Challenge in this writ petition is to the order passed by the Principal, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, whereby the admission of the petitioner to the 2nd Professional, MBBS Course, on migration from Kempegowda Institute of Medical Science, Bangalore, has been cancelled.
3.
Few facts relevant for the disposal of these petitions may be noticed thus;  4.
The petitioner passed his Pre-medical examination in the year 1986 and got admission to MBBS Course in Kempegowde Institute of Medical Science, Bangalore in August, 1986.
He passed his 1st Professional Examination of MBBS Course from the said Institute, securing 591% marks.
This Institute was recognised by the Medical Council for India from the year 1988-89, as is evident from certificate dated July 6, 1988, issued by the Principal and is attached as Annexure P-1 to this petition.
Vide application, Annexure P-3 dated March 17, 1988, the petitioner applied out Principal respondent No. 4 to grant him 'No Objection Certificate' enabling him to seek migration from Bangalore Institute to Medical Colleges situated in the State of Punjab.
He also applied for migration to the Director of Research and Medical Education, Punjab.
The petitioner was granted migration vide letter dated August 1, 1988, Annexure P-4, on two conditions, namely, (i) that permission is obtained from the Registrar, Jnana Bharathi, Bangalore University, Bangalore and Director of Medical Education, Ananda Rao Circle, Bangalore; (ii) that the students will only be eligible to appear in the 2nd Professional MBBS Examination after completing the prescribed course of study of 18 months.
The petitioner got the necessary 'No objection Certificate' and it is not disputed by the respondents.
He was consequently permitted to join in the 2nd Professional MBBS Course at Faridkot on September 8, 1988.
He paid the necessary dues and was allotted Roll No. being 8853.
Annexure P-6 is a receipt issued to the petitioner relating to payment of dues evidencing his admission to the 2nd Professional MBBS Course.
Admission of the petitioner was cancelled by order dated November 4, 1988, Annexure P-8 when he was already studying in the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College at Faridkot without any notice to him and by treating the admission of the petitioner originally granted as provisional.
It is this order of cancellation which has been challenged by the petitioner in this petition on various grounds which are not necessary to be noticed.
5.
The writ petition was admitted by order dated November 30, 1988 and the respondent-authorities were directed to permit the petitioner to continue his studies till further orders at his own risk and subject to the decision of the writ petition.
By order dated May 30, 1989, the petitioner was again allowed to take the examination at his own risk and subject to the decision of the writ petition.
The examination which the petitioner was allowed to take was obviously 2nd Professional MBBS examination.
By order dated September 28, 1989, it was directed by this Court that the result of the petitioner for 2nd Professional MBBS Examination be declared and in case he is required to appear in the Supplementary Examination, he may be allowed to do so in accordance with rules subject to the result of the writ petition.
6.
In deference to the order passed by this Court the result of the petitioner for 2nd Professional MBBS Examination was declared in October, 1989.
He was declared as having passed the examination.
He thereafter, appeared in the Final Professional MBBS Examination and this time he was permitted by the authorities to appear in the Examination in the absence of any order of this Court.
The result of the petitioner for Final Professional MBBS Examination was declared in January, 1991.
The petitioner passed the said examination.
Under the University Ordinances, an MBBS student is required to do internship for one year after passing the Final Professional MBBS examination so as to become eligible for award of the MBBS Degree.
The petitioner after passing his Final Professional MBBS Examination in January, 1991, did his internship from February 28, 1991 to February 27, 1992 and thus, completed the entire course.
He was even registered as a doctor with the Punjab Medical Council so as to entitle him to practice in medicines.
7.
In these circumstances the only grouse of the petitioner that remains is that a direction be given to the University to award him a Degree of MBBS as he has already passed the prescribed examination and completed internship.
8.
The facts as stated could not be disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents, but his only contention is that the petitioner was allowed migration provisionally and since the necessary permission has been declined, in the authorities were well within their right to cancel the admission.
9.
I have considered the matter and am of the opinion that the admission of the petitioner on migration is required to be regularised and he is entitled to grant of MBBS degree on completion of all formalities required under the University Ordinances.
10.
In Krishna Priya Ganguly etc. etc. v. University of Lucknow and others etc., AIR 1984 Supreme Court 186, it has been held by the Supreme Court that whenever a writ petition challenging admission to Medical Courses is filed provisional admission should not be given as a matter of course on the petition being admitted unless the Court is fully satisfied that the petitioner has a cast-iron case which is bound to succeed or the error is so gross or apparent that no other conclusion is possible and in case the Court is satisfied that there is strong prima facie case and the matter needs thorough examination, provisional admission may be given.
Their Lordships further observed as under :  "We hope and trust that the High Courts would in future discontinue the practice of lightly granting provisional admission to the candidates at the time of regular admissions as observed above.
It is needless to state that this Court on its part would also be extremely reluctant to grant provisional admission and would do so only in a very special case.
The fundamental reason for this is that otherwise the institutions are likely to become over crowded by candidates eligible or ineligible, efficient or inefficient."
In the case before the Supreme Court, by the time the cases were taken up for hearing, as many as nine out of twenty-one candidates had completed their courses and only the result was to be declared.
In these circumstances, the Supreme Court observed that it was not necessary to go into the merits or to give reasons thereof in view of the fact that the candidates got what they wanted.
This observations was made on the basis of concession made by the learned counsel appearing for the State and accepted by the Court.
In these circumstances, an order was passed directing the authorities to declare the result of the candidates.
11.
In another case, namely, Rajendra Prasad v. Karnataka University, AIR 1986 SC 1448, the students had been granted admission to the B.Sc.
Engineering Degree Course in the Engineering Colleges in the State of Karnataka, who had passed 10+1 Examination from the State of Rajasthan though such students were required to pass 10+2 Examination before being eligible for seeking admission to the said course.
The said students who had not passed 10+2 Examination were found to be ineligible by the Karnataka University and they were informed accordingly.
They filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the cancellation of their admissions.
Their writ petitions were admitted and an interim order was made allowing them to continue their studies in the Engineering Colleges and as a result thereof, they continued appearing in the examinations.
The High Court ultimately dismissed the writ petitions.
On appeal to the Supreme Court by the students, it was concluded as under :-  "There can, therefore, be no doubt that the appellants were ineligible for admission to the Engineering Degree Course of the Karnataka University and their admission was contrary to the ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility."
A question thereafter arose as to what should be done when the petitioners/appellants had been allowed to continue their studies provisionally initially by the High Court and later on by the Supreme Court.
While considering this matter, it was observed as under :-  "But the question still remains whether we should allow the appellants to continue their studies in the respective Engineering College in which they were admitted.
It was strenuously pressed upon us on behalf of the appellants that under the orders initially of the learned Judge and, thereafter, of his Court, they have been pursuing their course of study in the respective Engineering Colleges and their admissions should not now be disturbed because if they are now thrown out after a period of almost four years since their admission their whole future will be blighted.
Now it is true that the appellants were not eligible for admission to the Engineering Degree Course and they had no legitimate claim to such admission.
But it must be noted that the blame for their wrongful admission must lie more upon the Engineering Colleges which granted admission than upon the appellants.
It is quite possible that the appellants did not know that neither the Higher Secondary Examination of the Secondary Education Board, Rajasthan nor the first year B.Sc.
examination of the Rajasthan and Udaipur Universities was recognised as equivalent to the Pre-University Examination of the Pre-University Education Board, Bangalore.
The appellants being young students from Rajasthan might have presumed that since they had passed the first year B.Sc.
examination of the event the Higher Secondary Examination of the Secondary Education Board, Rajasthan they were eligible for admission.
The fault lies with the Engineering Colleges which admitted the appellants because the Principles of these Engineering Colleges must have known that the appellants were not eligible for admission and yet for the sake of capitation fee in some of the cases they granted admission to the appellants.
We do not see why the appellants should suffer for the sins of the management of these Engineering Colleges.
We would, therefore, notwithstanding the view taken by us in this judgment, allow the appellants to continue their studies in the respective Engineering Colleges in which they were granted admission."
12.
The Supreme Court decisions in Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 2027 and Niadamarti Mahesh Kumar v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1986 SC 1362, also relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner have no application to the facts of the present case.
13.
In the case in hand, as already noticed, the petitioner was eligible to be admitted to MBBS Course and had been so admitted.
It is a case of migration only, from the University in Karnataka to a University in the State of Punjab.
The migration had been granted and the petitioner continued his studies till as far back as January, 1991.
He has already passed his 2nd & Final Professional MBBS Examination.
Not only this, he has also completed his internship and even has been registered as a doctor with the Punjab Medical Council.
14.
For the foregoing reasons, I am of the considered opinion that admission of the petitioner to 2nd Professional MBBS Courses in Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot is required to be regularised and it is so ordered.
Since the admission of the petitioner on migration from Karnataka University to Panjabi University has been regularised the petitioner is entitled to all the consequential benefits.
A direction is consequently issued to the respondent-authorities to grant to the petitioner the necessary Degree of his having passed MBBS Course on his completing all requisite formalities that may be required under the Ordinances or any other Rules of the University or the subject.
This direction is being issued as it is not disputed that the petitioner has already passed 2nd Professional and Final Professional MBBS Course.
With the above observations and directions the writ petition is disposed of.
Civil Writ Petition No 4657 of 1987 is also disposed of in the above terms and directions.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs in both the petition.