RS Mongia, J - The judgment was pronounced on 20121991.
The writ petition was allowed, but it was observed that reasons would be recorded later on.
I proceed to record reasons.
2.
Petition is holding the post of Head of Civil Engineering Department in Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar City (hereinafter called the 'Polytechnic') and is a permanent employee of the said Polytechnic.
Petitioner has to his credit service of about 31 years in the Polytechnic.
The Polytechnic is run by the DAV College Managing Committee, Chitargupt Road, New Delhi, which has been arrayed as one of the respondents.
3.
The petitioner was initially appointed as Surveyor Instructor in the Polytechnic on 9.7.1960 (copy of the appointment order is Annexure P-8).
Thereafter the petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in the Civil Engg.
Department vide appointment letter dated 2381965.
On 20.10.1981 the petitioner was promoted on regular basis to the post of head of the Civil Engineering Department in the Polytechnic.
Copy of the promotion order is Annexure P-10 to the petitioner.
It was mentioned in this promotion order that all terms and conditions of his service would remain the same as conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated 2281965 when he was appointed as a Lecturer.
4.
The appointment letter of the petitioner dated 2381965 appointing him as Lecturer (Civil) besides having some other terms contained the following stipulations.
1.
You will be on probation for one year from the date of your joining.
On expiry of the probation, you will be confirmed in your post in case your work and conduct is found satisfactory.
Your next increment will fall due one year after the date of your joining.
In case your work and conduct is not found satisfactory, during probation, your services can be terminated by one months's notice or pay in lieu of notice.
2.
Notice period on either side will be 3 months during probation and after confirmation.
If you resign and wish to be relieved, or if the management wishes to terminate your services, and relieve you, before the expiry of the notice period, pay and allowances shall have to be paid for the balance of the notice on either side.
3.
In the matter of leave and general conditions of service you will be governed by the rules of the DAV College Managing Committee.
4.
You have agreed to serve the Polytechnic for at least 2 years under this agreement your resignation will not be accepted before 30.4.1967."
Please Communicate immediately if you accept the appointment offered to you on the terms stated above.
You have joined on 1781965."
5.
The offer of appointment was accepted by the petitioner on the above terms.
Vide order dated 2231991 (Annexure P-1), Principal of the Polytechnic conveyed the decision of the Managing Committee terminating the services of the petitioner with immediate effect.
The order dated 2231991 (Annexure P-1) reads as under :-  "In light of resolution No. 7211(a) of the 72nd meeting of the Mehar Chand Polytechnic Managing Committee, held at Delhi on 15th March, 1991, I am to inform you that your services are terminated with immediate effect.
In accordance with your agreement of service; vide letter No. 4164 dated 2381965, clause No. 3, and letter No. 3675 dated 20.10.1981 clause No. 3, salary in lieu of three months notice period of Rs. 21,43500 and the undisturbed salary for the months of January, 1991, February, 1991 and 22 days of March 1991, amounting to Rs. 1608420 is paid to you.
Total amount of Rs. 3751920 is being paid by Bankers Cheque/pay order PMJ No. 0969728 dated 21391 to be drawn on Canara Bank, Jalandhar and the same is enclosed herewith.
All other dues to your credit be claimed and will be settled by the Management after getting no dues certificate.
You stand relieved."
6.
Petitioner filed the present writ petition challenging the order of termination (annexure P-1).
The motion Bench stayed the operation of the impugned order by virtue of which the petitioner continued to work as Head of the Department in Civil Engineering in the respondent-Polytechnic.
7.
The decision of the writ will revolve around the point whether respondent-Polytechnic governed by the DAV College Managing Committee is a 'State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It is the stand of the respondent that the respondent is not a 'State' further even if petitioner's services have been wrongly terminated, the petitioner can at the most file a civil suit for wrongful dismissal in breach of a contract and no writ lies for enforcing a contract of personal service.
Respondent went to the extent, even if the respondent is held to be a 'State', even then, since there was no violation of any Statute and at the most there can be a breach of the contract, and in that eventuality no writ is competent and only a civil suit can be filed.
8.
Let me first clear the decks to go into the point whether respondent is a 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India or not.
I may refer to Supreme Court Authority in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, 1986(2) SLR 345 : AIR 1986 1571 in which it was held that if an authority which is a State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India breaches a contract then the efficacious remedy would be a writ and not a civil suit.
In paragraph 100 of the judgment, Supreme Court observed as under :-  "100.
The contesting Respondents could, therefore, have filed a civil suit for a declaration that the termination of their service was contrary to law on the ground that the Rule 9(i) was void.
In such a suit, however, they would have got a declaration and possibly damages for wrongful termination of service but the Civil Court could not have ordered reinstatement as it would have amounted to granting specific performance of a contract of personal service.
As the Corporation is "the State", they therefore, adopted the far more efficacious remedy of filing a writ petition under Article 22 of the Constitution."
Rule 9(i) which was under consideration of the Supreme Court in the above noted case was to the effect that the services of a permanent employee could be terminated by giving him a notice of a certain period.
In the case in hand similar clause has been inserted in Para 3 of the appointment letter.
9.
In view of the judgment of Supreme Court (supra) if it is held that the respondent is a 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, then certainly a writ would lie against the respondent and I would be in a position to go into the point whether clause 3 of the appointment letter is good or bad in Law.
10.
Let met now refer to the pleadings of the parties on the point whether respondent is a 'State' or not under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It has been averred by the petitioner that Polytechnic is an aided, recognised Institution by the State Government and is affiliated to the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and the degrees and diplomas are conferred by the said Board.
It gets 95% grant in aid from the State Government.
The constitution of the Managing Committee of the Polytechnic envisages 50% nominees of the Central, and State Governments, which includes;  1.
3 representatives of All India Council of Technical Education.
2.
1 representative of Government of India.
3.
2 representatives of Punjab Government.
4.
2 representatives of the Polytechnic staff.
5.
1 Secretary/Ex-offico member.
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 which is a Central Act, controls and governs the academic and administrative affairs of Technical Institutions, both Government as well as privately managed.
Section 2(h) of 1987 Act defines Technical Institution as follows :-  2(h) "technical institution" means an institution, not being a University which offers courses or programmes of technical education, and shall include such other institutions as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Council by notification in the official Gazette, declare as technical institutions."
The statement of objects and reasons for enacting 1987 Act stipulates that the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) was set up in 1954 by a Government resolution as a National Expert Body to advise the Central and the State Government for ensuring the co-ordinated development of technical education in accordance with approved standards.
During the first three decades the Council functioned quite effectively and there was phenomenal development of technical education in this period.
However, in recent years, a large number of private engineering colleges and polytechnics have come up in complete disregard of the guidelines, laid down by the AICTE.
Most of these institutions have serious deficiencies in terms of even the rudimentary infrastructure necessary for imparting proper education and training.
Barring some exceptions, there is scant regard for maintenance of educational standards.
11.
Taking into account the growing erosion of standards the Council at its meeting held in 1981 came to the conclusion that a stage had been reached when it should be vested with statutory powers to regulate and maintain standards of technical education in the country.
In pursuance of these and other recommendations a National Working Group was set up in November, 1985 to look into the role of the AICTE.
The National Working Group recommended that in order to enable the AICTE to play its role effectively, it shall have to be vested with necessary statutory authority.
The National Policy on Education, 1986, also stipulated that the AICTE will be vested with statutory authority for planning, formulation and the maintenance of norms and standards accreditation, funding of priority areas, monitoring and evaluation, maintaining partly of certificates and awards and ensuring the coordinated and integrated development of technical and management education.
12.
The State Government had issued letters dated 2191976 (copy Annexure P-4) vide which the Government pay scales and allowances have been made applicable to the private technical institutions.
It has been further averred that all kinds of leaves which are being granted to the employees of the Polytechnic are according to the Punjab Government Leave Rules.
The Managing Committee of the Polytechnic had passed a Resolution on 10.1.1983 making applicable leave rules prescribed by the Government.
Appointments to the Polytechnic and other Government and Private Polytechnics are made by the Director of Technical Education, Punjab and is regulated by the Technical Board of Education joint admission test is held for all Polytechnics affiliated to the Board including Government Polytechnics, the Technical Board provides the minimum qualification/standard.
In the Grant-in-Aid code issued by the State Government for technical Education Institutions, some conditions of grant are reproduced below :-  "514 :- The teaching staff shall be selected by sub-committee appointed by the Managing Committee for the purpose which will include the Director or his nominees.
Some experts out of the panel approved by the Ministry of Education will also be corporated to assist the sub-committee in making the selection.
The appointments of Principal shall, however, be made by the Managing Committee direct.
515 : The case of confirmations, promotions resignations, dismissal and removal of the staff members will also be examined by the sub-committee mentioned in para 514 and then put up to the Managing Committee for approval.
518 : The accounts of the institution shall be open for inspection by the representatives of the Government of India/State Government."
All the above averments have been admitted by the respondents excepting that 95% aid that the Polytechnic gets from the Governments is not 95% of the entire expenditure, but is the 95% of the deficit towards the payment of salaries to the employees of the Polytechnic.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the basic test to find out whether a particular institution is an authority of 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others etc., AIR 1981 SC 487 laid down the following tests :-  (1) "One thing is clear that if the entire share capital of the corporation is held by Government it would go a long way towards indicating that the corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government."
(2) "Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the corporation, it would afford some indication of the corporation being impregnated with governmental character."
(3) "It may also be a relevant factor whether the corporation enjoys monopoly status which is the State conferred or State protected."
(4) "Existence of "dep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that the Corporation is a State agency or instrumentality."
(5) "If the functions of the corporation of public importance and closely related to government functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of Government."
(6) "Specifically, if a department of Govt. is transferred to a Corporation, it would be a strong factor supportive of this inference" of the corporation being an instrumentality or agency of Government."
Supreme Court had called out these tests after examining the earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in International Airport Authority's case (AIR 1979 SC 1628).
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon the judgment in Francis John v. The Director of Education and others, AIR 1990 SC 423, in which it was held that where the disciplinary proceedings were started against a headmaster of a school which was a recipient of the Grant-in-Aid as per the Grant-in-Aid Code, and the findings of the Dispute Settlement Committee were approved by the Director of Education of the Govt. and he permitted the termination of services of the Head Master in consequence of which the order of termination was passed, a writ petition against such order of termination would be maintainable.
14.
Learned counsel also relied upon the observations made in case Shri Anandi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust and others.
v. VR Rudani and others, AIR 1989 SC 1607, wherein Supreme Court held as under :-  "If the rights are purely of a private character no mandamus can issue, if the management of the college is purely a private body with no public duty mandamus will not lie.
These are two exceptions to Mandamus.
But once these are absent and when the party has no other equally convenient remedy, mandamus cannot be denied.
The law relating to mandamus has made the most spectacular advance.
Article 226 confers wide powers on the High Courts to issues writs in the nature of prerogative writs.
This is a striking departure from the English law.
Under Article 226, writs can be issued to "any person or authority".
It can be issued for the enforcement of any other purpose."
The term "authority" used in Article 226 in the context, must receive a liberal meaning unlike the term in Article 12.
Article 12 is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights under Article 32.
Article 226 confers power on the High Courts to issue writs for enforcement of the fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights.
The words "any person or authority" used in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant.
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owned by the person or authority to the affected party.
No matter by what means the duty is imposed.
If a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied.
It may be pointed out that mandamus cannot be denied on the ground that the duty to be enforced is not impose by the statute.
The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies affecting the rights of the people should not be put into watertight compartment.
It should remain flexible to meet the requirement of variable circumstances.
Mandamus is a very wise remedy which must be easily available 'to reach injustice wherever it is found.'
Technicalities should not come in the way of granting that relief under Article 226."
15.
Though the above said observations were in context of issuance of mandamus, but the petitioner's counsel submitted that these would equally apply to the case in hand to find out whether the respondent is 'State' or not under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner counsel submitted that under Article 41 of the Constitution of India, it is a obligation of the State, of course within the limits of its economic capacity and development, to make effective provisions for securing right to education.
Learned counsel cited Full Bench Judgment of Delhi High Court in Master Vibhu Kapoor v. Council of India School Certificate Examination and another, AIR 1985 Delhi 142 to contend that if the State carries out its obligation under Article 41 of the Constitution of India, then it will be performing a public function.
If the private bodies or persons are discharging the same functions which are to be discharged by the Government, the same may not ipso facto be Governmental instrumentalities unless there is something more to it.
In para 23 of the judgment, Full Bench of the Delhi High Court observed as under :-  Para 23.
- "In a welfare State Government is required to discharged various functions.
Some by way of an obligation and others by way of a duty.
It cannot be disputed that the welfare State that we in our country envisage postulates that the State must try its best to make effective provision for securing education for its citizens of course within the limits of its economic capacity and development.
If the State does so then in the institution run or controlled by it, there can be no doubt, the public function that is performed is Governmental in character.
Private bodies and persons can also impart education.
If there is nothing else merely because private bodies or persons are discharging a functions which is also discharged by the Government will not make the function discharged by private bodies or persons Governmental in character.
There has to be something more."
Learned counsel also specifically relied on the following observations of the Supreme Court in Anandi Mukta's case (supra) for the contention that a writ would lie against the respondent :  "The words "any person or authority used in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
16.
According to the learned counsel, most of the tests laid down by the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia's case (supra) and other above noted cases are fulfilled by the respondent and consequently the respondent is a 'State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel summarised that 50% members of the Managing Committee are to be from the State or Central Governments.
Under the Grant-in-Aid Code, the staff is to be Selected by the Committee which has to be include the Director of the Board of Technical Education or his nominee and there have to be some experts in the selection Committee out of the panel approved by the Ministry of Education.
Case of confirmation, promotions, resignation, dismissal and removal have to be examined by the Sub-Committee which is formed under clause 514 which has to include functionaries of the Government as stated above.
Under Clause 518 of the Grant-in-Aid Code the accounts of the institution are open for inspection by the representatives of the Government of India/State Government.
Under the 1987 Act, the Council has a control over the technical institutions and under Section 10(1)(9) of the Act, the Council can even give directions of the technical institutions and can see that these are implemented.
According to the counsel there is a deep & pervasive control of the Government functionaries on the affairs of the Managing Committee.
Further, according to the learned counsel, it receives 95% grant-in-aid from the State to meet expenses, though, according to the respondent, it is only 95% of the deficit.
However, the fact remains that it receives substantial aid.
The institution is affiliated to the Punjab State Board of Technical Education, which is the examining body of all technical institutions including Government technical institutions including Government technical institutions.
Even the admissions are held on the basis of combined examination held by the said Board.
Further, according to the learned counsel, the respondent was performing a public duty/obligation which the State Government is normally expected to carry out under Article 41 of the Constitution of India.
The affairs of the management are circumscribed by the rules and regulations of the Board of Technical Education; Grant-in-aid Code issued by the Government under the provisions of 1987 Act.
17.
Mr. SP Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 2, on the other hand, submitted that Respondent No. 2 is not an 'Authority' or a 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, and, therefore, no writ was maintainable against it.
According to the learned counsel, the respondent-Institution is owned and controlled by DAV College, Managing Committee, New Delhi, which is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act.
The State Government is not the chief funding source but the Institution is run mainly on its own resources, further the functions which are being performed by the Institution are not the one which are Government in essence.
There is no plannery control over the Institution residing in the Government nor there is any element authority or command.
According to the learned counsel, the whole expenditure was being met by the DAV College Managing Committee and the Government had agreed to met its share of deficit to the tune of 95%.
According to the learned counsel, there is no obligation enjoined by Constitution which the Institution is performing.
Further, according to him, there is no violation of any statutory provisions, which could give rise to a cause of action to the petitioner to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court.
Since, according to the learned counsel, the above-mentioned tests are not satisfied by Respondent-Institution, therefore, it is not an 'Authority' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
18.
The learned counsel in support of his submissions relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in Chander Mohan Khanna v. The National Council of Educational Research and Training and others, 1992(1) SCT 100 (SC) : JT 1991(4) SC 233, wherein the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) was held not to be a 'State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
He also cited a Full Bench judgment of this Court reported as Ram Parshad v. The Indian Institute of Bankers, 1991(5) SLR 266, wherein the Indian Institute of Bankers was held to be not a 'State'.
Further he also relied upon a Supreme Court judgment in Tekraj Vasandi v. Union of India, etc., AIR 1988 SC 469, wherein the Supreme Court held that the Indian Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (ICPS) was not a 'State', under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
In Chander Mohan Khanna's case (supra), where the Supreme Court was considering whether the NCERT was a 'State' or not, it observed in paras 2 and 3 of the judgment as under :-  2.
There are only general principles but not exhaustive test to determine whether a body is an instrumentality or agency of the Government.
Even in general principles, there is no cut and dried formula which would provide correct division of bodies into those which are instrumentalities or agencies of the Government and those which are not.
The powers, functions, finances and control of the Government are some of the indicating factors to answer the question whether a body is "State" or not.
Each case should be handled with care and caution.
Where the financial assistance from the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the institution, or the share capital of the corporation is completely held by the government, it would afford some indication of the body being impregnated with government character.
It may be a relevant factor if the institution or the corporation enjoys monopoly status which is State conferred or State protected.
Existence of deep of pervasive State control may afford an indication.
If functions of the institution are of public importance and related to governmental functions, it would also be a relevant factor.
These are merely indicative indicate and are by no means conclusive or clinching in any case (See (i) Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagat Ram, 1975(1) SCC 421); (ii) RD Shetty v. International Airport Authority, (1979(3) SCC 489); (iii) Ajay Hasi v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981(1) SCC 722); and (iv) Som Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India, (1981(1) 449).
3.
Article 12 should not be stretched so as to bring in every autonomous body which has some nexus with the Government within the sweep of the expression "State".
A wide enlargement of the meaning must be tempered by a wise limitation.
It must not be lost sight of that in the modern concept of Welfare State; independent institution, corporation and agency or generally subject to State control.
The State control does not render such bodies as "State" under Article 12.
The State control, however, vast and pervasive is not determinative.
The financial contribution by the State is also not conclusive.
The combination of State aid coupled with an unusual degree of control over the management and polices of the body, and rendering of an important public service being the obligatory functions of the State may largely point out that the body is "State".
If the Government operates behind a corporate veil carrying out Governmental activity and governmental functions of vital public importance, there may be little difficulty in identifying the body as "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
(See : (i) PK Ramakrishna Iyer v. Union of India, 1984(2) SCC 141; (ii) Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojonath Gangoli, (1986(3) SCC 156) and (iii) Tekraj Vasandhi alias KL Basandhi v. Union of India, (1988(2) SCR 26));" The learned counsel strongly relied upon the observations made in para 3 above.
19.
In Tekraj Vasandi's case (supra) where the question before the Supreme Court was whether ICPS was or was not a 'State' under Article 12, it had noticed that ICPS was a Registered Society, financed mostly by the Central Government, partly by gifts and donations from India and abroad.
The first President of the Society was the than Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
Out of the Five Vice-Presidents, three were the than Central Ministers and the other two were the then chief Justice of India and the Attorney General of India.
The objects of the Society were to provide for constitutional and parliamentary studies, promotion of research in Constitutional law, setting up of a legislative research and reference service for the benefit of legislators etc.
It was held by the Supreme Court that ICPS was born as a voluntary organisation.
It has further found that though the contribution from the State was substantial, yet it was entitled to receive aid from the public.
Further, the objects of the ICPS were not Government business.
So far as question of Government's pervasive control over the ICPS was concerned, it had observed, "In a welfare State-------- Government control is very pervasive and touches all aspects of social existence--------- A broad picture of the matter has to be taken and a discerning mind has to be applied keeping the realities and human experiences in view so as to reach a reasonable conclusion."
In light of the above factors, Supreme Court came to the conclusion that ICPS was not a 'State'.
20.
Similarly, the Full bench of this Court in Ram Parshad's case (supra) came to the conclusion that the Indian Institute of the Bankers did not answer the test laid down by the Supreme Court in various judgment referred to above, but found out whether a particular Institution is a 'State' or not ?
21.
It may be noticed that the Supreme Court in Tekraj Vasandi's case (supra) had also observed that there cannot be a strait jacket formula.
It is not necessary that all the tests should be satisfied for reaching the conclusion either for or against holding an Institution to be 'State'.
In a given case, some of the features may emerge so boldly and prominently that a second view may not be possible.
22.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that on conspectus reading of various judgments of the Supreme Court, referred to above there is no divergence as far as the tests are concerned for finding out whether a particular Institution is an 'Authority' or 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
In each case, tests have been applied and as observed in Tekraj Vasandi's case (supra), a broad picture of the matter has to be taken and a discerning mind has to be applied keeping the realities and human experiences in view so as to reach at reasonable conclusions.
Taking all the factors into consideration in the present case, which have been summarised in the earlier paragraphs of the judgment, I am of the considered view that Respondent No. 2 is a 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India and would be amenable to the writ jurisdiction.
23.
Once it is held that Respondent No. 2 is a 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, then there is no force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the Respondents that since there is no violation of any Statute by Respondent No. 2, no cause of action arises to the petitioner to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi etc. etc. v. State of UP and others, 1990(6) SLR 1 : 1991(1) SCT 575, it was observed that considerations based on Article 14 of the Constitution of India, are not excluded in contractual matters.
It was held that the State action in contractual matters is amenable to judicial review and this may be more so when the modern trend is also to examine the unreasonableness of a term in such a contract where the bargaining power is unequal so that those are not negotiated contracts but standard contracts between unequals.
In Central Inland Water Transport Corporation's case (supra), the Supreme Court held that a term in a contract of employment was opposed to public policy and violative of the provisions of the Contract Act.
24.
The above being the position in law, then according to me there is no difficulty in striking down the clause in the petitioner's appointment, whereby the services could be terminated by the employer after serving three months notice.
Whether such a clause is in a rule or in a contract of employment, does not make any difference.
Such a clause is unreasonable and apart from being against the public policy, as held in Central Inland Water Transport Corporations' case (supra) by the Supreme Court, it is also violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, being wholly arbitrary.
So, the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioner on the basis of the said clause (which empowered the employer to terminate the services of the petitioner by giving three months' notice) is held to be void and liable to be quashed.
25.
There are Rules framed by the Respondents themselves, under which giving of reasonable opportunity is envisaged before terminating the services.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that there is a prescribed proforma of service agreement which has to be executed by the members of the teaching staff and since the petitioner had not executed any such proforma, he is entitled to an opportunity.
I am of the view that after the petitioner's initial appointment he was further promoted and then made the Head of the Department and under these circumstances, the execution of the agreement at the initial entry becomes insignificant and it can be assumed that the petitioner is serving in accordance with the service conditions mentioned in the proforma agreement.
Even otherwise, if it is held that reasonable opportunity as envisaged under the proforma agreement is not to be provided even then in absence of any power to terminate the services of a confirmed employee, Rules of natural justice would have to be complied with; otherwise the termination of a confirmed employee would be wholly arbitrary.
26.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that the learned counsel for the Respondents also raised an argument that the Respondent-Institute is a minority Institution, and, therefore, this court should not interfere in the matter.
Even if the respondent is a minority Institution, it does not have the licence to act arbitrarily and in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India In Managing Committee of the Kanya Maha Vidayalaya, Jullundur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLR 415, this court held that even a minority Institution is to comply with the provisions of an Act which envisaged an enquiry before terminating the services of a confirmed employee.
In absence of any Statute, an Authority which is 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, is to comply with its own Rules and in any case with the rules of natural justice, so that its action is not arbitrary and is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India  For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed, and the order of termination of the services of the petitioner, dated 22nd March, 1991 (Annexure P.1) is hereby quashed, with no order as to costs.
Writ petition allowed.