PLN Sarma, J - Ex-Manager of the Canara Bank filed the writ petition questioning the order of the third respondent in Case No. DLP:HC CHF:1445 dated 1941986 removing him from services, as confirmed on appeal by the second respondent, which was communicated to him in Proceedings No. HYSO 1852 87 KPR dated 2821987.
2.
The relevant facts are as follows : The petitioner was working as Manager in Canara Bank at Ramannagudem Branch in Warangal District.
While he was working at Ramannagudem, certain complaints were received by the higher authorities.
Initially, one Sri S Subba Reddy, Manager, Divisional Office of the Canara Bank at Warangal visited Ramannagudem on 2791983 and made a preliminary enquiry into the truth or otherwise of the complaints made against the petitioner.
The said Manager submitted a report to the higher authorities stating that these complaints are baseless and the people are made to give complaints by one Mr. Nageswararao.
3.
However, a charge-sheet dated 1611985 was issued to the petitioner containing five charges which are as follows :  "1.
The first charge relates to granting of several loans and advances in discriminatory contrary to the rules and procedures.
2.
Charge II deals with demanding and accepting of illegal gratification from various parties.
3.
The third charge is in respect of granting two crop loans of Rs. 5,000/- each to two fictitious persons based on fictitious documents.
4.
Charger IV refers to detaining of cheque of Laxmi Fertilizers received in collection for unduly long deliberately to accommodate the party.
5.
The fifth charge is in respect of failure to repay the excess TA drawn promptly wherein in respect of one sanction, he has drawn Rs. 30/- twice.
An enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct the enquiry by the Divisional Manager in his proceedings No. HYSO:2757:E-3785 dated 1131985.
The Enquiry Officer appointed by the Disciplinary Authority (General Manager) conducted the inquiry and submitted his report dated 3091985 to the Disciplinary Authority.
He found the petitioner guilty of all the charges, except items 5, 7 and 8 of Charge No. II.
4.
On the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer, the third respondent in his proceedings reference No. DPL:HC:CHF 1445 dated 1941986 removed the petitioner from service without the same being a disqualification for future employment.
The order of the third respondent is as follows:  Ref: DPL:HC:CHF:144519 APR 1986.
Proceedings of The General Manager.
Sub: Enquiry against Sri V J M Rao (5347) Manager (under suspension).
Ref: Charge-sheet HYSO:13883:E-37:CH 11-84 dated 1611985.
Whereas departmental proceedings were initiated against the subject employee by serving on him thwe above referred charge-sheet.
Whereas an Inquiry Authority was appointed vide proceedings of the General Manager HYSO:2757:E-37:85 dated 11385 to conduct the enquiry.
And Whereas the Inquiry Authority after conducting the inquiring has submitted his report holding the employee guilty of the charge levelled against him as enumerated in his report.
Now, therefore agreeing with the findings of the Inquiry Authority, the following punishment namely:  "Removal from services which shall not be a disqualification for future Employment."
as envisaged under Regulation 4(g) of the Canara Bank Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations 1976 is hereby imposed on the subject employee.
A copy of the findings of the Inquiring Authority is enclosed."
5.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Disciplinary Authority removing him from service, the Petitioner filed appeal to the Board of Directors as provided under Canara Bank Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal Regulations, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Regulations').
The Appellant Authority in its proceedings dated 1421987 agreed that all the charge except the statement of imputations 5, 7 and 8 in respect of charge No. II have been proved.
They confirmed the punishment given by the third respondent and dismissed the appeal.
6.
Questioning the order of the third respondent as confirmed by the second respondent removing him from service, the present writ petition is filed by the petitioner.
7.
Sri G Ramachandra Rao, learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following contentions:  (1) The order of the third respondent viz. Disciplinary Authority does not contain any reasons whatsoever and no findings are given on the respective charges and it does not show that the Disciplinary Authority applied its mind and therefore, the order of the Disciplinary Authority is void as opposed to Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulations'.
(2) The order of the Appellate Authority, viz. the second respondent herein though contained reasons and findings, cannot be led to be legal in view of the fact that the order of the third respondent is unsustainable and therefore, the Appellate Order also must go.
The confirmation by the Appellate Authority of the order of Disciplinary Authority does not make any difference.
(3) The order of the Disciplinary Authority is not supported by any evidence on record and it is a case of no evidence and therefore, it is liable to be quashed and this court has jurisdiction to interfere.
8.
On the other hand, Sri A Gopal Reddy learned counsel for the respondents contended that when the Disciplinary Authority has accepted the Inquiry report, it is not necessary to give elaborate reasons or findings on each charge.
He further contended that even if the order of the Disciplinary Authority is irregular or contrary to any regulation, the moment it is confirmed by the Appellant Authority, it gets merged in the order of the Appellate Authority and it is only the order of the Appellate Authority that can be questioned if there is any illegality or irregularity and not the original order.
The original order does not subsist after it gets merged with the Appellate order.
It is also contended that this Court has no jurisdiction to interfere with the order of the Appellate Authority if it is supported by any evidence on record.
If it is a case of no evidence only or if there is an error apparent on the face of record, this Court has jurisdiction to interfere and not otherwise, and it is not a case where the Appellate Authority's order is based on no evidence.
It is based on evidence and cogent reasons are given and all the charges were held proved except item 5, 7 and 8 of Charge No. II.
Therefore, the order of removal is valid.
It is also contended but the learned counsel for the respondent that the petitioner is in a managerial post.
On the facts and circumstances of this case and in view of the findings given on the charges, he cannot be entrusted with the managerial duties and, therefore, dismissal must be sustained.
9.
The first contention that the Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulations' requires the Disciplinary Authority to give reasons in support of the order and also must show that the Disciplinary Authority applied its mind, depends upon the language of the Regulation which is as follows:  "7.
Action on the inquiry report :  (1) The Disciplinary Authority, if it is not itself the inquiring authority may, for reason to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for fresh or further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold further inquiry according to the provisions of regulation 6 as far as may be.
(2) The Displinary Authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) If the Disciplinary Authority, having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in regulation 4 should be imposed on the officer employee it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in regulation 8 make an order imposing such penalty.
(4) If the Disciplinary Authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that no penalty is called for, it may pass an order exonerating the officer employee concerned."
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the language of Regulation 7(3).
The said Regulation 7(3) says that if the Disciplinary Authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified should be imposed on the officer employee, it shall take an order imposing such penalty.
The learned counsel strongly relied upon the words "having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge", for his contention that the said regulation requires the Disciplinary Authority to gave findings on all or any of the articles of charge.
In view of the fact that the order of the Disciplinary Authority does not contain any findings on the articles of the charge, it is submitted, that it is wholly illegal and the order is void.
11.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submits that if the Disciplinary Authority is not itself the Inquiring Authority (as in our case) and if the Disciplinary Authority disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own finding on such charge.
Regulation 7(3) comes into play only when Regulation 7(2) is applicable, i.e. if the Disciplinary Authority is not the inquiring Authority and if it disagrees with the findings on the inquiring authority, it has to record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own findings on the said charge.
Then only under Regulation 7(3), the Disciplinary Authority, having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge shall make an order imposing such penalty.
12.
On the language of the Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulation' I am inclined to accept the contention advanced on behalf of the respondent.
The scheme of Regulation 7 indicates that if the Disciplinary Authority is not itself the Inquiring Authority and if the Inquiring Authority submits its report to the Disciplinary Authority, then the Disciplinary Authority only when it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority, shall record such reasons for such disagreement and record such findings on charge or charges.
When the Disciplinary Authority is disagreeing with the inquiring authority on any article of charge, then under Regulation 7(3), the Disciplinary Authority, having regard to its findings given on its disagreements with the Inquiring Authority, shall make an order imposing such penalty.
Therefore, in my opinion, Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulations' applies only in a case where the Disciplinary Authority disagrees with the findings of the Inquiring Authority.
In a case where it agrees with the findings of the Inquiring Authority, it is not necessary to give elaborate reasons or give findings on each charge.
13.
Similar point arose in Union of India v. K Rajappa, AIR 1970 SC 748.
In the said case, the respondent, who was working as an Assistant Station Master at Chalakudy Railway Station was chargesheeted.
An Inquiry Officer was appointed by the Disciplinary Authority and he submitted a report to the effect that all the four charges were proved against the respondent.
A show cause notice was issued to the delinquent Officer and ultimately an order was passed by the Disciplinary Authority tentatively imposing a penalty of dismissal from service and called upon the delinquent officer to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
After the explanation was submitted by the respondent to the said show-cause notice, the Disciplinary Authority dismissed the respondent from service.
The relevant order is as follows:  "The employee, in his reply dated 381963 to this charge-sheet, has not accepted the charges contained in the same.
An enquiry, therefore, was arranged.
It was held by the Assistant Commercial Superintendent of Olavakkot from 22863 to 2981963.
I have seen the enquiry proceedings I find that the procedure has been followed correctly, that the accused has been given every reasonable opportunity for his defence and I agree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer that all the charges mentioned in the chargesheet have been established.
Since these are serious charges, it is tentatively decided to impose the penalty of dismissal from service on Shri K Rajappa Menon, Assistant Master Chalakkudi.
He should, therefore, be asked to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service accordingly."
14.
Similar contention was raised before the Supreme Court, viz. that Rule 1713 of the Railway Employees Conduct and Disciplinary Rules provides that if the Disciplinary Authority is not the Enquiring Authority, it shall consider the record of the enquiry and record its findings on each charge.
The said argument was accepted by the High Court to the effect that the impugned order did not comply with the aforesaid rule because findings relating to each charge were not given after a proper discussion and analysis of the evidence produced at the departmental enquiry.
The learned Judges of the Supreme Court rejected the contention and held that Rule 1713 of the Railway Service Conduct and Disciplinary Rules does not lay down any particular form or manner is which the disciplinary authority should record its findings on each charge.
All that the Rule requires is that the record of the enquiry should be considered and the disciplinary authority should proceed to give its findings on each charge.
The learned Judges held as follows:  "This does not and cannot mean that it is obligatory on the disciplinary authority to discuss the evidence and the facts and circumstances established at the departmental enquiry in detail and write as if it were an order or a judgment of a judicial tribunal.............
It was further held :  "When he agreed with the findings of the Enquiry Officer that all the charges mentioned in the charge-sheet had been established, it meant that he was affirming the findings on each charge and that would certainly fulfill the requirement of the Rule.
The Rule after all has to be read not in a pedantic manner but in a practical and reasonable way."
So holding, the learned Judges allowed the appeal.
Rule 1713 of the Railway Service Conduct and Disciplinary Rules is similar to Regulation 7 of 'the Regulations' and the order considered in the Supreme Court case is also similar to the order of the Disciplinary Authority in our case in material particulars.
Therefore, in my opinion, that Regulation 7 of 'the Regulations' does not require the disciplinary authority to give reasons and findings on each charge when it is agreeing with the findings of the inquiring authority.
15.
To a similar effect is the Judgment of the Supreme Court in Tara Chand v. Delhi Municipality, AIR 1977 SC 567.
In the said case, Regulation 8(9) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Services (Control and Appeal) Regulations fell for consideration which is as follows :  'Regulation 8...........  (9) The Disciplinary Authority, shall, if it is not the Enquiring Authority, consider the record of inquiry and record its findings on each charge.
(10) If the Disciplinary Authority, having regard to its findings on the charges, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in regulation 6 should be imposed, it shall : (a) furnish to the municipal officer or other municipal employee a copy of the report of the Enquiring Authority and, where the Disciplinary Authority is not the Enquiring Authority, a statement of its findings together with brief reasons for disagreement, if any, with the findings of the Enquiring Authority, and (b) give him a notice stating the action proposed to be taken in regard to him and calling upon him to submit within a specified time such representation as he may wish to make against the proposed action.
The said Regulation is similar to the Regulation 7 of 'the Regulations' in the present case.
Similar contention was also advanced in the said case referred to supra (2).
Repelling the said contention, the learned Judges stated that when the disciplinary authority clearly says that it agrees with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, that means that the disciplinary authority held the charge drawn up as proved.
The learned Judges stated in para 19 of the said Judgment that it may be necessary for a disciplinary or administrative authority exercising quasi-judicial functions to state the reasons in support of its order if it differs from the conclusions arrived at and the recommendations made by the inquiring officer.
However, it would be laying down the proposition a little too broadly to say that even an order of concurrence must be supported by reasons.
16.
The two decisions of the Supreme Court referred to above, in my opinion, clearly support the contention advanced on behalf of the respondents.
In view of the above, I hold that Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulations' refers to a situation where the disciplinary authority disagrees with the findings of the Inquiring Authority in which case only, he has to give reasons and record findings.
If the disciplinary authority disagrees with the findings of the Enquiring Officer, he has to record reasons and give findings on each charge.
When the disciplinary authority says that it is agreeing with the findings of the inquiring officer, it is sufficient compliance of the regulation mentioned above.
The regulation cannot be read in a pedantic way.
Therefore, the first contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner cannot stand.
17.
The second contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner is also not sustainable.
Even assuming for a minute that the disciplinary authority's (3rd respondent) order does not comply with the Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulations', when the same is confirmed in appeal by the second respondent giving elaborate reasons and findings, it is only the order of the appellate authority that can be questioned and not the order of the disciplinary authority.
In other words, when once the order of the disciplinary authority is confirmed by the appellant authority (R-2), it gets merged in the order of the Appellate Authority and thereafter, it is only the order of the Appellant Authority that can be questioned and not the order of the disciplinary authority (3rd respondent).
In view of the above, it is contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that when once the order of the disciplinary authority, even assuming that it is illegal, is confirmed in appeal by the appellate authority, it gets merged in the order of the appellate authority and it is not longer open to the petitioner to question the order of the primary authority.
In support of the said contention, the learned counsel for the respondent relied upon a decision in Somanath v. State of Orissa, 1951 (2) SLR 550.
In the said Judgement, the learned Judges assumed that the order of the disciplinary authority was illegal because no enquiry into the alleged misconduct was made before making that order.
But there was an appeal, as in our case, to the appellant authority.
The appellate authority dismissed the appeal.
The learned judges on the above facts and circumstances held as follows :  'In those circumstances we are of the opinion that the order of respondent No. 4 dated the 11th March, 1960 has merged in the appellate order of the State Government dated the 2nd January, 1962 and it is the appellate decision along which subsists and is operative in law and is capable of enforcement.
In other words, the original decision of respondent No. 4 dated the 11th March, 1960 no longer subsists for it has merged in the appellate decision of the State Government and unless the appellant is able to establish that the appellate decision of the State Government is defective in law, the appellant will not be entitled to the grant of any relief.'
The learned judges stated that it was not shown by the appellant in that case that the appellate order of the State Government was defective in law and in that view of the matter, the learned judges dismissed the appeal.
This Judgment of the Supreme Court fully supports the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents.
In the present case, even assuming that the order of the third respondent is bad in law and not in conformity with Regulation 7(3) of 'the Regulations', even then it got merged in the order of the appellate authority-second respondent.
When once the order of the third respondent got merged in the order of the second respondent, it is only the order of the second respondent that has to be challenged and the order of the third respondent does not subsist after the merger.
Therefore, even if the disciplinary authority's order is illegal, when it gets merged in the appellate order, the order of the appellate authority alone has to be attacked.
In the present case also, it is not contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of the appellate authority-second respondent is defective in law.
The learned counsel for the respondents also relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in SS Rathore v. State of MP, AIR 1990 SC 10, for the proposition that the order of the primary authority will get merged in the appellate authority's order in the case of reversal, modification as well as confirmation.
Therefore whether the appellate authority reverses, modifies or confirms the order of the primary authority gets merged in teh appellate authority's order.
In view of the above, I am of the opinion that the order of the Third respondent herein dasted 1941986 got merged in the order of the second respondent-appellate authority when the appeal was dismissed.
The third respondent's order dated 1941986 does not subsist any longer.
It is only the appellate authority's order that has to be questioned.
Therefore, the contention that the primary authority's order is illegal and the illegality continues despite the fact that the order is confirmed by the appellate authority is unsustainable.
18.
The last and final contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is that neither the order of the disciplinary authority nor the order of the appellate authority is supported by any evidence on record and that it is a case of no evidence and therefore, it is liable to be quashed.
The learned counsel elaborated his argument stating that in so far as the second charge is concerned, eight complainants were referred in the enquiry Officer's report.
Their statements were recorded by the enquiry officer behind the back of the petitioner and the same was relied upon which is wholly unsustainable and is opposed to principles of natural justice.
If the said statements are excluded, there is no evidence on record to support the findings.
This contention is also without substance.
In the enquiry report it was stated that one Talari Koteswararo was examined as M.W.
11.
The statements of the other complainants were not taken into consideration by the enquiry authority.
He relied upon the documentary evidence as well as the evidence of M.Ws.
2 and 11 in so far as the charge No. II is concerned.
Same is the case with the appellate authority.
Therefore, the contention raised on this aspect cannot be accepted.
Further, the other chargers are also quite serious viz., granting loans and advances indiscriminately contrary to the rules and procedures and then granting crop loans to two fictitious persons based on fictitious documents etc. All the charges are held proved except items 5, 7 and 8 of Charge No. II by the enquiry officer as well as the appellate authority (second respondent).
The third respondent agreed with the findings of the inquiring authority.
Therefore, it is not a case where the orders of the third and second respondents are passed on no evidence.
There is evidence on record which was taken into consideration by the inquiring authority as well as the appellate authority.
In fact the petitioner admitted that he had exceeded the over-all limit for allowing temporary overdraft in SB Accounts and also admitted having granted higher amount to Krishna Merchants and granted loans without any powers at the relevant time to grant such loans and also admitted that the documents were not properly taken before the loans were disbursed.
Therefore, in my opinion, the report of the inquiring authority which is accepted by the disciplinary authority as well as the order of the appellate authority second respondent are based on evidence on record.
19.
It is not for this Court exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to re-appraise the evidence.
When once the orders are based on some evidence on record, this Court has no jurisdiction to interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It is fairly well settled that if the order is based on some evidence, the High Court cannot interfere exercising the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India (Vide: Nand Kishore v. State of Bihar, 1978(1) SLR 46).
The learned counsel for the respondent also relied upon the decision in D Suryanarayana Rao v. State of AP 1973(2) SLR 24, for the proportion that even if one of the charges is not proved and the finding recorded thereon was found to be bad, still the High Court cannot interfere if the punishment can be sustained on other charges.
The learned counsel submits that in view of the fact that the other charges are also held proved and since the same is not being challenged, the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service can be sustained with reference to those charges even assuming for a minute that Charge No. II is not proved.
In my opinion Charge No. II is also proved except items 5, 7 and 8.
Even otherwise, the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service can be sustained with reference to the other charges.
20.
The petitioner is in a managerial post in a nationalised bank dealing with public funds.
It is found during the domestic enquiry and also in the appellate order that the petitioner granted several loans and advances indiscriminately contrary to rules and demanded and accepted illegal gratitious documents and indulged in the other irregularities.
I am in agreement with the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that he does not deserve to be in a managerial post which is a highly responsible one.
21.
For all the above reasons, the writ petition is dismissed, but in the circumstances without costs.
Petition dismissed.