AL Bahri, J (Oral) - This revision petition had been filed by the defendant-Bank of Baroda against order dated February 10, 1988, passed by Sub Judge I Class, Chandigarh, dismissing the review application.
2.
Captain RK Bhardwaj was employed by Bank of Baroda.
Earlier he had served in the Army.
His pay was fixed taking into consideration his military service.
Subsequently, the order of fixing pay was modified and benefit of service was reduced.
This order was challenged by him in a writ petition which was dismissed with the observation that since disputed questions of fact were involved he could challenge the said order in the Civil Court.
Ultimately, he challenged the same by filing a civil suit.
After trial the suit was finally disposed of on September 16, 1986.
The impugned order dated December 21, 1982 was held to be bad in one respect that instead of allowing nine increments taking into consideration increments.
Declaration was thus granted accordingly to that extent otherwise the impugned order was held to be valid.
The review application was filed on November 10, 1986 which was dismissed as stated above.
It was held that the review application was filed beyond 30 days and on merits also the same had no merit.
3.
Shri JS Shahpuri, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has argued that excluding the time spent in obtaining certified copy of the order under review, the application for review was within time.
On persual of the file it was pointed out that such certified copy of the judgment under review was filed subsequently i.e. in February, 1988 and not along with the review application.
On that score learned counsel for the respondent-plaintiff argued that this copy of the judgment should not have been taken into consideration under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Such a copy, if benefit of time was to be taken, was required to be filed along with the review application.
In support of this contention reliance was placed on the decision of the Calcutta High Court in Additional Collector of Customs, Calcutta and another v. M/s Best and Co, AIR 1966 Calcutta 398.
The other decision relied upon is of this Court in Hardhan Singh v. Mangal and others, 1980 PLR 130.
The view expressed by the Calcutta High Court cannot be followed as the Lahore High Court in Jowand Singh v. Ala Singh, AIR 1938 Lahore 295 has taken a contrary and liberal view.
The practice in the Lahore High Court to which this Court is a successor in that sense, has been that certified copy of the judgment was not required if review application was filed in the Court decreeing the suit.
Furthermore, the provisions enumerated in the code of Civil Procedure are meant for administrating substantial justice and are not to be considered as hurdles in that way.
When factually certified copy of the judgment sought to be reviewed was obtained by the Petitioner well within the period of limitation, even though the said copy was not filed along with the review application but was not filed later on, the period spent for obtaining the certified copy could be taken into consideration while computing the limitation.
From the certified copy of the judgment it is noticed that application for obtaining the certified copy was filed on September 22, 1986 and the copy was prepared on October 22, 1986.
As already stated above, the Civil Court decided the suit on September 16, 1986 and after excluding the time spent in obtaining the certified copy the application for review was well within time.
The ratio of the decision in Jowand Singh's case (supra) is not applicable as in that case application for certified copy of the judgment was made after expiry of the period of limitation prescribed for the appeal.
4.
On merits it has been argued by Shri JS Shahpuri, Advocate, that the judgment passed by the Civil Court was erroneous and such error was apparent on its face.
According to him there was no issue framed regarding the period of service of the plaintiff rendered in the Army and at the time of final judgment this question could not be taken into consideration.
There is no force in this contention.
Reading of the plaint categorically shows that the plaintiff Shri Bhardwaj had pleaded his more than 10 years service in the Army and this para was not denied in the written statement.
On admitted or not denied facts issues were not required to be framed.
Issues are only framed on disputed questions of fact.
On going through the judgment under review it has been noticed that decision was based on a certificate produced by the plaintiff regarding the period of his army service while coming to the conclusion that the service was for more than 10 years and that the plaintiff was entitled to 10 increments and not nine as was given in the impugned order.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show that this decision of the Court was erroneous or contrary to any rule of service which governed the service conditions of the plaintiff.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in the revision petition the same is dismissed with costs.
Revision dismissed.