RL Anand, J - Bhoop Singh son of Sher Singh, petitioner has filed the present writ petition against the official respondents Nos. 1 to 3 and private respondent No. 4 Sukhbir Singh and it has been prayed that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued against the respondents and the termination order dated 22.5.1999 (Annexure P-10) issued be respondent No. 2 which has been conveyed to the petitioner on 2551999, be quashed and further it may be declared that order dated 1641998 (Annexure P-3) passed by the High Court has no meaning so far as the petitioner is concerned.
It was further prayed by the petitioner that a writ of mandamus be also issued against respondents No. 1 to 3 to allow the petitioner to work as Naib-Tehsildar by treating as if no termination order was ever passed by respondent No. 2 against the petitioner.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter called the Commission) issued an advertisement dated 2291993 and six posts of Naib-Tehsildars were advertised for Ambala Division.
Out of six posts of Naib-Tehsildars two posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes and four posts were reserved for Ex-servicemen.
The petitioner being eligible applied for the said post against the category of Ex-Servicemen.
He was selected.
His name appeared in the selection list dated 1151994 at Sr. No. 5 in the category of Ex-Servicemen.
After his Selection the petitioner was working against the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
His work and conduct was satisfactory.
No adverse remarks were ever conveyed to him.
However, respondent No. 4 Sukhbir Singh filed C.W.P.
No. 729 of 1996 praying for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the official respondents to appoint him as Naib-Tehsildar against the reserved vacancy meant for Ex-Servicemen as per the policy instructions of the State Government under which the dependents of service personnels killed in action are to be given preference for appointment to the State Service over the other Ex-Servicemen.
The plea of respondent No. 4 was allowed vide judgment dated 1641998 passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench and directions were issued that within one month of the submission of the certified copy of the order, the Commission would consider the case of respondent No. 4 for selection as Naib- Tehsildar in the preferential category II of the dependents of Ex-Servicemen and deicde whether or not he deserves to be recommended for appointment as Naib-Tehsildar.
It was also mentioned in the order dated 1641998 that if the Commission recommends the name of respondent No. 4 for appointment as Naib-Tehsildar and it becomes necessary to dispense with the service of a less meritorious person then appropriate action would be taken by giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the person likely to be affected adversely.
As per the directions issued by the High Court in the above said writ petition the respondent No. 3 considered the claim of respondent No. 4 and found him ineligible for being considered as dependent of Ex-Serviceman for the post of Naib-Tehsildar vide order dated 1781998.
It was mentioned by respondent No. 3 that respondent No. 4 is not eligible for the post of Naib-Tehsildar on the ground of being a son of Army personnel killed in action as the priority category II under which the respondent No. 4 claimed the benefit of reservation of dependent of Ex-Serviceman personnel killed/disabled beyond 50% and the respondent No. 4 merely being a son of Ex-Serviceman killed in action does not entitle a person to any priority in selection.
Respondent No. 4 has agricultural land.
He inherited 13 kanals 10 marlas of land.
He had annual income of Rs. 3,000/- in the year 1992-93.
He was not dependent upon his father, therefore, he was not eligible to be considered in the priority Category No. II of the Haryana Govt. letter dated 631972.
Thereafter, respondent No. 4 filed a contempt petition bearing No. 1082 of 1998 which was disposed of by the High Court on 7.5.1999 on the ground that the order dated 1781998 has been revoked by the Commission vide order dated 551999.
The petitioner alleges that he was surprised to know that the order dated 1781998 has been revoked by the Commission vide order dated 551999 at his back.
Thereafter, respondent No. 3 wrote a letter to respondent No. 2 wherein the name of respondent No. 4 was recommended for appointment on the post of Naib-Tehsildar in Ambala Division, as a result of which the name of the petitioner was excluded from main list.
The petitioner also alleges that in C.W.P.
No. 729 of 1996 he was not a party nor he was a party to the contempt petition.
He was served with a show cause noticed dated 1851999.
He gave reply and in spite of the satisfactory reply his name was removed from the list of Naib-Tehsildars and respondent No. 4 was appointed when he was not eligible.
Consequently, the services of the petitioner were terminated.
On these basis the petitioner has challenged the termination order dated 22.5.1999 and made a prayer as stated in the earlier portion of this judgment.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Three sets of written statement were filed.
The stand of respondents No. 1 and 2 is that the Commission revoked the order dated 551999.
The impugned order was passed after considering the reply of the petitioner and the services of the petitioner were terminated in compliance of the order of the High Court.
With the inclusion of the name of respondent No. 4, the name of the petitioner had to be exclude from the main list as there was no vacancy for Ex-Servicemen quota.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were rightly terminated.
Respondent No. 3 filed a separate written statement and it was submitted that earlier the Commission passed an erroneous order dated 1781998 and as such the same was revoked by passing the order dated 551999.
Respondent No. 4 also filed a separate written statement and his case is that the petitioner has no concern with the preferential category No. II of the instructions dated 631972 against the answering respondent who has been rightly considered and appointed.
According to the instructions, if the name of first two categories are available then candidates of category No. III (Ex-Servicemen, who retired from Army and are still getting pension) will be called to fill that post.
In the present case the candidates of preferential category No. II (dependents of service personnel who killed in war/disabled beyond 50%) were available like answering respondent.
In these circumstances, the petitioner was never eligible because he falls within category No. III.
There was an error on the part of respondents No. 1 to 3 while considering the case of the petitioner for the post of Naib-tehsildar.
The son/dependent of Ex-servicemen, who were killed in action, is eligible.
This fact was also cleared by Zila Sainik Board, Bhiwani vide letter dated 26101998.
The said letter was submitted to respondent No. 3, who had initially passed a wrong order by illegally rejecting the case of respondent No. 4.
The respondent No. 3 had wrongly and improperly interpreted the circular dated 631972 in the light of instructions dated 21.11.1980 which are applicable to the dependents of Ex- Servicemen.
The instructions relied upon by the petitioner are not applicable to the facts and, therefore, the order dated 1781998 was passed in an illegal manner and it could not be sustained in the eyes of law.
The two brothers of answering respondent had already taken the benefit of dependent of Ex-servicemen as per the instructions dated 631972.
In short, the case set up by respondent No. 4 is that he had a preferential claim than that of the petitioner and, therefore, he was eligible for the post and had superior claim than that of the petitioner.
4.
I have heard Mrs. Daya Chaudhary, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Vijay Dahiya, AAG, Haryana on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, Mr. RS Kundu, Advocate on behalf of the respondent No. 4 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the order of the Hon'ble Division Bench Annexure P-3 has been wrongly interpreted by respondents Nos. 1 to 3.
It was not the intention or desire of the Division Bench to straightaway give a finding in favour of respondent No. 4 calling upon respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to appoint his against the post of Naib-Tehsildar.
The only finding given by the Hon'ble Division Bench was to consider the name of respondent No. 4 for appointment subject to his eligibility.
The said directions of the High Court were taken note of and at one stage the Chairman of the Commission passed an order rejecting the claim of respondent No. 4.
Later on employment was given to respondent No. 4 under the threat of contempt.
The petitioner was never a party to the writ petition or contempt petition.
The claim of the petitioner was always superior as respondent No. 4 was never a dependent.
He had agricultural income and in this view of the matter his claim was rightly rejected by the Chairman of the Commission.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondents Nos. 1 to 3 submits that earlier the appointment of the petitioner was against the rules and that was even so adjudicated by the Division Bench though the petitioner was not a party to that writ petition.
The directions were given to the Commission to reconsider the matter.
The matter was wrongly reconsidered.
Respondent No. 4 filed a contempt petition and, thereafter the Commission realised the mistake and passed the impugned order after adopting the principles of natural justice.
Respondent No. 4 was a dependent.
He comes under category No. II, while the petitioner falls under category No. III and category No. II has to be preferred to category No. III.
Even if the petitioner had some income from the agricultural land, it does not mean that he could not be the dependent upon his father.
He might have contributed his resources in the common pool in order to supplement the income of the family.
Mere small earning of respondent No. 4 does not mean that he was independent and was not depending upon his father.
7.
I have considered the rival contentions of the parties and am of the considered opinion that this writ petition is totally devoid of any merit.
First of all, let me make a mention with regard to the judgment dated 1641998 passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench.
The case set up by respondent No. 4 in C.W.P.
No. 729 of 1996 was that he should be considered and appointed against the post of Naib-Tehsildar against the reserved vacancy meant for Ex- Servicemen as per policy instructions of the State Government under which the dependents of service personnel killed in action are to be given preference for appointments to the State service over the other Ex-servicemen.
The point was examined by the Division Bench in the light of the instructions of the State Government and it was observed by the Bench that up to 2 dependents of the service personnel killed/disabled beyond 50% will get a preferential right over the other Ex-Servicemen.
Accepting the contention of respondent No. 4 that he falls in category No. II, the writ was allowed by giving the following directions :-  "(1) Within one month of the submission of certified copy of this order by the petitioner, the respondent-Board shall consider his case for selection as Naib Tehsildar in the preferential category (II) of the dependents of Ex- Servicemen and decide whether or not the petitioner deserves to be recommended for appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
While doing so, the Board shall keep in view the following decisions of this Court :- (i) CWP No. 13309 of 1995, Rajpal Singh v. State of Haryana & others, decided on 5121996.
(ii) CWP No. 6325 of 1996, Naresh Chander and another v. State of Haryana and others decided on 2341997.
(2) If the Board recommends the name of the petitioner for appointment, the respondent No. 2 shall issue appropriate order appointing the petitioner within one month of the receipt of the recommendations from the Board and if for giving appointment to the petitioner, it becomes necessary to dispense with the service of a less meritorious person then appropriate action be taken by giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the person likely to be affected adversely."
In pursuance of these directions of the Hon'ble Division Bench dated 1641998, an order was passed on 1781998 by the Chairman of the Commission and the case of respondent No. 4 was rejected.
But he was not satisfied with this order.
He filed C.O.C.P.
No. 1082 of 1998 and during those proceedings the order dated 551999 was shown to the Court as a result of which the contempt proceedings were dropped on 7.5.1999.
The order dated 551999 clearly spells out that respondent No. 4 falls in preferential category No. II than that of Ex-Service which is category No. III.
Resultantly, the order of appointment of the petitioner was invoked and this order was passed after complying with the principles of natural justice.
8.
Now let us examine how respondent No. 4 stands on better footing than that of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4 is there son of a person who has lost his life in the Army action.
The instruction dated 631972 run as follows :-  "(a) Reservation.
The existing reservation in respect of civil posts for ex-servicemen should be utilized in the manner given below :- (i) disabled ex-servicemen with disability between 20% to 50%.
(ii) upto two dependents of service personnel killed/disabled beyond 50%.
(iii) other ex-servicemen.
Note : Disabled ex-servicemen will mean ex-servicemen who while serving in the Armed Forces of the Union, were disabled in operations against the enemy in disturbed areas.
Note : The dependents will include besides wife/widow dependent sons/daughters."
The reading of the above would show that the Government had framed three categories.
First preference has been given to those Ex-Servicemen who themselves became disabled and their disability was assessed between 20% to 50%.
The second preference has been given up to two dependents of service personnel killed/disabled beyond 50%.
The third preference has been given to other Ex-Servicemen, meaning thereby those Ex-Servicemen who were not injured or became disabled like the petitioner.
9.
Now the grouse of the petitioner is that respondent No. 4 is not dependent as he has agricultural land and, therefore, he does not fall within the definition of dependent.
In this view of the matter, his case was rightly rejected by the Commission at one point of time.
I do not subscribe to the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
While earning, a person can still be dependent upon his father.
A male issue may have some income from his personal property and he might have contributed that income in the general pool in order to supplement the income of the family, but nevertheless he will be considered as dependent, if he actually takes benefit from the income of his father.
In this view of the matter, I hold that respondent No. 4 falls within category No. II, whereas the category of the petitioner is No. III.
10.
Faced with this difficulty the learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to the order dated 551998 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 1999(2) SCT 298 (SC) : Civil Appeal No. 1701 of 1993, titled Haryana Public Service Commission v. Harinder Singh & Anr.
In my opinion, this order is not applicable to the facts in hand in view of the clear-cut policy of the Haryana Govt. with regard to the Ex-Servicemen.
The relevant portion of the policy has already been reproduced above in this judgment.
11.
I may also make a mention that the order terminating the services of the petitioner has been passed after adopting the principles of natural justice and to that extent the learned counsel for the petitioner has not raised any submission.
Resultantly, I dismiss this writ petition no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.