GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who was a candidate for recruitment as Constable in Haryana Police, has filed this petition with the prayer that Rule 1216(16) of the Punjab Police (Haryana Amendment) Rules, 1998 (hereinafter referred to as the amended Rules) be declared unconstitutional and further that the selection made by the respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 be quashed.
2.
Although, the notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent Nos. 1 to 4 only, the respondent Nos. 5 and 6 have joined them in filing the written statement dated 2491998.
During the course of hearing, an additional affidavit of Shri AS Chawla, the then Superintendent of Police, Jhajjar was filed on 26101998.
The record of selection consisting of the following files was produced by the learned Deputy Advocate General :-  (i) Registers prepared by the selection committee on the basis of evaluation of the performance of the candidates in the physical efficiency test and viva voce.
(ii) File containing list of candidates who appeared for interview and who were awarded marks by the selection committee.
(iii) File containing instructions for recruitment of Constables.
(iv) File containing correspondence regarding measurement of the chest and height of the candidates.
(v) File containing the list of candidates with their signatures in token of appearance in the test.
(vi) File containing the roll numbers of the candidates who were declared eligible for physical efficiency test; and (vii) File containing the roll numbers of the candidates who were found eligible to be called for viva voce.
3.
Under the directions of the Court, original registers were shown by the learned Deputy Advocate General to the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
Now we shall briefly notice the facts relevant to the decision of issues raised in the writ petition.
The petitioner and others applied for recruitment as Constables in District Jhajjar in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the competent authority for recruitment of 100 Constables.
He appeared in the physical efficiency test held in the first week of July 1998 and on being declared successful in the said test, he was called for viva voce.
Likewise, other candidates who cleared the physical efficiency test were also called for viva voce.
The result of selection was notified by the respondent No. 3 who headed the three-member Selection Board.
Since the petitioner's name does not figure in that list, he has sought the Court's intervention for quashing the entire selection on the following grounds :-  (a) Rule 1216(6) under which 15 marks are allocated for interview out of total 35 marks is ultra vires to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India; (b) the decision of the Selection Board to interview candidates to the extent of nine times the vacancies is wholly arbitrary and capricious and contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court; (c) the recommendation made by the Selection Board is vitiated by arbitrariness and interplay of extraneous considerations; (d) the selection is also vitiated because merit has been sacrificed in order to accommodate favoured candidates.
5.
The official respondents have opposed the prayer made by the petitioner by contending that the impugned selection has been made solely on the basis of merit and no extraneous factor has influenced the recommendations of the Selection Board.
The allegations of mala fides levelled by the petitioner have been denied by the respondents.
They have also averred that every candidate was assessed keeping in view his performance in the physical efficiency test and viva voce and the petitioner cannot, after having taken part in the process of selection, complain against the recommendations made by the Board.
In order to justify the prescription of 15 marks out of total 35 marks, the respondents have made the following statement in para 10 of the written statement :-  "It is admitted that 20 marks are meant for physical efficiency test and 15 marks for viva voce tests.
So far as the percentage shown as 42% for viva voce test is concerned, it is justified in case of selection of constables because for the post of constable the minimum standard of qualification is matriculation and the percentage kept for physical efficiency test can be obtained by large number of candidates equally because this standard in rural area can be achieved easily when the vacancies are open throughout the State.
It is pertinent to mention that for the selection of constable it is not only the physical performance but it includes the aptitude, mental ability and other psychological factors for the suitability of the police job offered to the candidate according to his duties and only after considering these facts the amendments in PPR was made in 1998 and 15 marks were laid down for interview on the ground of above mentioned reasons.
The job requirement of a constable requires that he should not only be physically fit but also well behaved, mentally alert having positive outlook, right attitude, balanced temperament and aptitude for the job which is arduous and of demanding nature.
Since the police duties are entirely different from other departments hence the marks for interview laid down in other service rules/instructions for civil department cannot be compared with the marks for interview prescribed for the police.
Hence, the stand taken by the petitioner in this para is untenable in the eyes of law.
The rules framed by the Govt. are not violative of the Constitution of India as the same have been enacted so that the candidates of high calibre be selected for appointment in the Police Department in view of the multifariousness of duties in the department.
This is need of the hour, that the best possible available candidates should be selected for appointment in the Police Department for providing best services to the society."
The respondents have also denied the allegation that candidates bearing registration Nos. 1059, 420, 4453 and 2138 were selected despite lack of physical fitness.
6.
Shri Rameshwar Malik urged that Rule 1216(16) be struck down on the ground of excessive allocation of marks for viva vice.
He submitted that allocation of 42% marks for interview alone is contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 454, Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 647 (SC) : 1991(3) RSJ 569 : and Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardy and others, 1950-1988(2) RSJ 257 : AIR 1981 SC 487 and, therefore, the impugned rule should be declared unconstitutional.
Learned counsel further submitted that by fixing very high percentage of marks for viva voce, the entire selection has been made dependent on the assessment of the performance of the candidates in the viva voce and, therefore, the impugned rule should be declared unreasonable, arbitrary and violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He then argued that the Selection Board has acted in a most arbitrary manner while assessing the performance of the candidates who appeared in the viva voce test and those who did not perform well in the physical efficiency test have been selected leaving out more meritorious candidates like the petitioner who secured 20 marks out of 20 in the physical efficiency test.
He also pointed out that the candidates bearing registration Nos. 3451, 3245, 3153 and 3213 have been selected even though they did not clear the physical efficiency test.
7.
The learned Deputy Advocate General made a statement that none of the candidates who failed in the physical efficiency test was interviewed by the Selection Board or recommended for appointment.
He also stated that 28 out of the candidates finally recommended by the Selection Board secured 20 marks in the physical efficiency test and the remaining selected candidates secured 18 marks and that no candidate who secured less than 18 marks has been recommended for appointment.
Shri Goyal argued that the allocation of 42% marks for viva voce does not violate the constitutional provisions relating to equality because the selection has not only been made on the basis of written test and viva voce but also on the basis of assessment of the physical efficiency of the candidates.
Learned Deputy Advocate General also submitted that the Selection Board had interviewed the candidates keeping in view their general awareness, mental alertness and suitability for police job.
He invited our attention to the averments made in paragraph 4 of the affidavit of Shri AS Chawla and submitted that every care was taken to make impartial assessment of the candidates in the viva voce and with this object the marks secured by the candidate in the physical efficiency test were kept secret and were not made known to the members of the Selection Board.
He placed relevant registers before the Court to show that the allegations made qua the candidates bearing registration Nos. 3451, 3245, 3153 and 3212 are factually incorrect.
8.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective contentions.
9.
Vide notification No. GSR 62/Const./Art.309/98 dated July 17, 1998, the Governor of Haryana, in exercise of his powers under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution read with Sections 2 and 7 of the Police Act, 1861, amended Rule 1214 to 1218 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 in their application to the State of Haryana.
The amended Rules 1215, 1216(1), (2), (5), (6), (8), (9), (10), (11), (13), (14), (15), (16), (17), (19), (23) read as under :-  "12.15 Age, physical standards and academic qualifications :- (1) No person shall be appointed to the post of constable by direct recruitment who is less than 18 years or more than 27 years of age at the time of enrolment : Provided that for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Class categories relaxation of upper age limit of five years shall be given.
(2) The candidate for recruitment as a constable shall have a minimum height of 5'-7" and normal chest measurement of 33" with expansion of 15 inches: Provided that for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes categories relaxation in physical standards to the extent of one inch in height and one inch in chest measurement shall be given.
(3) The minimum educational qualification for a candidate to be eligible for selection as a constable shall be matriculation.
However, for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes categories the minimum educational qualification shall be 8th class pass.
1216.
Procedure for recruitment :-  (a) All vacancies in the rank of constables shall be filled up by direct recruitment.
(2) Selection of candidates for recruitment as constables shall be made after giving wide publicity through Employment Exchange and through Hindi, English and Punjabi newspapers having circulation in Haryana and adjoining areas.
xx xx xx xx (5) Selection of candidates for recruitment as constables shall be done by a Selection Board.
(6) The physical standards as already laid down from time to time subject to the relaxations allowed to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates and to the candidates belonging to the Backward Classes, if any, shall be adhered to strictly while making selection.
xx xx xx xx  (8) Names of all the candidates who come up for selection shall be entered in a register called Recruitment Registration Register and the serial number at which the name of a candidate is entered in the register shall be called the registration number of the candidate to be used during the entire process of recruitment.
The registration number of each candidate shall also be marked on his application form.
Recruitment Registration Register shall be maintained as per Form 1216(A).
(9) Registration shall be followed by scrutiny of application forms as well as attested copies of all testimonials received along with the application forms shall be made with the original certificates and after scrutiny the particulars shall be entered in the Recruitment Registration Register.
All the candidates who do not fulfil the requirements of age, educational qualification of caste (in case of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Class only) shall be asked to leave and a remark regarding their ineligibility shall be entered in relevant column of the Recruitment Registration Register.
(10) After the registration and scrutiny are over, the physical measurements of the candidates shall be taken.
Each candidate shall be got measured by Chairman of the Selection Board in his own presence.
(11) The physical measurements of each candidate shall be entered in another register to be called the Physical Measurements Register to be maintained in Form 1216(B).
The names of the candidates shall be entered in this register as per their registration number and the entries in this register shall include the measurements of the height and chest of the candidate as also an entry about his eligibility for enlistment or otherwise on the basis of the same.
Each such entry shall be duly authenticated by the Chairman and members of Selection Board.
xx xx xx  (13) The candidates found eligible on the basis of physical measurements shall undergo physical efficiency tests which will follow immediately thereafter.
(14) The details of physical efficiency tests which each candidate will have to undergo and the marks which will be awarded shall be as under :  Event Time taken/distance Marks obtained (A) (i) Race of 100 Metre Less than or equal to 135 Seconds.
5 (ii) Race of 100 Metres Less than or equal to Seconds but more than 135 seconds 3 (iii) Race of 100 Metres More than 14.5 Seconds 0 (B) (i) Race of 800 Metres Less than or equal to 2 minutes 30 seconds 5 (ii) Race of 800 Metres 2 minutes 50 seconds or less but more than 2 minutes 30 seconds 3 (iii) Race of 800 Metres More than 2 minutes 50 seconds 0 (C) (i) Long Jump 15 feet or more than 15 feet 5 (ii) Long Jump 13 feet or more than 13 feet but less than 15 feet 3 (iii) Long Jump Less than 13 feet 0 (D) (i) High Jump 4 feet or more than 5 feet 4 (ii) High Jump 3 feet 5 inches or more than that but less than 4 feet 3 (iii) High Jump Less than 3 feet 6 inches 0 (15) The total qualifying mark in the physical efficiency test shall be 9 only and candidates securing a total of less than 9 marks in these test shall be deemed to have failed the physical efficiency tests and will be eliminated.
The achievement/performance of each candidate in the physical efficiency tests shall be entered in another register to be called Physical Efficiency Test Register to be maintained in form 1216(C).
The names of the candidates shall be entered in the physical efficiency test register as per their registration number in an ascending order.
Each name shall also be given a fresh serial number which will be the physical efficiency test serial number for that candidate.
Entries regarding performance of each candidate in the physical efficiency test shall be authenticated by the Chairman and members of the Selection Board by signing on each page.
Register will also show the marks obtained by each candidate in each of the physical efficiency tests and the total thereof.
(16) All the candidates who are declared qualified in the physical efficiency tests shall be interviewed by the Selection Board to judge their suitability for a police job.
The maximum marks for interview/personality test shall be 15 only.
The marks secured in the interview by the candidates shall also be entered in the Physical Efficiency Test Register.
(17) On completion of the interview/personality test all the candidates who had qualified the physical efficiency test and had appeared for the personality test will be arranged as per their inter se merit on the basis of the marks secured by them in the physical efficiency tests and interview.
Separate merit lists shall be prepared for the general candidates, candidates belonging to the Backward Classes, candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and to the Ex-servicemen category.
xx xx xx xx xx  (19) To remove the grievances, if any, of such candidates who had not been selected by the Selection Board and were dissatisfied with its verdict, a Deputy Inspector General of Police so nominated by the Director General of Police shall hear their complaints and take appropriate follow up action.
xx xx xx xx  (23) The registers relating to recruitment process viz., Recruitment Registration Register, Physical Measurements Register, Physical Efficiency Test Register, Complaints Register shall all be permanent registers and the custody of these registers shall be of the unit for which selection had been made by the Selection Board.
The application forms of the candidates shall be preserved for a duration of three years from the date on which the physical efficiency test is completed."
10.
A conjoint reading of the rules reproduced above shows that the selection for appointment to the post of Police Constables is to be made from among the eligible candidates by assessing their performance in physical efficiency test and interview/personality test.
The marks secured by the candidates in the physical efficiency test and interview are to be added for the purpose of determination of their relative merit.
The maximum marks fixed for physical efficiency test are 20 as against 15 maximum marks allocated for interview/personality test.
Though, these rules are silent about the criteria to be adopted for the purpose of judging the performance of the candidates in the interview/personality test, in the context of the service required to be performed by Constables, we find it reasonable to accept the statement made by the official respondents in para 10 of the written statement that the selection of Constables is not made only on the basis of physical performance but their aptitude, mental ability and other psychological factors having bearing on their suitability for the Police job.
11.
We are also of the view that the State is empowered to lay down appropriate criteria for selection for the purpose of recruitment to the various categories of posts in different departments.
The members of the police force constitute a special class.
The degree of involvement of members of the force in activities directly related to the people is much more greater than the members of other civil services.
The common man depends upon the police in a big way for protection of his life, liberty and property.
The police personnel are required to discharge multifarious duties including prevention and investigation of crimes, prosecution of persons accused of various offences, maintenance of law and order.
These and other duties make the job of police extremely important to the society.
Simultaneously, members of the force become extremely vulnerable to pressure from various quarters.
Therefore, we do not find anything inherently wrong in the government's decision to give due weightage and importance to the factors like aptitude for job, mental alertness and balanced temperament while assessing the performance of the candidates for recruitment as Constables.
We are also of the considered opinion that the allocation of 15 marks for assessing the personality of the candidates with reference to the various relevant factors is neither excessive nor arbitrary or capricious warranting declaration that the impugned rule is unconstitutional.
The ratio of the decisions of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra); Mohinder Sain Garg's case (supra) and Ajay Hasia's case (supra) cannot be invoked in a case like the present one for striking down Rule 1216(16).
In Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar and others, 1994(1) SCT 483 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 141 : 1994(1) SCC 150, a two Judges Bench of the Supreme Court reviewed a number of judicial precedents on the subject and held that the principles laid down in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra) etc. cannot be applied to the cases in which the recruitment is made on the basis of viva voce only.
Some of the observations in Anzar Ahmad's case (supra) are extracted below :-  "These observations would indicate that the matter of weight to be attached to interview and the allocation of marks for interview vis-a-vis marks for written examination can arise when written examination as well as viva voce test are both accepted as essential features of proper selection and there also no hard and fast rule regarding the precise weight to be given to the viva voce test as against written examination, can be laid down and the said weight must vary from service to service according to the requirement of the service.
The question of weight to be attached to viva voce would not arise where the selection is to be made on the basis of interview only."
12.
The ratio of the decision in Anzar Ahmad's case (supra) has been applied in Subhash Chander Verma v. State of Bihar, 1995(2) SCT 389 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 904 and Harjinder Singh Sodhi v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(1) SCT 385 (SC) : JT 1996(9) SC 443, in which the allocation of 50% marks for selection for direct recruitment has been upheld.
13.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the allocation of 15 marks for interview/personality test does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or discrimination and Rule 1216(16) cannot be struck down on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
14.
We shall now examine the contention of Shri Malik that the recommendations made by the Selection Board are vitiated due to arbitrary award of marks in the viva voce test.
It is an established proposition that the purpose of interview/personality test is to assess overall intellectual and personal capabilities of the candidate.
That gives an opportunity to the recruiting body to evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness, dependableness, effectiveness in achieving the targets, ability to lead etc. All this necessarily involves application of mind by the members of the selection committee/board.
The possibility of difference in the approach of the members of selecting body, in their assessment of the personality etc. of various candidates, is inherent in the system of selection in which the interviews play important role.
If all the candidates are awarded identical marks in viva voce, then the whole exercise of making an assessment of the personality of the candidate with reference to various relevant factors will be reduced to a farce.
In such a situation, the Court may legitimately draw an inference that the selection has been made without application of mind.
If we scrutinise the record produced by the respondents in the light of what has been said hereinabove, there is little difficulty in holding that the award of different marks to the candidates does not per se suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
The very fact that 28 out of the selected candidates secured 20 marks out of 20 in the physical efficiency test and the remaining selected candidates secured 18 marks in the said test is sufficiently indicative of an objective application of mind by the Selection Board.
No doubt, some candidates like the petitioner have been left out from the list of selected candidates even though they secured 20 out of 20 marks in the physical efficiency test but this, by itself, is not sufficient to record a finding that the selection has been manipulated in favour of the less meritorious candidates due to the influence of extraneous forces.
15.
A careful study of the registers and award-sheets produced by the respondents along with the affidavit of the Chairman of the Selection Board shows that marks were allocated to the candidates as per general awareness of the candidate, response to practical like situation, mental alterness etc. As a matter of fact, the members of the Selection Board were not even aware of the marks secured by the candidates in the physical efficiency test.
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the submission of Shri Malik that the marks have been awarded to the less meritorious candidates with a view to upgrade their merit.
The grain of suspicion, if any, should be deemed to have been removed in view of the uncontroverted affidavit of the Chairman of the Selection Board.
We also do not find any substance in the argument of Shri Malik that excessive number of candidates were called for viva voce test.
The petitioner cannot, after having taken part in the process of selection, be permitted to turn around and challenge the recommendations made by the Selection Board on the ground that an unusually large number of candidates were called for viva voce test.
16.
A sample check of the roll numbers given by Shri Malik is sufficient to belie the apprehension of the learned counsel that some of the candidates, who failed to clear physical efficiency test, have been interviewed and selected.
The record of the case shows that no such candidate was interviewed and selected.
The contention urged by the learned counsel that the selection is vitiated due to mala fides and bias is being mentioned by us only to reject it because the petitioner has failed to place any evidence on record to show that members of the Selection Board acted under the influence of higher authorities or any other person.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.