MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner was working as Octroi Clerk with the Municipal Committee, Palwal, in the State of Haryana.
Having been appointed in the year 1973, he had put in about twelve years' service when he was suspended on 24th March, 1985, because of his involvement in a criminal case.
After trial, the Sessions Judges convicted the petitioner on 17th April, 1985, holding him guilty of murder and sentenced him to imprisonment for life.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the same and the High Court accepted the same on 20th February, 1986, holding that the statements of the prosecution witnesses could not be relied upon and there was no evidence to connect the accused with the crime.
Even though the appeal was allowed by the High Court on 20th February, 1986, and no appeal seems to have been filed before the Supreme Court against acquittal of the accused.
Yet the respondent Municipal Committee has not taken back the petitioner in service.
The representations made by the petitioner from time to time did not yield any result and it is under these circumstances that the petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
2.
Though the writ petition was filed as far back as 1988, yet the Municipal Committee, Palwal, has not filed any return so far.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the record, I find that as a result of acceptance of the appeal by the High Court, it was necessary consequence that the petitioner should have been taken back in service.
The inaction of the respondents in the matter of reinstatement of the petitioner is wholly arbitrary and untenable in law.
4.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and direct respondents Nos. 2 and 3, the Deputy Commissioner, Faridabad, and the Municipal Committee, Palwal to take back the petitioner in service.
Since the appeal of the petitioner had been accepted by this Court on 20th February, 1986, which fact came to the notice of the respondents soon thereafter, there was no reason for not taking back the petitioner in service forthwith.
Therefore, the petitioner shall be entitled to the arrears of his salary admissible to him w.e.f.
20th February, 1986, that is, the date of judgement of the High Court.
The arrears shall be released to the petitioner within three months.
There shall be no order as to costs of this writ petition.
Petition allowed.