JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The YMCA Institute of Engineering, Faridabad, was established in 1969 as a joint venture of the Government of India, Government of Haryana and National Council of YMCAs of India.
In the first instance it offered courses in various disciplines of engineering leading to "Post Diploma Course" of 4 years duration.
The eligibility for the aforesaid course was 10+1 or equivalent qualification.
2.
All the petitioners who possessed Higher Secondary qualification were permitted admission to the aforesaid course by the YMCA Institute of Engineering, Faridabad.
The petitioners successfully qualified the said course on the expiry of 4 years and were duly awarded a "Post Diploma Course" certificate.
3.
In the year 1996, the nomenclature of "Post Diploma Course" was changed to "Advance Diploma Course" and after the change of the said nomenclature, candidates who had 10+2 or equivalent qualification only were considered eligible.
The course continued to be of a duration of 4 years.
It is not a matter of dispute between the parties that the course content leading to the "Post Diploma Course" certificate and the "Advance Diploma Course" certificate was identical.
4.
Despite the fact that those admitted to the course undertook educational training for a period of 4 years, they were merely granted a Diploma Course certificate.
Since the course content leading to the award of the Diploma Course certificate was not substantially different from the course content leading to the award of a Degree in engineering, various writ petitions came to be filed before the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, wherein the prayer of the candidates who had successfully obtained Diploma Course certificates was that a "Bridge Course" should be made available to them so as to upgrade their educational qualification from Diploma Course certificate to Degree in engineering.
In the first instance, CWP No. 7364 of 1999 was filed by the petitioners who had earlier acquired "Advance Diploma Course" certificate.
The said writ petition was allowed which resulted in the grant of admission to the petitioners therein to the "Bridge Course".
Since admission to the "Advance Diploma Course" was only open to the candidates who had acquired 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate or equivalent qualification, it is evident that the petitioners in CWP No. 7364 of 1999 possessed 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate or equivalent qualification.
Encouraged by the relief granted to the petitioners in CWP No. 7364 of 1999, certain other candidates, similarly situated as the petitioners in CWP No. 7364 of 1999, filed CWP No. 2861 of 2001.
The said latter writ petition was also allowed by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court on 2852001 (copy appended to the instant writ petition as Annexure P.1).
5.
The sequence of facts narrated in the foregoing paragraphs reveals that the "Bridge Course" was made available to the candidates who had acquired the "Advance Diploma Course" certificate from the YMCA Institute of Engineering, Faridabad, but not to the candidates who had obtained "Post Diploma Course" certificate.
Since admission to the "Bridge Course" was denied to those who had acquired "Post Diploma Course" certificate, CWP No. 6184 of 2001 came to be filed by a number of petitioners in the Hon'ble Delhi High Court.
All the petitioners in the aforesaid writ petition besides having qualified the "Post Diploma Course" certificate also possessed the educational qualification of 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination or equivalent certificate.
On the analogy of the relief granted in CWP No. 7364 of 1999 and CWP No. 2861 of 2001, the petitioners in CWP No. 6184 of 2001 were also found to be eligible for admission to the "Bridge Course" which in turn would entitle them to upgrade their educational qualification from the "Post Diploma Course" certificate to a Degree in engineering.
It would, however, be pertinent to mention that while allowing CWP No. 6184 of 2001 on 30102001, it was repeatedly noticed by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court that all the petitioners in CWP No. 6184 of 2001 possessed the qualifications of 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate in addition to the "Post Diploma Course" certificate.
6.
As a consequence of the decisions rendered by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, the petitioners in the various writ petitions, referred to above, who had earlier qualified the "Post Diploma Course" or the "Advance Diploma Course" were admitted to the "Bridge Course" in compliance of the said decisions.
7.
Insofar as the present controversy is concerned, none of the petitioners possesses the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate or equivalent qualification.
All the petitioners in the instant course acquired the Higher Secondary Examination certificate prior to their admission to the "Post Diploma Course" and as such the qualification possessed by the petitioners is not 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate or equivalent.
Admittedly, the Higher Secondary Examination certificate is awarded to students after completion of 11 years of successful education.
The claim of the petitioners in the instant case is that they should also be permitted admission to the "Bridge Course" so as to entitle them to upgrade their "Post Diploma Course" certificate to a Degree in engineering.
Respondents Nos. 3 and 4 have no serious objection to the grant of admission to the petitioners to the "Bridge Course".
It is, however, pointed out by the counsel representing respondents Nos. 3 and 4 that educational standards and admission to educational courses are regulated by the All India Council for Technical Education i.e. respondent No. 2 and that if respondent No. 2 approved the admission of the petitioners to the "Bridge Course", they would have no objection in granting admission to the petitioners to the said course.
8.
The All India Council for Technical Education has filed a separate written statement.
A perusal of the written statement filed by the aforesaid respondent No. 2 reveals that it is essential for candidates to be admitted to the "Bridge Course" to possess not only "Post Diploma Course"/"Advance Diploma Course" certificate but also the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate or equivalent thereto; and since none of the petitioners possesses the said qualification, they are not eligible for admission to the "Bridge Course".
In this behalf, reliance is placed on the guidelines issued for All India Council for Technical Education dated 1561992.
The relevant portion of the aforesaid guidelines have been extracted in paragraph 2 of the written statement filed by respondent No. 2.
A perusal of the same reveals that for admission to engineering degree courses, minimum qualification should be 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate with the subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics.
On the basis thereof it is vehemently contended that since none of the petitioners possesses the qualification of 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination or equivalent thereto, they cannot be granted admission to the "Bridge Course".
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
9.
The object of the "Bridge Course" is only to upgrade the qualifications possessed by the petitioners.
All the petitioners possess the qualification of "Post Diploma Course" certificate.
Similarly situated candidates who had qualified the "Post Diploma Course" certificate from the same institute as the petitioners herein had agitated their claim before the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, which, by allowing CWP No. 6184 of 2001, accepted the claim of the said candidates for admission to the "Bridge Course".
It is not a matter of dispute between the parties that all the petitioners in CWP No. 6184 of 2001, have been allowed admission to the "Bridge Course".
The only distinction between the petitioners in CWP No. 6184 of 2001 and the petitioners in the instant case is that while the former possessed 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate, the petitioners possess the qualification of 10+1 Higher Secondary Examination.
The solitary question to be considered is whether there is any nexus so far as the "Bridge Course" is concerned, with the requirement of possessing the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate.
In my considered view, it is presently irrelevant as to what qualification the petitioners possessed prior to their acquisition of the "Post Diploma Course" certificate, reasons therefor are as follows.
Having acquired the "Post Diploma Course", the qualifications acquired prior thereto are absolutely insignificant.
The "Bridge Course" entities upgradation of the "Post Diploma Course" certificate to a Degree in engineering.
The only relevant consideration for admission to the "Bridge Course" can, therefore, be the possession of the "Post Diploma Course" certificate, since it is the said qualification which is being upgraded by admission to the "Bridge Course", accordingly, all those who have acquired the "Post Diploma Course" certificate must be deemed to be similarly situated.
Thus all the petitioners in CWP No. 6184 of 2001, in my view, are similarly situated as the petitioners in the present case, for the purpose of admission to the "Bridge Course" because 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination qualification has no nexus to the object sought to be achieved, namely, upgradation of the "Post Diploma Course" certificate to a Degree in engineering.
Additionally, the guidelines of All India Council for Technical Education, dated 1561992, relied upon by the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 have no relevance for the present controversy.
The aforesaid guidelines are for admission to a degree course of a duration of 4 years, the same are irrelevant for admission to the "Bridge Course" which is only of a duration of one year.
Admission to the "Bridge Course" is permissible to candidates who have spent four years before they have qualified the "Post Diploma Course".
In continuation of the aforesaid proposition, it would be pertinent to mention that after qualifying the 10+1 examination or the Higher Secondary examination, all the petitioners had undertaken an educational career of 4 years in various disciplines of engineering leading to the award of the "Post Diploma Course" certificate.
One cannot also overlook the fact that if the petitioners are permitted admission to the "Bridge Course" which is of a duration of one year, they would have undertaken the same number of years of educational training as those admitted to the degree in engineering courses regulated by the guidelines dated 1561992 (referred to above).
Stated in other words, the petitioners were awarded the Higher Secondary Examination certificate on completion of 11 years of educational career; thereafter they undertook the "Post Diploma Course" for an additional duration of 4 years; now, if the petitioners are admitted to the "Bridge Course" they would undertake training for a period of one year.
Resultantly, in all they would spend 11 +4+1 years i.e. 16 years of education before they can upgrade their qualification to the Degree level.
Even under the guidelines of the All India Council for Technical Education, dated 1561992, admission to the Degree Course is granted only to those candidates who have qualified the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination; Degree Course is of the duration of 4 years.
Such candidates would, therefore, also acquire an engineering degree after successful completion of 12+4 years i.e. 16 years of education.
Lastly, it is also necessary to notice that nowhere has the All India Council of Technical Education prescribed the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination qualification as a pre-requisite for admission to the "Bridge Course".
10.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, I am of the considered view that the solitary objection raised by the All India Council for Technical Education in denying admission to the "Bridge Course" for not possessing the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination qualification is not only misconceived but also that the said qualification has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant petition is allowed.
The petitioners are held eligible for admission in the "Bridge Course".
Respondents Nos. 3 and 4 shall proceed to consider their claim without insisting upon the 10+2 Senior Secondary Examination certificate as a pre- requisite for such admission.
In case it is not possible to accommodate the petitioners in the present academic session, the petitioners be considered for the next academic session or for any subsequent academic session for which they may apply.
Petition allowed.