GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for quashing of the notice dated 10121998 (Annexure P.3) issued by the Recovery Officer, Employees Provident Fund Organisation, Faridabad (respondent No. 2) under Section 8-B of the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1952 Act') requiring the petitioner to show cause as to why he should not be committed to civil prison in execution of the certificate issued under Section 8-C of the 1952 Act for recovery of arrears of provident fund etc.  2.
The petitioner is the Managing Director of the Company named as M/s Sobhag Textile Ltd, Faridabad (hereinafter referred to as `the Company').
Proceedings for recovery of the arrears were initiated against the Company because it failed to deposit the amount of provident fund etc.
The Company pleaded its inability to pay the amount on the ground that it was constantly incurring losses and its application for closure of the unit was pending before the State Government.
By an order dated 10.1.1997 passed under Section 7-A of the 1952 Act, the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Haryana determined the amount payable by the petitioner towards the arrears of provident fund etc.
The Company neither challenged that order by filling appeal under Section 7-I of the 1952 Act nor it deposited the amount.
This left the competent authority constituted under the 1952 Act with little choice but to issue recovery certificate and in pursuance thereof, respondent No. 2 issued the impugned notice.
3.
The petitioner has challenged his threatened imprisonment on the following grounds :  (i) the proceedings initiated on the basis of application filed by the Company under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the `the 1985 Act') are pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (for short `BIFR') and during the pendency of such proceedings, no punitive action can be taken against him in view of the bar contained in Section 22 of the 1985 Act; (ii) the order passed by the State Government declining the Company's prayer for declaring a lock out is under challenge before the High Court C.W.P No. 5183 of 1998 - M/s. Sobhag Textile Ltd v. State of Haryana and C.W.P.
No. 4880 of 1998 - M/s. Sapna Textile Ltd. v. State of Haryana and in view of the stay order passed in the case of M/s. Sapna Textile Ltd. (supra), the respondents cannot proceed with the recovery of arrears of provident fund; (iii) before initiating action for imprisonment of the petitioner on the ground of the Company's failure to pay the arrears of provident fund etc. the respondents are under obligation to recover the amount by attachment and sale of moveable and immovable properties of the establishment employer which they have failed to do.
4.
The respondents have justified the decision of the competent authority to issue the impugned notice by asserting that even after the passing of order of assessment, the Company did not pay a single penny and therefore, they are left with no option but to take action in accordance with Sections 8-A to 8-C of the 1952 Act.
They have contested the petitioner's prayer for stay of the notice by contending that the special provisions contained in the 1952 Act have overriding effect over the provisions of the 1985 Act and, in any case, the pendency of the writ petitions before the High Court and the proceedings before the BIFR cannot operate as a bar to the recovery of arrears of provident fund etc. in accordance with the provisions of the 1952 Act.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
In the first place, we shall deal with the petitioner's plea that in view of the stay order passed by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 4880 of 1998 - M/s. Sapna Textile Ltd. v. State of Haryana, the proceedings initiated under Section 8-B of the 1952 Act should be held in abeyance.
In our opinion, the effect of the interim order passed by the High Court in the writ petition filed by the sister concern of the Company restraining the government from taking further proceedings against the said petitioner does not have the effect of impeding the action initiated under the 1952 Act for recovery of the arrears of provident fund.
In that case, the High Court could not have passed an order adversely affecting the recovery of the arrears under the 1952 Act because neither the impugned notice is under challenge in the writ petition filed by M/s. Sapna Textile Ltd. nor the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner etc. have been impleaded as respondents and, in fact, that is not the scope of the interim order passed by the High Court.
6.
For the purpose of deciding the question as to whether the notice issued under Section 8-B of the 1952 Act for recovery of the arrears is barred by Section 22 of the 1985 Act, it will be useful to refer to these provisions.
The same read as under :-  "Section 8-B of the 1952 Act.
8-B.
Issue of certificate to the Recovery Officer :- (1) Where any amount is in arrears under Section 8 the authorised officer may issue, to the Recovery Officer, a certificate under his signature specifying the amount of arrears and the Recovery Officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover the amount specified therein from the establishment or, as the case may be, the employer by one or more of the modes mentioned below : (a) attachment and sale of the moveable or immovable property of the establishment or as the case may be, the employer; (b) arrest of the employer and his detention in prison; (c) appointing a receiver for the management of the moveable or immovable properties of the establishment or as the case may be of the employer : Provided that the attachment and sale of any property under this section shall first be effected against the properties of the establishment and where such attachment and sale is insufficient for recovering the whole of the amount of arrears specified in the certificate, the Recovery Officer may take such proceeding against the property of the employer for recovery of the whole or any part of such arrears.
(2) The authorised officer may issue a certificate under sub-section (1) notwithstanding that proceedings for recovery of the arrears by any other mode have been taken."
"Section 22(1) of the 1985 Act.
Section 22 - Suspension of Legal Proceedings, contracts etc. (1) Where in respect of an industrial company, an inquiry under Section 16 is pending or any scheme referred to under Section 17 is under preparation or consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where an appeal under Section 25 relating to an industrial company is pending, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or any other law or the memorandum and articles of association of the Industrial Company or any other instrument having effect under the said Act or other law, no proceedings for the winding up of the industrial company or for execution, distress or the like against any of the properties of the industrial company or for the appointment of a Receiver in respect thereof shall lie or be proceeded with further, except with the consent of the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority."
7.
The 1985 Act contains a non-obstante clause and, therefore, the provisions contained therein will ordinarily prevail over the provisions of the 1952 Act if there is inconsistency between the two statutes but an analysis of Section 22 of the 1985 Act shows that it does not operate as an impediment against the recovery of the arrears of provident fund under Section 8-B of the Act.
What Section 22 does is to suspend the legal proceedings like the winding up of the industrial company execution, distress or the like against the properties of the industrial company.
A plain reading of section 22 shows that it does not contain any bar against the adoption of coercive measures embodied in Section 8-B of the Act.
Therefore, we are unable to agree with Shri Mahesh Grover that in view of the pendency of the proceedings before the BIFR, the respondents should be restrained from executing the impugned notice.
8.
This leaves us with the question as to whether the threatened civil imprisonment of the petitioner is ultra vires to Section 8-B of the 1952 Act.
Shri Grover argued that before resorting to the mode contemplated by sub- clause (b) of Section 8-B(1), the respondents are duty bound to take action for sale and attachment of the property of the establishment as contemplated by sub-clause (a) thereof.
As against this, Shri Rajesh Bindal argued that the proviso appearing below clause (c) of Section 8-B(1) does not affect the power of the Recovery Officer to adopt either of the modes stipulated in clauses (a) or (b) of Section 8-B(1).
9.
We have given serious thought to the submission of the learned counsel.
In our view, the impugned notice cannot be quashed on the ground that the respondents have not taken action in terms of clauses (a) of Section 8-B(1).
Sub-section (1) of Section 8-B of the 1952 Act prescribes alternative modes of recovery of the arrears on the basis of certificate issued by the authorised officer.
Attachment or sale of moveable or immoveable property of the establishment or, as the case may be, and arrest of the employer and his detention in prison are two of the three modes which can be adopted by the Recovery Officer.
Proviso appearing below clause (c) of Section 8-B(1) of the 1952 Act lays down that attachment and sale of any property under Section 8-B shall first be effected against the properties of the establishment and proceedings against the property of the employer can be taken only if the amount due cannot be recovered from the properties of the establishment.
However, there is nothing in the said proviso from which it can be inferred that respondent No. 2 is not entitled to have recourse to mode prescribed in clause (b) of Section 8-B(1) before taking recourse in the sale of property under Section 8-B(1)(a) and in the absence of any such embargo, it is not possible to agree with Shri Grover that the notice issued by respondent No. 2 should be declared illegal, arbitrary and unjustified.
10.
In the end, Shri Grover submitted that the petitioner is ready and willing to deposit the arrears of provident fund etc. in terms of the order passed by the competent authority under Section 7-A of the 1952 Act provided he is allowed to do so in instalments.
Shri Bindal submitted that he does not have any instructions to agree with the statement of the learned counsel.
11.
In our opinion, the situation in which the petitioner finds himself calls for a sympathetic consideration of his request for being allowed to pay the arrears of provident fund etc. in instalments and we feel that ends of justice would be met by directing him to pay the arrears in monthly instalments of Rs. 25,000/- each.
12.
In the result, the petitioner's prayer for quashing of the notice dated 10121998 is declined but he is allowed to deposit the arrears of provident fund etc. in instalments and the writ petition is disposed of with the following directions :  (i) The petitioner shall deposit Rs. 25,000/- every month till the scheme for revival of the industry is finalised by the BIFR.
(ii) The first instalment of Rs. 25,000/- shall be paid on or before 18.12.1999 and all the subsequent instalments shall be paid on or before 10th of every month.
(iii) The respondents shall maintain an account of the amount deposited by the petitioner and as soon as the industry is revived, the amount due as on that date shall be communicated to the petitioner who shall deposit the remaining amount within the time to be fixed by respondent No. 1.
(iv) If the petitioner fails to deposit the monthly instalments, the writ petition shall be deemed to have been dismissed and the respondents shall then be free to give effect to the notice issued under Section 8-B(1)(b) of the Act.
Copy of the order be given Dasti to the parties on payment of the fee prescribed for urgent application.
Order accordingly.