HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed his BA Examination from Rohilkhand University, Bareilly in the year 1985 in the second division.
He then obtained his MA degree in Geography in the year 1987 once again securing a second division and also passed his B.Ed.
examination from the said University in the year 1988 in the third division.
The petitioner also got employment as Master in the Sanjay Gandhi Junior High School, Beodhan Khurd (Bareilly) in July, 1988.
The State of Haryana advertised 269 posts of SS Masters for government schools vide advertisement dated 29th July, 1991 (Annexure P.1).
In pursuance of the said advertisement the petitioner applied for the post in question and also appended an experience certificate issued by the Head Master of the Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Junior High School, Beodhan Khurd.
The petitioner also appeared for the interview in the office of respondent No. 2 in August, 1991.
The petitioner was, however, not selected for the post in question.
This selection was, however, quashed by this Court by its judgment dated 7th February, 1992.
Aggrieved by the decision aforesaid, some of the selected candidates and the respondent-State Government filed S.L.Ps.
in the Hon'ble Supreme Court and in accordance with its decision, the State Government again issued an advertisement dated November 6, 1992 (Annexure P.2) calling the earlier applicants to appear for a fresh interview.
The petitioner appeared before the selection committee on 18th November, 1992 and also submitted an attested copy of his experience certificate (Annexure P.3).
The petitioner was, however, not selected even in the fresh selection.
The primary grievance of the petitioner is that the selection committee did not take into account the experience certificate that had been issued to him and that had he been given 10 marks for the experience that he had obtained in the Sanjay Khurd Memorial Junior High School, Beodhan Khurd from 27121988 to 10.8.1991 he would have been ranked higher in the merit list and duly selected.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and at the time of the motion hearing this court had directed that the original application form along with enclosures should be placed for the examination of this Court.
Despite having been taken a number of adjournments the respondent-State did not produce the form and Mr. Bhinder, the learned District Attorney, Haryana made a statement on 24th March, 1995 that it was not traceable.
A reply has also been filed by the respondent-State to the averments made in the writ petition and two-fold stand has been taken firstly that the experience certificate had not been appended with the application form and, as such, it could not be taken into account and secondly that petitioner even otherwise was not eligible as he had not taken English as a subject at the BA level.
3.
Mr. Ravi Verma, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the experience certificate (Annexure P.3) had been appended with the application form and the fact that the respondents had not cared to produce the same in court and pleaded that it was not traceable, cast a doubt on the respondents case.
He has also urged that from the application form itself and from the other enclosures it was apparent that the petitioner had taken English as one of the subjects in BA but even otherwise the case of the petitioner was liable to be considered as he possessed as MA degree in Geography from a recognised University and that this stand of the respondents too was untenable.
4.
As against this, Mr. Rathee, the learned State counsel has argued that from the written statement it was clear that the experience certificate had not been appended with the application form and that the petitioner had also not appended his BA degree to show that he had taken English as one of the papers at that level.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the file.
In the record before me a copy of the experience certificate Annexure P.3 duly attested by the Block Education Officer, Jatusana (Rewari) has been produced in Court.
It is, therefore, apparent that the original or a photostat copy of this document must have been on the file of the Block Education Officer.
This certificate does clearly indicate that the petitioner had worked in the Sanjay Gandhi Junior High School, Beodhan Khurd from July 1988 to July 1991.
A copy of the BA degree Annexure P.6 with the replication also indicates that the petitioner had taken English as one of the subjects at the BA level.
Moreover, the mere fact that the respondent-State had not been able to produce the original application form in Court for whatsoever reasons raises a presumption against it.
6.
Mr. Verma's argument that independent of what has been held above, the petitioner was even otherwise eligible and fulfilled the educational qualifications for consideration, also has merit.
Annexure P.1 to the petition contains the conditions of eligibility for the post of S.S. Master.
They have been reproduced below :-  S.S. Master (269) i) BA Education from Govt. College of Education Kurukshetra with any two of the following subjects in addition to English : (1) History (2) Pol.
Science (3) Economics (4) Geography (5) Sociology or BA with English with any two of the above mentioned subjects with B.T./B.Ed.
from recognized University.
Or MA in one of the subjects mentioned above with B.T./B.Ed from a recognised University."
7.
It will be seen that three different sets of qualifications are visualised and all of them are in the alternative.
To my mind, the petitioner's case would also fall in the third category i.e. being an MA in the subject of Geography along with BT/BEd.
from a recognised University.
8.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner is an MA in Geography and has also secured a 2nd Division from SM College, Chandausi (Rohilkhand University, Bareilly) which is a recognised University.
9.
This petition is accordingly allowed and the matter remitted to the authorities concerned to re-examine the matter in the light of the observations set out above.
The entire exercise would be undergone within a period of two months from the date that a certified copy of this order is made available to the respondents.
In case the petitioner is found eligible, he shall be given seniority from the date of the main selection, though he would not be entitled to any wages for that period.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.