GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash the proceedings of enquiry initiated against the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules') on the basis of charge-sheet dated 1391984.
The petitioner has prayed for the quashing of the charge-sheet, the enquiry report and the order of punishment dated 15101990 passed by the Government of Haryana.
2.
The petitioner is a released Emergency Commissioned Officer.
He joined service of the Government of Haryana as an Assistant Engineer on 17th August, 1971.
On the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ex-Captain KC Arora and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(2) SLR 97 and judgment of the Division of this Court in BM Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1987(5) SLR 531, the petitioner became entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer after fixation of his seniority keeping in view the military service rendered by him during the period of emergency.
He has not been given promotion to the post of Executive Engineer on the basis of departmental enquiries which were initiated against him in the year 1984 and near about and for claiming retrospective promotion, he has separately instituted Civil Writ Petition No. 3911 of 1988.
3.
In response to the charge-sheet Annexure P.1 dated 1391984, the petitioner submitted his reply dated 28.11.1984 and denied the allegations of cuttings/overwritings in the tenders.
After about a year and five months, the Government appointed Shri BL Goyal to conduct enquiry into the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Shri Goyal submitted his report with findings of guilty in respect of both the charges levelled against the petitioner.
The Government of Haryana issued show cause notice dated 2841987 proposing punishment of removal from service upon the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted his detailed reply dated 1561987 (Annexure P.6) and after giving him hearing, the Government passed the impugned order and imposed punishment of removal from service upon the petitioner.
4.
Challenge of the petitioner to the impugned proceedings and the order is based on the following grounds :-  i) The tenders with reference to which allegation was made against the petitioner of interpolation/overwriting were at the preliminary stage and the same cancelled by the Superintending Engineer and no loss was caused to the Government and, therefore, initiation of enquiry after more than four years was illegal.
ii) No evidence was produced during the course of enquiry to substantiate the charges levelled against the petitioner.
iii) The list of documents and witnesses were not furnished to the petitioner and, in this manner the petitioner was not made aware of the material which was sought to be used against him.
iv) The enquiry Officer relied on some documents which were not produced during the course of enquiry and in regard to which the petitioner had no opportunity to defend himself.
The petitioner had furnished a list of defence witnesses on 1481986 which included the Divisional Accountant, Divisional Head Clerk and the Contractor concerned but the Enquiry Officer verbally refused to summon them at Government expenses by saying that TA/DA of the witnesses shall be paid by the delinquent and this decision of the Enquiry Officer was against para 1328 of the "Guidelines Regarding Procedure in Disciplinary Cases."
v) That the Enquiry Officer agreed to take statements of the Divisional Accountant, Divisional Head Clerk and the Contractor which they had made on 11101982, 13.10.1982 and 14.10.1982 but did not consider the same.
Similarly he ignored the affidavits of ten contractors including Deen Dayal who had submitted the disputed tender.
vi) That the punishment imposed on the petitioner is arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice.
vii) That the Enquiry Officer was biased because he was one of the respondents in the writ petition filed by the petitioner claiming seniority in the cadre of Sub Divisional Engineers.
5.
The respondents have defended the impugned proceedings by stating that the petitioner has been found guilty of interpolation in the tender forms as well as tender rates with a view to defraud the Government and, therefore, the punishment awarded to him is justified.
6.
The original enquiry file produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General during the course of hearing shows that after his appointment as Enquiry Officer, Shri BL Goyal issued notice dated 651986 and fixed the date of enquiry as 12.5.1986.
On that day the Presenting Officer was found absent.
However, the Enquiry Officer directed the petitioner to produce any witness or evidence at that stage.
The petitioner declined to do so.
The next proceedings were held on 2371986.
On that day the Presenting Officer filed the statement of charges and the statement of allegations.
The petitioner was asked to submit any evidence, documents or list of witnesses but the petitioner replied by saying that he would do so after the prosecution completes its case.
On the next date i.e. 481986 some documents were filed by the Presenting Officer and the next date of hearing was fixed as 1481986 for filing list of documents and witnesses by the petitioner.
On 1481986, the petitioner requested the Enquiry Officer to call three witnesses and five documents from the Presenting Officer.
The Enquiry Officer advised the Executive Engineer concerned to bring the documents as per the list supplied.
On 191986, the Enquiry Officer observed that three documents have been produced and the defence agreed not to insist for the production of two documents.
The petitioner agreed that he would not summon the three officials and he would rely on the statements made by these officials earlier.
On 1791986, the Enquiry Officer recorded the statement of the petitioner and that of the Presenting Officer.
On 31101986 also the Enquiry Officer recorded the statement of Presenting Officer in respect of charge Nos. 1 and 2 and that of the petitioner.
Thereafter, the Enquiry Officer proceeded to submit his report to the Government.
From the above, it is clear that no evidence whatsoever was produced by the department during the course of enquiry and Presenting Officer completed his case by producing some documents and making oral statement in the form of arguments.
The petitioner made his own statement and denied the allegations of interpolations/cuttings/ overwritings in the register or the tender form.
Rule 7(2) of the Rules which is quite relevant in the context of this case is reproduced below :-  "7(2).
The grounds on which it is proposed to take such action, shall be reduced to the form of a definite charge or charges which shall be communicated in writing to the persons charged, togather with a statement of allegations on which each charge is based and of any other circumstances which it is proposed to take into consideration is passing orders on the case, and he shall be require within a reasonable time to state in writing whether he admits the truth of all, or any, of the charges; what explanation or defence, if any, he has to offer and whether he desired to be heard in person.
If he so desires, or if the authority empowered to dismiss, remove or reduce him so directs, an oral enquiry shall be held at which all evidence shall be heard as to such of the charges are not admitted.
The person charged shall, subject to the conditions described in sub-rule (3), be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give evidence in person and to have such witnesses, called as he may wish, provided that the officer conducting the enquiry may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to call any witness.
The proceedings shall contain a sufficient record of the evidence and a statement of the findings and the ground thereof : Provided that - a) it shall not be necessary to frame any additional charge when it is proposed to take action in respect of any statement or allegation made by the person charged, in the course of his defence; b) the provisions of the foregoing sub-rule shall not apply where a person is dismissed, or removed or reduced on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove him, or reduce him in rank is satisfied that, for some reason to be recorded by him in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to give him an opportunity of showing cause against him, or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person such an opportunity.
c) if any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to give to any person an opportunity to defend himself under sub-rule (2), the decision thereon of the punishing authority shall be final."
7.
On a perusal of the above quoted rule, it becomes clear that the first step which is required to be taken for making an enquiry in terms of Rule 7(1) is the communication of the charges together with the statement of allegations to the delinquent.
He is required to be given time to admit the charges or to submit his explanation or defence and also indicate whether he desires to be heard in person.
In the event of denial of the allegations and oral enquiry is required to be held at which the evidence in respect of charges not admitted by the delinquent is required to be produced.
The delinquent is entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give evidence in person and produce witnesses.
The proceedings of enquiry must contain sufficient record of evidence and a statement of finding as well as the grounds on which such findings have been arrived at.
It is thus evident that the delinquent employee is entitled to know not only the charges and allegations but also other adverse circumstances which are likely to be taken into consideration in passing the final order by the competent authority.
He is also entitled to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the department and adduce evidence in defence.
8.
In this case the Enquiry Officer did not follow the procedure indicated in Rule 7.
Rather he adopted a strange method of calling upon the petitioner and the departmental representatives to make their respective statements on different dates and permitted the production of certain documents.
This procedure was clearly contrary to the requirement of Rule 7, inasmuch as, no evidence was produced by the department to substantiate the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
9.
Mere filing of documents by the departmental representative which he may have collected from different sources cannot amount to production of evidence by the department to substantiate the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Neither the persons who prepared those documents were produced nor the person who collected those documents was produced as witnesses and the petitioner had no opportunity to cross-examine such person.
This glaring defect in the proceedings of the enquiry caused grave prejudice to the petitioner, inasmuch as, he could not defend himself properly.
In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chintaman Sadashiva Waishampayan, AIR 1961 SC 1623, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court indicated the parameters of reasonable opportunity in disciplinary proceedings by observing :-  "When an order of dismissal passed against a public servant is challenged by him by a petition filed in the High Court under Article 226 it is for the High Court to consider whether the constitutional requirements of Article 311(2) have been satisfied or not.
In such a case it cannot be contended that the infirmities on which the public officer relies flow from the exercise of discretion vested in the enquiry officer.
The enquiry officer may have acted bona fide but that does not mean that the discretionary orders passed by him are final and conclusive.
Whenever it is urged before the High Court that as a result of such orders the public officer has been deprived of a reasonable opportunity it would be open to the High Court to examine the matter and decide whether the requirements of Article 311(2) have been satisfied or not.
In such matters it is difficult and inexpedient to lay down any general rules; whether or not the officer in question has had a reasonable opportunity must always depend on the facts in each case.
The only general statement that can be safely made in this connection is that the departmental enquiries should observe rules of natural justice, and that if they are fairly and properly conducted the decisions reached by the enquiry officers on the merits are not open to be challenged on the ground that the procedure followed was not exactly in accordance with that which is observed in Course of Law.
Stating it broadly and without intending it to be exhaustive it may be observed that rules of natural justice require that a party should have the opportunity of adducing all relevant evidence on which he relies, that the evidence of the opponent should be taken in his presence, and that he should be given the opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses examined by that party, and that no materials should be relied on against him without his being given an opportunity of explaining them.
The right to cross-examine the witnesses who give evidence against him is a very valuable right and if it appears that effective exercise of this right has been prevented by the enquiry officer by not giving to the officer relevant documents to which he is entitled, that inevitably would mean that the enquiry had not been held in accordance with rules of natural justice."
(Underlining is mine)  10.
In Kashinath Dikshita v. Union of India and others, AIR 1986 SC 2118, the Supreme Court held that non-supply of copies of statements of witnesses and copies of documents relied upon by disciplinary authority amounted to violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
In M/s Bareilly Electricity Supply Co Ltd v. The Workmen and others, 1971(2) SCC 617, their Lordships held :-  "The application of principle of natural justice does not imply that what is not evidence can be acted upon.
On the other hand what it means is that no materials can be relied upon to establish a contested fact which are not spoken to by persons who are competent to speak about them and are subjected to cross-examination by the party against whom they are sought to be used.
When a document is produced in a Court or a Tribunal the questions that naturally arise is, is it a genuine document, what are its contents and are the statements contained therein true ?
When the appellant produced the balance-sheet and profit and loss account of the Company, it does not by its mere production amount to a proof of it or of the truth of the entries therein.
If these entries are challenged the appellant must prove each of such entries by producing the books and speaking from the entries made therein.
If a letter or other document is produced to establish some fact which is relevant to the enquiry the writer must be produced or his affidavit in respect thereof be filed and opportunity afforded to the opposite party who challenges this fact.
This is both in accord with principles of natural justice as also according to the procedure under Order 19, Code of Civil Procedure and the Evidence Act both of which incorporate these general principles".
11.
I am also of the opinion that non-production of any witness to prove that the interpolations were made by the petitioner with an ulterior motive to cause loss to the Government constitutes a grave defect in the proceedings of enquiry and the respondent-Government has acted illegally in punishing the petitioner without there being any evidence to prove that the petitioner had in fact made interpolations to help the contractor.
It appears that the Government has treated the documents produced during the course of enquiry as automatically proved without considering the fact that no evidence was produced during the course of enquiry.
12.
Another serious defect with which the enquiry conducted by the respondents suffers is that the Enquiry Officer as well as the Government failed to consider the documents produced by the petitioner which were in the form of letter written by the Executive Engineer, Nuh as well as the statements of Head Clerk and Divisional Accountant.
The Government also ignored the fact that the tenders were at the preliminary stage and the Superintending Engineer, who was the competent authority, cancelled the tenders.
These serious defects in the enquiry caused immense prejudice to the petitioner and, therefore, the order of punishment is liable to be quashed.
13.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order of punishment Annexure P.7 dated 15101990 is quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits except the back wages.
Back wages shall be payable to the petitioner only on his producing cogent evidence before the Government that he was not earning elsewhere during the intervening period.
It is also made clear that the respondent-Government shall be free to hold fresh enquiry against the petitioner and quashing of the impugned order shall in no manner prevent the Government from taking a fresh decision in accordance with law.
14.
Keeping in view the fact that enquiry proceedings were initiated as early as in the year 1984 and a period of 12 years has elapsed since then, the Government is expected to take a final decision on the issue of holding of fresh enquiry within a period of three months.
Petition allowed.