Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is asking for a mandamus directing the respondents to regularize his service as an assistant teacher of English in Nimdighi High Madrasah, Howrah.
2.
His case is this.
After the institute was upgraded from junior high to high , on the basis of resolution of the managing committee of the institute dated October 12th, 1987 he was appointed in it as an assistant teacher.
In 1991 he moved this court by filing a writ petition for an order directing the respondents to regularize his appointment.
That was disposed of directing him to make a representation to the director of school education.
Accordingly he made a representation, which was rejected.
Feeling aggrieved, he filed the second writ petition in this court in 1992.
By order dated March 1st, 1994 that was allowed; the authorities were directed to approve his appointment.
Since that order was not carried out he filed a contempt application, which was dismissed by order dated May 13th, 2005.
Since he has been working in the institute, and since vacancy against sanctioned post is available, the respondents are under the obligation to approve his appointment.
3.
Counsel argues that in view of the order dated March 1st, 1994 the respondents were under the obligation to approve the appointment.
On the strength of the decisions of this court in Sudarsan Das v. State of WB & Ors. (1991) CLT 456, and Headmistress, Dubrajpur Girls High School & Ors. v. Pradip Kumar Mitra, (1993) 2 CLJ 24, he argues that when vacancies are available, the authorities are bound to regularize the service of the petitioner.
In support of his contention that provisions of the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997 cannot affect the vested right of the petitioner to get his appointment regularized, he relies on the decision of this court in Basudeb Bag & Anr. v. Bhaskar Chandra Kar & Ors., (1996) 1 CLJ 230.
In response, counsel for the state relies on the decision of this court in Aloke Jyoti Maitra v. The State of WB & Ors., (2003) 2 CLJ 553, and submits that there is no scope to appoint one in the institute, unless one is selected and recommended by the school service commission.
4.
In my view, the petitioner is not entitled to seek a mandamus directing the respondents to regularize his appointment.
On October 12th, 1987 the institute was not empowered to appoint the petitioner according to its sweet will.
The petitioner was given without initiating any recruitment process according to the recruitment rules.
It was not a mere irregular appointment, but a totally illegal appointment.
Such illegal appointment never created any enforceable legal right in favour of the petitioner, far less to speak of any vested right as contended.
5.
The legal position regarding regularization of service has been explained by the recent constitution bench of the apex court in Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. v. Umadevi & Ors., AIR 2006 SC 1806.
For whatever length one may serve on the basis of an illegal appointment, by that one does not acquire any right to get permanent appointment to any public office.
The concept of regularization has been deprecated by the apex court.
Giving permanent appointment to an illegally appointed person has been viewed as the back door entry in public office.
6.
As to the effect of the order dated March 1st, 1994, I only say that by filing this writ petition the petitioner is not entitled to execute that.
He allowed that order to become useless by efflux of time.
There is no scope to issue a mandamus directing the respondents to enforce that order.
An order obtained in a previous writ petition is not to be executed by filing a fresh writ petition.
(See decision dated April 8th, 2006 in W.P. No. 15410 (W) of 2004, Sk.
Abu Hashem v. State of WB & Ors.).
He was entitled to execute that order (see Bonbehari Roy & Ors. v. KMDA, AIR 2004 Cal 254).
He chose to abandon the remedy.
7.
It is absolutely immaterial whether any vacancy is available at the present moment, against any sanctioned post.
On the strength of the authorities given to me, I am unable to hold that if a vacancy is available, then the authorities have to regularize the service of the petitioner.
His initial appointment, even if it was given, was a totally illegal one, and it continued to be so all along.
There is no scope to issue a mandamus for legalizing an illegal act.
The authority cited by counsel for the state supports his contention.
At the present moment no one can be appointed in the institute, unless one is selected according to the relevant recruitment rules.
8.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.