VK Bali, J - Kanta Yadav widow of LNK/NA Anoop Singh of Army Medical Corps, who is stated to have died during Operation Meghdoot on July 24, 2000, through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant her further ex gratia of Rs. 25 lacs as per government policy, Annexure P-1, as also judgment of this Court in CWP No. 18469 of 2001, dated August 1, 2002.
2.
The bare minimum facts, as have been projected in the writ petition, for staking claim to the ex gratia of Rs. 25 lacs, reveal that Anoop Singh, husband of the petitioner, was permanent resident of village Narnaul, District Mahendergarh.
He joined the Indian Army as Sepoy-cum-Nursing Assistant in Army Medical Corps and was allotted 328 Field Ambulance after successful training, on July 19, 1984.
He was deployed in Sri Lanka in Indian Peace Keeping Force in 1987 and was awarded "Special Service Medal", for taking part in Operation Pawan there.
He was posted in high altitude in Jammu and Kashmir on March 21, 1999 and was attached with 102 Infantry Brigade in Siachen Glacier on April 21, 1999.
He was inducted to BANA Saddle to provide medical cover to the troops posted there engaged in Operation Meghdoot on May 28, 2000.
He, however, complained of weakness, inability to walk for long time and dry cough with pain in chest on July 19, 2000 and till July 24, 2000 he kept on serving the Nation.
On the date aforesaid, at about 10 AM, he breathed his last due to Pulmonary Embolism due to Pulmonary Artery Hypertension and Severe Exhaustion.
At about 10 AM on July 27, 2000 an intimation was given to the petitioner regarding sacrifice of her husband in Operation Meghdoot.
The dead body of Anoop Singh reached Bhiwani at 5 PM on July 28, 2000 and he was given last farewell at Bhiwani and was cremated there at 7 PM.
On September 10, 2000 an ex-gratia of Rs. 5 lacs was recommended to the petitioner as per Ministry of Defence letter dated September 22, 1998, Annexure P-1 and she was paid the said amount of Rs. 5 lacs as ex gratia.
The case of the petitioner is that she was entitled to ex gratia of Rs. 75 lacs in view of the government policy, Annexure P-1 dated September 22, 1998 and by applying the same very policy, in similar circumstances, this Court had allowed the same very amount as ex gratia in the matter of death of Dr. SS Bali in CWP No. 18469 of 2001 decided on August 1, 2002.
It is the remaining amount of Rs. 25 lacs which has been claimed as ex gratia in the present petition.
3.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court, respondents have entered defence and contested the cause of the petitioner.
It is pleaded in the written statement that husband of the petitioner was enrolled in the Army Medical Corps on July 19, 1984 and was posted to 328 Field Ambulance located at High Altitude on April 21, 1999.
He was detailed for Operation Meghdoot duty and inducted to Bana Saddle at Siachen on May 28, 2000 to provide medical cover to troops deployed there as per existing policy of the sector.
He, however, expired on July 24, 2000.
As per medical records, the cause of death was Pulmonary Embolism due to Pulmonary Artery Hypertension while performing assigned task during Operation Meghdoot and 328 Field Ambulance considered the death of Anoop Singh as battle casualty vide their letter dated July 27, 2000.
Accordingly, RO AMC notified the case as battle casualty vide letter dated August 9, 2000 as per Special Army Order No. 8/5/85.
Family pension claim and ex gratia award for Rs. 5 lacs as per Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter dated September 22, 1998 in favour of the petitioner were initiated to the Principal Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad along with the medical documents, who considered the death of husband of the petitioner as attributable to military service and granted special family pension vide Pension Payment Order dated March 26, 2001 (Annexure R-1).
Later, Liberalised Family Pension and ex gratia grant of Rs. 5 lacs was issued as per existing rules vide PPO dated October 15, 2001.
As per the instructions of the Government of India dated September 22, 1998, the petitioner, besides Liberalised Family Pension, was also entitled to ex gratia grant to the tune of Rs. 5 lacs, which was accordingly paid.
4.
The bare minimum facts, as have been projected in the petition stand admitted.
However, the discordant view expressed by learned counsel for the parties is with regard to interpretation of government policy, Annexure P-1 whereas, it is case of petitioner that in the circumstances here husband died, she was entitled to Rs. 75 lacs as ex gratia as per terms of policy, Annexure P-1, case of the respondents is that the petitioner is not entitled to more than Rs. 5 lacs towards the said head as per terms of the same very policy.
With a view to appreciate the controversy between the parties, it would be useful to extract relevant part of the policy, Annexure P-1.
The same reads thus :-  "(a) Death occurring due to accidents in the course of performance of duties : 500 Lacs.
(b) Death occurring in the course of performance of duties attributable to acts of violence by terrorists, anti-social elements etc. : 500 Lacs.
(c) Death occurring during (i) enemy action in international war or Border Skirmishes and (ii) action against militants, terrorists, extremists etc. : 750 lacs".
5.
Whereas, it is the case of the petitioner that matter herein would be covered by clause (c) and, therefore, the petitioner would be entitled to compensation to the tune of Rs. 75 lacs, the case of respondents is that the case would be covered under clause (b) and, therefore, petitioner would not be entitled to anything more than Rs. 500 lacs.
This precise point came to be debated and, thus, adjudicated upon by Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 18469 of 2001 (Dr. SS Bali v. Union of India & Ors.), decided on 182002.
The question that came to be framed by the Hon'ble Division Bench reads as follows :-  "The limited question that falls for consideration before this Court is as to whether the petitioner is covered under clause (1)(c) of the policy or under any other clause which would justify denial of the balance payment as claimed by the petitioner."
6.
The facts of the case aforesaid were not at variance from the one in hand.
The father of Major Nitin Bali had approached the Court seeking a direction to the respondents to treat the death of his son as battle casualty in terms of policy of the Government and to release the balance payment of Rs. 25 lacs on account of ex gratia grant in terms of the said policy.
Major Nitin Bali was posted at the International Border in Kargil sector at high altitude.
On 26101998 his father received a telephonic message that his only son had sacrificed his life for the country during the counter insurgency Operation Rakshak on 25101998.
The Ministry of Defence, Government of India, had issued a notification for grant of ex gratia lump sum compensation to the families of Armed Forces personnel who died in harness on recommendation of Fifth Pay Commission.
This Notification was issued on 2291998.
The petitioner in the said case had received only a sum of Rs. 5 lacs instead of Rs. 75 lacs as recommended from 3rd Battalion of Punjab Regiment on 21.6.1999.
The facts, leading to the death of Major Nitin Bali, as reflected in the judgment, would show that as per the stand taken by the respondents, to did not suffer a battle casualty.
The officer was posted at Kargil and had been fighting the enemy at the international border for a considerable time before his death.
He died as a result of "actute pulmonary oedema".
Major Nitin Bali had not suffered a war injury but fell sick because of high altitude which ultimately resulted in his death.
Relying upon Para No. 4 Note VIII of Army Order 8/S/85, dealing with the accidental death sustained due to natural calamities such as, floods, avalanches, land slides any cyclones, at any time of performance of operational duties while in action against enemy forces, to be treated as battle casualty and Paras (xi) and (xii) to existing Para 4, dealing with the casualties accruing while operating on international border or line of control due to natural calamities and illness caused by climatic conditions to be treated as physical casualties for statistical purpose and battle casualty for financial purposes, death of Major Nitin Bali was declared as a battle casualty by the respondents themselves.
The Division Bench while dealing with the policy, Annexure P-1 held that "such a death per se would fall in category (c) of the Government policy and the death of the officer would necessarily have to be construed as a battle casualty covered under the said clause".
It is true that the performance of Major Nitin Bali and his valour in fighting the enemy has been highlighted in the judgment but ultimately, even though, Majour Nitin Bali died due to "acute pulmonary oedema" on high altitude, his death had been held as covered under category (c) of the policy, Annexure P-1.
The matter herein, in our view, is covered in favour of the petitioner by Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP No. 18469 of 2001 (Annexure P-11).
No arguments have been raised before us that may persuade us to take a view different than the one taken in judgment, Annexure P-11.
7.
In view of the discussion made above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant further ex gratia of Rs. 25 lac to the petitioner within three months from today.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.