Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner, in this petition, challenges the action of the respondent-Bank in conducting disciplinary proceedings against him during the pendency of the criminal complaint pending before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana.
2.
Petitioner was placed under suspension while working as Branch Manager, Union Bank of India, GT Road Branch, Ludhiana.
Disciplinary inquiry was ordered against him by the disciplinary authority.
He was issued a charge sheet Annexure P-1.
Charge against the petitioner was that while working as Branch Manager at GT Road Branch, Ludhiana, he allowed Shri Girdhari Lal Bassi, account holder of Current Account No. 17129 to introduce cash of Rs. 45 lacs in a fictitious current account and withdraw the same with his connivance.
Statement of allegations was also supplied to the petitioner.
Assistant Commissioner, Income Tax Central Circle, Ludhiana, filed a complaint under section 278 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') against the petitioner in the the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana, on 2711997, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2, with this petition.
Some of the facts stated in the Statement of Allegations and the complaint are common and overlapping.
3.
Petitioner has come to this court for staying the disciplinary proceedings pending against him during the pendency of the criminal trial.
Plea taken is that the allegations levelled against the petitioner in the disciplinary proceedings are exactly the same which are subject-matter of criminal trial and the continuation of departmental proceedings is likely to prejudice the defence of the petitioner in the criminal case.
For this, reliance has been placed upon two judgments of the Supreme Court reported in Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd v. The Workmen, AIR 1965 SC 155 and Kusheshwar Dubey v. M/s. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and others, AIR 1988 SC 2118.
4.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents.
Plea taken in the written statement is that the departmental proceedings can simultaneously continue against an employee during the pendency of the criminal proceedings.
That a fact finding inquiry was conducted and on finding a prima facie case against the petitioner, he was charge-sheeted by the disciplinary authority.
It has been denied that the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner at the instance of the Income Tax Department.
The charge sheet was issued in July, 1996 whereas the criminal proceedings were launched by the Income Tax authorities in January, 1997.
Both the actions on the part of answering respondents and the Income Tax Authorities are independent of each other and are grounded on different considerations and facts.
5.
By way of preliminary objection, it has been asserted that according to settled legal position enunciated by the Supreme Court, criminal and departmental proceedings can continue simultaneously against a delinquent employee.
Another preliminary objection taken is that in the entire process of departmental proceedings, the petitioner along with his defence representative/Assisting Officer duly participated, cross-examined management witnesses and submitted other detailed defence version on the merits of the case.
Departmental proceedings have already been completed and concluded on 2661997.
Since, the petitioner has only prayed for staying the departmental proceedings, the cause of action, if any, does not subsist and the petition has become infructuous.
That the petitioner having duly participated in the departmental inquiry cannot be permitted to make a grievance of (sic) the departmental proceedings, after the conclusion of the same.
6.
On facts, it has been stated that the disciplinary proceedings have been initiated against the petitioner by his employer whereas the complaint under section 278 of the Act has been filed by the Income Tax Authorities, which are independent of each other.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
Mr. Vinod Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kusheshwar Dubey's case (supra), argued that the domestic inquiry pending against the petitioner should be stayed pending the final disposal of the criminal case because the criminal case and the disciplinary proceedings are grounded on the same set of facts.
In case, the petitioner is compelled to disclose his defence in the disciplinary proceedings then, the trial of the criminal offence against him would be prejudiced.
8.
As against this, Mr. Amarjit Singh, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent-Bassi has argued that the departmental proceedings against an employee can continue during the pendency of the criminal proceedings.
He has placed reliance upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. BK Meena and others, 1996(4) SCT 708 : 1996(6) SCC 417.
9.
We find substance in the plea raised by the counsel for the respondents.
In BK Meena's case (supra), their Lordships, after considering the entire case law, including the judgments in Tata Oil Mills' case (supra) and Kusheshwar Dubey's case (supra), have held that the disciplinary inquiry cannot and should not be delayed unduly.
If the disciplinary inquiry is to await the decision in the criminal case, then, it might be delayed for an unduly long period because invariably the criminal cases drag on endlessly especially where high officials or persons holding high public offices are involved.
It has also been observed that the approach and objective of the criminal proceedings and the disciplinary proceedings is altogether distinct and different.
In the disciplinary proceedings, the question is whether the respondent is guilty of such conduct as would merit his removal from service or lesser punishment, as the case may be, whereas in the criminal proceedings the question is whether the offences registered against him are sufficient to hold him guilty of a criminal offence and, if so, what sentence should be imposed upon him.
The standard of proof, the mode of inquiry and the rules governing the inquiry and trial in both the cases are entirely distinct and different.
It was further observed that staying of disciplinary proceedings pending criminal proceedings should not be a matter of course but a considered decision.
In para 14 of this judgment, it was observed as under :-  "14.
It would be evident from the above decisions that each of them starts with the indisputable proposition that there is no bar for both proceedings to go on simultaneously and then say that in certain situations, it may not be `desirable', `advisable' or `appropriate' to proceed with the disciplinary enquiry when a criminal case is pending on identical charges.
The staying of disciplinary proceedings, it is emphasised, is a matter to be determined having regard to the facts and circumstances of a given case and that no hard and fast rules can be enunciated in that behalf.
They only ground suggested in the above decisions as constituting a valid ground for staying the disciplinary proceedings is that "the defence of the employee in the criminal case may not be prejudiced".
This ground has, however, been hedged in by providing further that this may be done in cases of grave nature involving questions of fact and law.
In our respectful opinion, it means that not only the charges must be grave but that the case must involve complicated questions of law and fact.
Moreover, `advisability' `desirability' or `propriety', as the case may be, has to be determined in each case taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case.
The ground indicated in D.C.M.
and Tata Oil Mills is also not an invariable rule.
It is only a factor which will go into the scales while judging the advisability or desirability of staying the disciplinary proceedings.
One of the contending considerations is that the disciplinary enquiry cannot be - and should not be - delayed unduly.
So far as criminal cases are concerned, it is well known that they drag on endlessly where high officials or persons holding high public offices are involved.
They get bogged down on one or the other ground.
They hardly ever reach a prompt conclusion.
That is the reality in spite of repeated advice and admonitions from this Court and the High Courts.
If a criminal case is unduly delayed that may itself be a good ground for going ahead with the disciplinary proceedings held over at an earlier stage.
The interests of administration and good government demand that these proceedings are concluded expeditiously.
It must be remembered that interests of administration demand that undesirable elements are thrown out and any charge of misdemeanour is enquired into promptly.
The disciplinary proceedings are meant not really to punish the guilty but to keep the administrative machinery unsullied by getting rid of bad elements.
"The interest of the delinquent officer also lies in a prompt conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings.
If he is not guilty his honour should be vindicated at the earliest possible moment and if he is guilty, he should be dealt with promptly according to law.
It is not also in the interest of administration that persons accused of serious misdemeanour should be continued in office indefinitely, i.e, for long periods awaiting the result of criminal proceedings.
It is not in the interest of administration.
It only serves the interest of the guilty and dishonest.
While it is not possible to enumerate the various factors, for and against the stay of disciplinary proceedings, we find it necessary to emphasise some of the important considerations in view of the fact that very often the disciplinary proceedings are being stayed for long periods pending criminal proceedings.
Stay of disciplinary proceedings cannot be, and should not be, a matter of course.
All the factors, for and against, should be weighed and a decision taken keeping in view the various principles laid down in the decisions referred to above."
10.
Keeping the ratio of BK Meena's case (supra) in view, we examine the facts of the present case.
11.
Disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner in July, 1996, whereas the criminal proceedings were launched by the Income Tax authorities under section 278 of the Act in January 1997.
In response to the disciplinary proceedings, petitioner had filed his reply.
His defence representative duly participated before the Inquiry Officer and cross-examined the management witnesses.
The charge in the departmental proceedings is different from the alleged offence committed by the petitioner in the criminal proceedings launched against him by the Department of Income Tax.
Some of the facts may be common and overlapping but the scope of the departmental inquiry and the criminal case is different.
It would not be in interest of justice to keep the departmental proceedings stayed during the pendency of the criminal proceedings against the petitioner, which may not conclude in the near future.
We refrain ourselves from saying anything on merits lest it might prejudice the case of either of the parties.
12.
We find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.