GS Singhvi, J - Whether the service rendered by the petitioner pursuant to his ad hoc appointment as Agriculture Sub Inspector w.e.f.
3.9.1966 should have been taken into consideration for fixation of his seniority is the short question which arises for determination in this petition filed by him for quashing the seniority list circulated by Chief Conservator of Soils, Punjab (respondent No. 2) vide letter Annexure P-7 dated 22.10.1986.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as Agriculture Sub Inspector vide order dated 2981966/ 1.9.1966 issued by Deputy Director of Agriculture, Nabha on purely temporary basis up to 30.9.1966 in Rice Package Programme in Block Samana.
After the expiry of initial term, he was permitted to continue albeit without any written order, though, later on, his continuance was regularised vide orders dated 11.4.1967 (Annexure P-2), 1461967 (Annexure P-3) and 151968 (Annexure P-4), with one day's break on each occasion.
In 1971, he was regularly appointed as Agriculture Sub Inspector vide order dated 17.2.1971 issued by respondent No. 2 on the recommendation of the Departmental Selection Committee.
After 15 years of his regular appointment in the cadre, respondent No. 2 circulated the final seniority list of Agriculture Sub Inspectors vide memo dated 22.10.1986 Annexure P-7.
The petitioner has averred that as per the existing practice, his ad hoc and temporary service should have been counted for the purpose of fixation of seniority and respondent No. 2 committed a serious illegality by ignoring the said service and fixing his seniority at Sr. No. 119.
He has further averred that on the basis of his length of service counted from 1.9.1966, he is entitled to be fixed at S. No. 60 and, therefore, a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing respondent No. 2 to fix his seniority at S. No. 60 instead of S. No. 119.
3.
In their written statement, the respondents have taken the stand that the seniority of the petitioner has been fixed by taking into consideration length of service rendered by him from the date of regular appointment and the previous service rendered on the basis of temporary appointment cannot be counted for the purpose of fixation of seniority among the members of the service.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
In my opinion, the petitioner's claim for fixation of seniority by taking into consideration temporary service rendered by him w.e.f.
1.9.1966 is liable to be rejected in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association and another, 2000(4) SCT 664 (SC) : 2000(5) SLR 223.
The background facts of that case were that Shri Rakesh Kumar Singla had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 15031 of 1993 in this High Court with the prayer for directing the State of Haryana in the Department of Irrigation and Power as well as Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Department to grant him selection grade in the cadre of Assistant Engineers by taking into consideration the service rendered by him on the basis of ad hoc appointment.
The State Government resisted his claim by contending that his initial appointment was not in accordance with Recruitment Rules and, therefore, the service rendered pursuant to said appointment could not be taken into consideration for the purpose of counting of 12 years period required for grant of the benefit of selection grade in terms of government circular dated 261989.
The Division Bench of which I was a member, was inclined to dismiss the writ petition, but keeping in view order dated 17.9.1993 passed by the Coordinate Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 6235 of 1993 - Brish Bhan Mittal v. State of Haryana, the matter was referred to a Larger Bench.
By a majority judgment, the Full Bench held that ad hoc service rendered by the petitioner was liable to be taken into consideration for the purpose of grant of the benefit of selection grade and seniority.
The Supreme Court approved the minority view and held that ad hoc service rendered by the petitioner prior to his regular appointment cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of fixation of seniority and grant of benefit of selection grade.
Some of the observation made in the judgment of the Supreme Court are extracted below :-  "A combined reading of the aforesaid provisions of the Recruitment Rules puts the controversy beyond any doubt and the only conclusion which could be drawn from the aforesaid Rules is that the services rendered either on ad hoc basis or as a stop-gap arrangement, as in the case in hand from 1980 to 1982 cannot be held to be regular service for getting the benefits of the revised scale of pay or of the selection grade under the Government Memorandum dated 2nd June, 1989 and 16th May, 1990, and therefore, the majority judgment of the High Court must be held to be contrary to the aforesaid provisions of the Recruitment Rules, consequently, cannot be sustained.
The initial letter of appointment dated 6121979, pursuant to which respondent-Rakesh Kumar joined as Assistant Engineer was on ad hoc basis and Clauses 1 to 4 of the said letter further provide that the appointment will be on ad hoc basis for period of 6 months from the date of joining and the salary was a fixed salary of Rs. 400/- pm in the scale of Rs. 400/- to Rs. 1,100/- and the services were liable to be terminated without any notice and at any time without assigning any reason and that the appointment will not enable the appointee any seniority or any other benefit under the Service Rules for the time being in force and will not count towards increment in the time scale.
In view of the aforesaid stipulations in the offer of appointment itself, we really fail to understand as to how the aforesaid period of service rendered on ad hoc basis can be held to be service on regular basis.
The conclusion of the High Court is contrary to the very terms and conditions stipulated in the offer of appointment and, therefore, the same cannot be sustained.
The regular letter of appointment, dated 2911982 in favour of Rakesh Kumar was also produced before us and that letter indicates that the respondent, Rakesh Kumar, along with others had applied to be Secretary, Haryana Public Service Commission for being appointed as an Assistant Engineer and the Service Commission after selecting the number of persons prepared a list and appointment letters were issued by the Government from the said list on the basis of the merit position of different candidates.
Thus the appointment of respondent Rakesh Kumar was a fresh appointment in accordance with the Statutory Rules after the Public Service Commission adjudged their suitability and the regular service of the respondent Rakesh Kumar must be counted from the date he joins the post pursuant to the offer of appointment dated 2911982 and the prior service rendered by him on ad hoc basis cannot be held to be regular service nor can it be tagged on to the later service for earning the benefit under the Government Circular dated 2nd June, 1989 as well as the Clarificatory Circular dated 16th May, 1990.
The conclusion of the majority judgment of the High Court, therefore, is wholly erroneous and cannot be sustained."
5.
The petitioner has neither averred nor any material has been placed on record to show that his initial appointment was preceded by any selection.
Therefore, respondent No. 2 did not commit any illegality by fixing his seniority on the basis of service rendered by him after 17.2.1971, i.e., the date of regular appointment.
6.
There is another reason for declining relief to the petitioner, namely, non-impleadment of necessary parties.
The petitioner is claiming refixation of his seniority at S. No. 60 instead of S. No. 119.
If his prayer was to be accepted, all those Agriculture Sub Inspectors whose seniority has been fixed between S. No. 61 and S. No. 118 would be adversely affected.
Their chance of promotion would also get diminished.
Therefore, all of them were necessary parties and the petitioner's failure to implead them is fatal to his claim for refixation of seniority.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.