RS Mongia, J - Vide order dated April 27, 1995, this writ petition was dismissed by a Division Bench at the motion stage without calling upon the other side.
However, the petitioner filed Special Leave Petition before the Apex Court.
The Apex Court vide order dated September 25, 1995 observed as under :-  "Delay condoned.
The learned counsel for the petitioner says that though the main contention before the High Court was that the refusal to summon the scrutineers of register has vitiated the inquiry the said contention has not been considered by the High Court.
He points out that the very first ground in the writ petition relates to the said contention.
Be that as it may, the proper course in the circumstances is for the petitioner to approach the High Court by way of review petition and urge the said contention.
If he does so, we have no doubt that the High Court will consider and dispose of the same in accordance with law.
The SLP is disposed of accordingly."
2.
Hence the review application was filed.
It came up for hearing on December 15, 1995, before the same Division Bench and the following order was passed :-  "To appreciate further the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner, let notice of motion in the writ petition be issued to the Guru Nanak Dev University for January 12, 1996.
The University is directed to produce the original result sheet of the petitioner bearing Roll No. 12211 in MA History (Part-II) examinations held in April, 1987 for improvement on the aforesaid date."
3.
Thereafter, the matter was placed before another Division Bench, which ordered that the matter be placed before a Bench headed by me.
Since in the meantime the other member of the Bench had been transferred, the matter was placed before me sitting singly.
4.
The brief facts leading to the filing of the writ petition may be noticed.
The petitioner joined the services of respondent-Guru Nanak Dev University (hereinafter referred to as `the University') as a Clerk in the year 1972 and was subsequently promoted as Senior Clerk, and then promoted as an Assistant.
He was placed under suspension on May 18, 1990, as a departmental enquiry was contemplated against him.
He was served with a charge-sheet dated August 3, 1990.
The charge-sheet may be reproduced here :-  "Whereas Shri Baljit Singh Saini was working as Assistant in the Examination I Branch in the year 1987 and he was entrusted with the preparation of the result of MA Part-II History Examination held in April, 1987.
He was posted in Section A-10 in Examination Branch.
And whereas one candidate Sushma Rani D/o Shri Amar Nath appeared in MA History Part-II Examination under Roll No. 12211 for improvement of her Division and she had opted to appear in all the four papers for this purpose.
As per record she appeared in papers I, II and IV and remained absent in Paper III in the said Examination, but her result was got declared as passed obtaining 421 marks in the main Gazette of MA Part-II History Examination April, 1987 by adding 56 marks of paper III even though she had not appeared in the III paper.
The said result of the candidate was not got scrutinized from any scrutineer.
Now under the orders of the Vice Chancellor, this charge-sheet is hereby delivered to Shri Baljit Singh Saini, Assistant as under :-  1.
Shri Baljit Singh Saini entertained the admission form of the candidate Sushma Rani D/o Shri Amar Nath, Roll No. 12211, MA Part-II (History) Improvement Examination Branch on 431987 whereas the last date for submission of admission forms with maximum late fee of Rs. 30/- was 311987.
He received the said admission form on 431987 and wilfully entertained it, without obtaining the orders of any competent authority, and thus accommodated the candidate unlawfully and by doing so, he violated the relevant rules of the University which accounts for his mala fide intention, dereliction of duty and serious misconduct in the performance of his duty.
2.
Shri Baljit Singh Saini got declared the result of the candidate Sushma Rani D/o Shri Amar Nath, Roll No. 12211 MA Part-II History (Imp) Examination April, 1987 by showing her having passed the said Examination in the main Gazette, fully knowing the fact that she had not appeared in Paper-III as no Award List of the said paper of the candidate was available with him at that time.
He had also not got scrutinized the said result of the candidate from any scrutinizer.
Thus he intentionally committed bungling to unlawfully help the candidate for his personal gains and violated the provisions of ordinances pertaining to the said Examination which amounted to dereliction of his duty and serious misconduct in performance of his duties.
Hence as desired by the Vice Chancellor, Shri Baljit Singh Saini is hereby called upon to submit therein whether he admits the truth of all or any of the above mentioned charges, what explanation or defence, if any, he has to offer and whether he desires to be heard in person by the Vice Chancellor.
In case no reply is received from him within the stipulated period, it will be presumed that he has nothing to say and the matter will be proceeded further in accordance with the provisions of Statute 33 of the University Calendar, Vol. 1, 1986."
5.
It is the case of the petitioner that after the service of the charge- sheet, he requested the University to permit him to inspect the original result sheet pertaining to the concerned candidate and also requested for the inspection of Scrutineers' register in order to a show the payment made to the Scrutineers who scrutinised the result of the concerned candidate and others.
The inspection of the result sheet was allowed but the Scrutineers' register as asked for was not shown to the petitioner.
He submitted a detailed reply on November 5, 1990, without being allowed to inspect the Scrutineers' register.
Copy of the reply has been appended as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The reply having not been found satisfactory by the University authorities, regular enquiry was ordered and one retired District and Sessions Judge was appointed as an Inquiry Officer.
The petitioner asked for certain documents before the Enquiry Officer vide application dated January 22, 1991 and also requested for getting the assistance of Shri OP Agrawal, Advocate, because the Enquiry Officer was a retired District and Sessions Judge, who was conversant with the legal aspect of the matter.
As per the averments in the petition, no orders were passed on the application.
Thereafter, the enquiry proceeded and the petitioner was held guilty by the Enquiry Officer vide his report dated March 5, 1991, copy annexure P-5.
The Registrar of the University issued a show cause notice dated April 23, 1991, to the petitioner on the basis of enquiry report that the Vice Chancellor of the University was of the view that there are good and sufficient reasons for removal of the petitioner from service.
The petitioner was to show cause as to why the said penalty be not imposed.
He had asked for copies of the statements of the witnesses which were recorded during the enquiry before he could submit reply to the show cause notice.
However, the University vide letter dated May 10, 1991 informed him as under :-  "With reference to this letter dated 2541991 it is hereby informed that as per the Legal Remembrancer of University the supply of documents such as copies of statements of the witnesses in connection with enquiry case, there is no provision in the rules.
He is hereby informed that the Show Cause Notice which was served upon him vide this office letter No. 8013/R, dated 2441991, reply thereto be submitted within two days from the issue of this letter."
6.
The petitioner, however, submitted his reply to the show cause notice dated May 24, 1991, copy attached as Annexure P-9.
The Vice Chancellor after considering the reply passed an order dated August 30, 1991, removing the petitioner from service with immediate effect.
It was further ordered that the subsistence allowance paid to the petitioner would not be recovered from him.
The appeal of the petitioner to the Syndicate against the order of punishment was also rejected vide proceedings dated September 16, 1994, copy annexure P-12.
The order of punishment passed by the Vice Chancellor dated August 30, 1991, copy annexure P-10, and the appellate order of the Syndicate dated September 16, 1994 (conveyed on September 22, 1994), copy annexure P-12, have been made the subject-matter of challenge in the present writ petition.
7.
From the charge-sheet, which has already been reproduced above, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the first charge was that the petitioner had entertained the admission form of Sushma Rani, Roll No. 12211, MA Part II (History) Improvement Examination on March 4, 1987, whereas the last date for submission of admission form with maximum late fee of Rs. 30/- was January 3, 1987.
The petitioner had, according to the University, wilfully entertained the admission form on March 4, 1987, without obtaining the order of competent authority and thus accommodated the candidate unlawfully and by doing so, he violated the relevant rules of the University which accounted for his mala fide action, dereliction of duty etc.
According to the petitioner's counsel, the case of the University was that it was a pre-planned arrangement first to entertain the admission form of the candidate, which otherwise could not be entertained as the same had been submitted late as per the specified time and it was also pre-planned to see that the candidate does improve her MA result by whatever method when ultimately the result was to be declared.
The petitioner in his reply to this charge in a nutshell submitted as under in his reply to the charge-sheet.
"My reply to charge No. 1 is as under :- The admission form was not received by me as alleged in the charge-sheet.
This form alongwith other admission forms were given to the Set A-10 in which I was then working as a Clerk as per distribution of admission forms, class- wise, by the then admissions clerk/Asstt./Supdt.
Further, as is apparent from the admission form I just checked the eligibility of the candidate to appear in the said examination on 26/3 with the help of my other colleague in the set which was confirmed by my seniors viz., the Assistant (the Set in charge).
Shri Hardip Singh Dhillon 27/3 and finally confirmed by the then Superintendent Shri Sulakhan Singh Bath.
All this can be corroborated from the original admission form.
In fact, thousands of admission forms were dealt in every session in a year.
The eligibility of the private candidates was confirmed in the Examination Branch with the final orders of Superintendent (Examination) and the candidates' admission form would have been received within the period of late fee of Rs. 30/- which has been confirmed by the Accounts Branch.
This admission form is said to have been received in the office (in fact, the admission form was received in the office of the Registrar (R&D) Section on 2/3).
This fact can be verified from the Demand Sheet of April, 87 examination sent by the Examination Branch to the Accounts Branch for ascertaining the fact of having received the admission form in time.
The date of receipt of an admission form is always mentioned in the demand sheet.
If the Accounts Branch had after taking notice of the date of receipt of admission form in the demand sheet and tallying the same pointed out of the ineligibility of the candidate to sit in the Examination concerned (Because of the receipt of the admission form and free after the expiry of the last date with extra late etc.) the matter would have been settled then and there and the candidate would not have been allowed to sit in the examination."
8.
The petitioner's counsel, however, submitted that apart from the reply mentioned above, even as per the University Calendar, Vol II of the year 1986, which was applicable to the facts of the present case, the form of the candidates could be entertained.
According to the petitioner's counsel, as per the University Calendar referred to above, under regulation 23 (appearing at page 70) under the chapter "MASTER OF ARTS EXAMINATIONS" starting from page 59, a candidate who appears for improvement of his division appears as a private candidate.
Regulation 23 is in the following terms :-  "Improvement of Division 23.
A person who has passed MA examination from this University in the third division may be allowed to reappear as a private candidate in the same subject for purpose of improving his division.
For this purpose, he may be given two chances within a period of five years from the date of his passing in the third division."
9.
The examination in the present case in which the petitioner was to appear commenced on May 7, 1987.
Regulation 2(a)(ii) under the Chapter Master of Arts examination appearing at page 59 lays down the period within which the admission form may be accepted.
It provides that with late fee of Rs. 100/- the admission form may be accepted "up to 30 days before the commencement of the examination" so far as the private candidates are concerned.
In the present case, the candidate's form was received on March 2, 1987, much prior to thirty days of the commencement of the examination along with late fee.
Moreover, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that it was not the petitioner who had in fact received the Form but it was entertained by various other officers who had allowed the candidate to sit in the examination.
Otherwise also as per the aforesaid regulation, the form could be entertained.
10.
Learned counsel for the University, however, argued that this point was never raised in his reply nor in the writ petition.
Since it was on the basis of the regulations only that the petitioner had raised the point, I had allowed the petitioner's counsel to raise the point as no facts were involved and the submission was made on the admitted facts.
11.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties on this point I am of the view that the University authorities were not right in giving a finding firstly, that the petitioner was the only person involved in entertaining the admission form.
There were other officers also who were to ultimately deal with the admission form.
Moreover, as per the aforesaid regulation, I am of the view that the admission form of the candidate was entertainable with the late fee.
12.
So far as the second charge is concerned, though at one stage the counsel for the University had shown me the result sheet but on later hearings, the result sheet was not shown as according to the counsel, it was not traceable.
Scrutineer's register on which the payment made to the Scruitineers is recorded was also not produced.
13.
The candidate had appeared earlier and had obtained the following marks in the papers :-  Paper I : 38/100 Paper II : 33/100 Paper III : 56/100 Paper IV : 48/100 Total : 175/400 14.
When the candidate appears for improving the division, on the result sheet the previous marks of the paper are also tabulated and below that the marks obtained in the examination for improvement are mentioned.
The candidate in the present case was required to appear in all the four papers for improving the division.
However, the candidate had absented herself in Paper III.
In the column of marks of the result sheet, the previous marks in Paper III were correctly mentioned as 56 and below that instead of mentioning `A' to show that the candidate was absent, it was left blank.
The columns pertaining to other papers were correctly filled in showing the previous marks as well as the marks obtained in the examination for improvement of the division.
What the tabulators, i.e., the petitioner and one Sucha Singh did was that the 56 marks in Paper III which the candidate had obtained in the previous examination were totalled along with the marks the candidate obtained in the other three papers in the examination for improvement of division.
She had obtained the following marks in the examination for improvement :-  Paper I : 46/100 Paper II : 43/100 Paper III : Absent Paper IV : 56/100 15.
By adding 56 marks in Paper III which the candidate had obtained in the previous examination, the total shown in the improvement examination was 201 and by adding 220 marks of MA Part I, the candidate was shown to have obtained 421 marks and was shown pass.
Since the candidate had not appeared in Paper III, the result should have been shown as `Previous Result Stands'.
This result of the candidate having improved her division was ultimately declared in the gazette.
It may be observed here that the candidate had applied for the detailed marks certificate almost three years after the declaration of the result.
The result sheet showed the signatures of two Scrutineers as well as signatures of a person who rechecked the result.
16.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, there was a mistake on the part of the petitioner in counting the previous marks of Paper III in the case of the candidate while compiling her result.
This mistake not only escaped the notice of Sucha Singh who had tabulated the result along with the petitioner but had even escaped the notice of the two Scrutineers as also the person who rechecked the result sheet.
There were signatures of the Scrutineers on the result sheet as well as of the person who rechecked the same as without that the result could not have been declared.
If there were any mala fide intention on the part of the petitioner then after the declaration of the result, if he had just filled in the result sheet the same marks of the candidate in Paper III in the examination to improve the division, which she had obtained in the previous examination, i.e., 56, perhaps nobody could have at any stage found out this as the result had already been declared.
If the petitioner had taken a chance by intentionally tabulating the wrong result, then it may escape the notice of the Scrutineers as well as the rechecker, then having succeeded in the same he would have seen to it that 56 marks are entered for Paper III in the improvement examination in the result sheet after the result had been declared though wrongly.
This, according to the counsel, was never done.
Further it was submitted that if the petitioner was mixed up with the candidate, the candidate would not have allowed three years to lapse before applying for the detailed marks certificate.
She would have done the same immediately after the result of the examination was declared.
Moreover, no benefit of the wrong declaration of the result had been obtained by the candidate as result was later on cancelled.
It was submitted that even the Inquiry Officer in his report had observed as under :-  "It is no doubt a fact that other officials concerned also initialled the result before its publication in the Gazette Notification and they seem to have done the same as an idle formality but that fact alone does not exonerate Shri Baljit Singh Saini who had managed the whole story evidently to help the candidate."
17.
Learned counsel for the respondent University, however, reiterated that the petitioner was involved in the episode and he intentionally totalled the previous marks of the candidate in Paper III to show that she had improved her division and in fact, the Scrutineers had never scrutinised the result of the candidate and the result was not tabulated at all when the Scrutineers scrutinised the result.
18.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The very basis of the charge that the petitioner was initially mixed up with the candidate to accept her admission form mala fide to ultimately help her has already been dealt with above while dealing with charge No. 1.
If the candidate's admission form could be accepted otherwise the question of any mala fide intention does not arise.
Otherwise also if the result is to be scrutinised and rechecked before its declaration, it cannot be said that there could be any previous arrangement unless there was arrangement with the Scrutineers and the Rechecker.
Unless there is a pre-arrangement with the Scrutineers and the Rechecker, which under the circumstances is very improbable, the petitioner cannot be held guilty.
It was because of a sheer mistake which escaped the notice of the Scrutineers and even the rechecker that wrong result was declared which was ultimately cancelled.
Had there been any bad intention on the part of the petitioner, nothing stopped him after the declaration of the result from tabulating the same marks in Paper III in the result sheet which the candidate had got previously though, in fact, she was absent.
This is because when the detailed marks certificate is issued, the marks are picked up from the result sheet and it could not be detected that the candidate was in fact, absent.
It is not the case of the respondent or University that there was any cutting or over-writing regarding the result of the candidate.
19.
For the foregoing reasons, I find that the findings of the enquiry officer as well as the Syndicate upholding the findings of the Enquiry Officer are not well based.
The impugned orders dated August 30, 1991 and September 22, 1994, copies annexure P-10 and P-12 respectively, are liable to be quashed.
20.
The question then would arise as to what relief regarding the arrears of pay the petitioner is entitled to under the circumstances of this case.
The petitioner has not worked all this period after his removal in the University and somehow the matter has been pending in this Court or the Apex Court.
I am of the view that interest of justice will be met if the petitioner is paid 25% of the arrears of pay from the date of his removal to the date of his re- instatement.
The petitioner may not be paid anything more for the suspension period other than the allowances which he had already received.
21.
Consequently, the review application as well as the writ petition are allowed.
The orders at Annexure P-10 and P-12 are quashed and the petitioner is held entitled to the arrears of salary as mentioned above.
He will be entitled to all other consequential benefits arising from his re-instatement by virtue of this order.
Petition allowed.