KK Srivastava, J - The petitioners seek regularisation of their services under the policy of regularisation, vide copies annexed in this writ petition as Annexures P5 and P6 and also pray for grant of pay at par with the regular employees in the Department of Education.
2.
The petitioners excepting Hari Chand (petitioner No. 22) and Surjit Kaur (petitioner No. 26) were appointed as part-time Sweepers in various Educational Institutions in the State of Punjab.
About 15-20 years back they were appointed by the Head Teacher/BPO/Head Master without any reference to the Employment Exchange.
Petitioner No. 22 Hari Chand was working as a Chowkidar at Goverment High School, Taipala while petitioner No. 26 Surjit Kaur was working as a Water Carrier at Government High School, Mardapur.
The grievance of the petitioners is that despite their rendering services for a number of years they have not been regularised.
Reference has been made to the notification dated 751993 issued by the Punjab Government revising the policy of regularsation of ad hoc employees.
Under the policy aforesaid, daily wage/casual workers who have completed ten years or more service as on 3081992 were considered for regularisation with effect from 191992 on availability of the posts.
These instructions also covered the contingent paid or temporary staff on part time basis in the police battalion of the Police Department such as cooks, dhobies, barbers, mochies (cobblers), tailors, carpenters, masons, sweepers and water carriers only after the completion of the modalities before hand like conversion/creation of the part time posts to regular posts within specified pay scales for each of them and declaring these part time temporary incumbents as daily-wage workers.
Later on, in 1995, the Government of Punjab issued an order for regularisation of the services of all work-charge employees/casual daily wagers under the Punjab Government in various Departments.
These instruction were also applicable to contingent paid or temporary staff on part-time basis in the Police Department vide copy Annexure P5 with the writ petition.
The petitioners sought the regularisation by serving a legal notice on the respondents.
The Director of the Public Instructions, Punjab, respondents No. 2 and 3 issued letter dated 2371996 replying to the legal notice of the petitioners Annexure P2.
The District Education Officer (Roop Nagar) sent a reply dated 6111996 informing the petitioners that the Government had not issued instructions regarding the regularisation of the part-time employees.
The copies of the letters are annexed as Annexures P3 and P4 to the writ petition.
The petitioners have cited a judgment of this Court in the case of Surender Singh and another v. The State of Haryana and others, 1992(2) SCT 125 (SC), CWP No. 17 of 1991 decided on 18111991 and annexed copy of the judgment as Annexure P7.
Reference has also been made to a Civil Writ Petition No. 2783 of 1995, Gurdev Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(2) SCT 125 (SC).
The petitioner of that case, namely, Gurdev Kaur was appointed 15 years back as a part-time worker and her services were terminated upon the arrival of a regular incumbent.
The petition was allowed by this Court and a direction was issued to the respondents to reinstate the services of the petitioner and regularise her services against the available vacant post of Water Carrier/Dai.
3.
Respondents No. 1 to 7 filed their written statement wherein it was, inter-alia, alleged that the petitioners were working as part time sweepers and their emoluments were paid from the contingency funds.
No appointment letter had been issued to the petitioners who were allowed to work for a short time by the Incharge of the respective institutions.
It was further alleged that there were instructions/Rules/Policy to regularise the services of the part time sweepers of the Education Department.
The Punjab Police Rules were not applicable to the petitioners.
Reference was made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 5060 of 1991 arising out of S.L.P.
(Civil) No. 14229 of 1991, State of Punjab and other v. Surinder Kumar and others, 1992(1) SCT 538 (SC).
The Supreme Court had denied the claim of part time lecturers for regularisation of their services.
It was further mentioned that according to the Government policy, schools were upgraded from Primary to Middle to High and High to Senior Secondary.
However, part time sweepers cannot claim the regularisation of their services after upgradation of schools.
It was averred that the provision made for the Police Battalion is not applicable in the present case because the method of recruitment in the Police Department was totally different.
4.
Undisputedly, the instructions dated 751993 Annexure P5 covered the contingent paid temporary staff on part time basis in the police battalion of the Police Department.
Para (x) of these instructions in this context provides as under :-  "These instructions will also cover the contingent paid temporary staff on part time basis in the police battalion of the Police Deptt.
such as cooks, dhobies, barbers, mochies, tailors and carpenters, masons, sweepers, water carriers only after the completion of the modalities before hand like (a) conversion/creation of the part time posts to regular posts within specified pay scales for each of them, and (b) declaring these part time temporary incumbents as daily wage workers."
5.
The petitioners have filed copy of judgment of a Division Bench of this court delivered in C.W.P.
No. 2783 of 1995, Gurdev Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, which is Annexure P8.
In the said case, the Court considered the matter of regularisation of the petitioner who was appointed as a water carrier at Woman Hospital, Dhuri with effect from 17.5.1971.
The petitioner possessed certificate of registration as a trained Dai issued by the Punjab Nurses Registration Council.
The appointment of Gurdev Kaur was initially for a period of six months, but later on, she continued without interruption on part time basis for more than 23 years and five months.
The services of Gurdev Kaur were terminated vide order dated 31101994 issued by the Senior Medical Officer, Dhuri which was impugned in the said writ petition wherein the petitioner also claimed regularisation of her services.
The Court while allowing the writ petition directed for regularisation of the services of the petitioner and observed as under :-  "Claim of the petitioner for regularisation of services and also for appointment as trained Dai is quite justified.
In annexure P-3, issued as early as in 1983, the petitioner has been described as trained Dai.
This shows that although the petitioner was appointed as water carrier, she was in fact asked to discharge the duties as trained Dai.
In his recommendation made on the application of the petitioner for appointment as Dai the Senior Medical Officer has recorded that the petitioner has been working in the institution for last 15 years and her work and conduct is satisfactory.
The fact that the petitioner is a qualified trained Dai has also not been denied and further that vacant post of trained Dai is available has also not been controverted.
Keeping a person as part timer for 23 years and 5 months and ignoring his case for regularisation cannot in any manner be justified particularly when regular posts of Water Carrier and trained Dai have become available.
In our opinion the present one is a fit case in which the petitioner deserved to be regularised in service and appointed a Water Carrier/Dai against the available vacant post."
6.
In the written statement there was no averment made regarding the non-availability of the posts for the petitioners.
The stand taken by the respondents in the written statement is that the petitioners were allowed to work only as part-time Sweepers at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner from time to time and they were paid from contingency funds and therefore, they cannot claim for regularisation of their services.
We are of the considered view that once the respondents have considered the cases for regularisation of part-time employees of police battalion and this Court has considered and allowed the claim of an employee working as part-time Water Carrier in the Medical Department of the State in the case of Gurdev Kaur (supra), the petitioners also deserve to be considered for regularisation of their services on their respective posts.
It cannot be said that the employees of the police battalion stand on a different footing under the same Government than the petitioners working in the Education Department of the State.
Resultantly, this writ petition is allowed to the extent that the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services on their respective posts under the relevant instructions expeditiously and preferably within a period of three months from the date of receipt of this order.