PN Nag, J. (Oral) - The petitioner in this writ petition has prayed for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay to the petitioner pay, allowances and other emoluments payable to the post of Commandant from January 22, 1982 till the date of superannuation, i.e. 31186 and also the consequential retirement benefits of pension, gratuity etc. on such basis.
2.
The petitioner, who was originally appointed as an Emergency Commissioned Officer in the Army, after being released from the Army, was appointed as Assistant Commandant in Border Security Force (for short 'BSF') on 1111967.
On 2681972, he was promoted as Deputy Commandant (Current Charge) in the said service and was regularised in this post.
He was designated as Deputy Commandant/Joint Asstt.
Director, BSF in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-1700 plus Rs. 50/- as compensatory allowance.
Thereafter, he was posted in 29th Bn.
BSF (2nd in Command) in March, 1981 on the same terms and conditions.
3.
It appears that certain posts of Deputy Commandant were designated as 2nd in Command and the scale of Deputy Commandant, Second Command, was revised to Rs. 1200-1700 plus Rs. 100/- special pay plus Rs. 100/- as compensatory allowance as applicable to the post of Battalion Commandant.
4.
The petitioner, vide order dated 2111982, passed by respondent No. 2 (annexure 5-A) was conferred the local rank of Commandant and he took over as Commandant, 29th Bn., BSF, Sri Nagar with effect from 2211982 and consequently he submitted a charge report (annexure 6) to the higher authorities to the effect that he had taken over the charge of 29th Bn., BSF as Commandant (LR).
Therefore he continued to work as Local Rank Commandant uptil 21st September, 1982 when he met with an accident during the course of his employment in active duty area and suffered spinal injury which disabled and paralyzed him.
5.
It appear that a Departmental Promotion Committee (for short 'DPC') was convened in October, 1982 to select officers for promotion as regular Commandants at a fixed pay of Rs. 1800/- plus Rs. 100/- special pay and Rs. 100/- as Compensatory Allowance and the name of the petitioner was approved for regular promotion as Commandant on the basis of merit-cum-seniority in October, 1982.
However, no promotion order was issued as the petitioner was hospitalised.
The petitioner having represented against the non-issuance of the order of promotion as regular Commandant, he was informed that the promotion of the petitioner could take effect only from the date when he filled up the charge report and took up the charge of the post and since the petitioner had not taken the charge as yet, his promotion could not be effected.
6.
However, it appears that there was a seniority list prepared by the respondents and one Mr. SP Ahuja who was also similarly appointed as Asst.
Commandant like the petitioner in BSF and later as Deputy Commandant was in the meantime shown higher in seniority above the petitioner whereas the petitioner was senior to Mr. Ahuja at the relevant time.
The result was that the petitioner challenged the seniority of Mr. Ahuja in the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 266 of 1981 and the contention of the petitioner was upheld by the learned single Judge.
The Union of India filed a Letters Patent Appeal, being LPA No. 7/82 against the order of the learned single Judge, which, no doubt, was allowed and the seniority of Mr. Ahuja was restored subject to the condition that the promotion granted to Mr. Ahluwalia, the present petitioner would remain unaffected and it was ordered that Mr. Ahuja or the Union of India would not question such promotion of the petitioner on the basis of that judgment.
7.
It may be stated here that it is apparent in the judgment itself that the petitioner was promoted to the next higher rank of the Commandant and that the Union of India had stated that they would not question such promotion on the basis of the judgment.
Unfortunately, the Union of India has come out in this writ petition with a different stand contrary to the undertaking given by them before the Jammu & Kashmir High Court in LPA 7/82 and are questioning the promotion of the petitioner as a Commandant.
8.
The petitioner on account of accident could not formally join the duty of the Commandant for which he was approved by the D.P.C.
till his superannuation on 31.1.1986.
However, he was granted leave upto 31.1.1986 the date of superannuation by the Department.
The fact, however, therefore, remains that the petitioner continued in the service as Commandant throughout from 2211982 to the date of superannuation on 31.1.1986 and is entitled to full pay and allowances as are admissible to the Commandant for the aforementioned period and other consequential benefits.
The petitioner has been making periodic representations to the authorities concerned for making necessary payments but of no use.
According to the petitioner, while holding the local rank of Commandant, he has performed and discharged all the duties and responsibilities of Commandant (LR) and regular Commandant and on the principle of equal pay for equal work, the petitioner is entitled to full pay and allowances of regular Commandant.
9.
The petitioner has since been denied the pay and allowances of Commandant for the period from 2211982 till the date of his retirement, i.e. 31.1.1986 illegally, he has been constrained to prefer this writ petition.
10.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner was only given a local rank of the Commandant as since 31 Bn.
BSF was without a Commandant, therefore, Commandant 29th Bn.
BSF was posted to 31st Bn.
BSF and the petitioner being the senior-most Deputy Commandant in 29th Bn.
BSF was conferred with the Local Rank of the Commandant so that he may look after the duties of the Commandant till a regular Commandant was posted in 29th Bn.
BSF.
11.
No doubt the DPC was held in 1982 for considering the Deputy Commandants for the promotion to the rank of Commandants in the BSF, the petitioner was also considered and was recommended by the DPC in the panel prepared by them for the eventual promotion to the rank of Commandant.
However, on account of an accident which the petitioner met with, on 2911982, he could not join duty as a Commandant for which he was approved.
Further, he could not join duty till the date of his superannuation on 31.1.1986, even for a single day.
12.
No doubt the petitioner had assumed the charge of the Commandant by submiting that he has assumed the charge of Commandant 29th Bn.
BSF on 2211982 and continued to function in that capacity till he met with the accident and thereafter even continued to hold the rank of Commandant.
In fact, he was holding the charge of Commandant (LR) in accordance with Rule 14A(4)(c) and (d) of the Border Security Force Rules.
The petitioner could not assume the charge of Commandant on account of his medical unfitness and, therefore, he is not entitled for any benefits payable to a Commandant.
Since the petitioner could not take the charge as a Commandant for a single day, under Fundamental Rule 17(1) the petitioner is not entitled to draw the pay and allowances as are admissible to the Commandant.
13.
Further, the respondents have not denied the averments made by the petitionr in regard to the judgment relied upon by Jammu & Kashmir High Court and have only stated that the same is a matter of record.
14.
Unfortunately, none is present on behalf of the Union of India.
On 1521991 this court ordered the regular hearing of the matter on 531991 within first ten cases and notice to that effect was issued to counsel for the Union of India stating therein that the case shall be heard on that date in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case as would be referred to hereinafter.
The case was taken up on 5th March, 1991 but none appeared on behalf of the Union of India and the matter was adjourned for today.
Even today, none has put in appearance on behalf of the respondents Union of India.
It is unfortunate that the cases are being taken so casually by the Union of India and the court is, therefore, constrained to take up this matter in the absence of counsel for the Union of India.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the stand taken by the respondents that the petitioner did not take charge of the post of the Commandant is factually incorrect as it is contrary to the records.
16.
There seems to be a good deal of force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Annexure 5A clearly points that the petitioner had been conferred local rank of Commandant and he had been posted with immediate effect in such post and that further vide annexure 6, he had also taken over the charge of Commandant of the said Batallion, namely, 29th Bn., BSF on 22nd January, 1982.
Vide annexure 7, the IG, BSF, Sri Nagar informed the authorities concerned at Delhi that the petitioner had assumed charge of the post of Commandant from 2211982 and the charge report of assumption was being sent by post.
17.
It may be noted here that after the petitioner was formally regularised for promotion as a Commandant on the basis of the recommendations of the DPC held in October 1982, the petitioner had already met with an accident and was lying in disabled condition in the hospital and because of his disability, he could not formally re-join as a Commandant after the approval of regularisation of his promotion as a Commandant on the basis of the recommendations of DPC.
However, since the petitioner was in service and was already holding the charge of the post of Commandant (LR) there was no question of his again submitting his charge report for holding such a post.
Under Rule 14(4)(a) of the Border Security Force Rules, 1969 an officer or Subedar of the Force holding a local rank shall exercise the command and be vested with the powers of an officer holding that rank.
In other words, he would discharge all the duties, responsibilities and functions of a command and would be vested with the powers of an officer holding that rank.
Since the petitioner has already taken over the charge of 29th Bn., BSF on 2211982 and thereby assumed and taken over the duties, responsibilities and functions as a Commandant, there was no question of his again submitting another charge report for holding such a post as he had already taken over the charge of the command as Commandant w.e.f.
22.1.1981 by having assumed and taken the duties, responsibilities and functions of the office earlier and even the Rules do not make a distinction between the duties, responsibilities and functions of a person holding a local rank or a rank on regular basis.
Furthermore, admittedly, the petitioner was found suitable for promotion to the post of Commandant on the recommendations of the DPC held some time in 1982.
The respondents should have considered in the facts and circumstances of the case that there was no necessity of having a formal charge report from the petitioner for his joining as a Commandant as it was merely a formality.
He has already assumed the duties, responsibilities and functions of a Commandant on 2211982 and taken over the charge of the command.
The stand of the respondents, therefore, is wholly untenable in the eyes of law.
18.
The next stand of the respondents is that although the petitioner was holding a local rank of Commandant, under Rule 14-A(4)(c), he was not entitled to any extra pay and allowances for holding such rank.
I am afraid this provision cannot be invoked to debar the petitioner from claiming pay and allowances of the post which he effectively and legally held and is entitled to the same w.e.f.
2211982 till the date of his retirement, i.e., 31.1.1986.
In the petition and more particularly in the rejoinder, the petitioner has stated that the duties, responsibilities and functions of Commandant (LR) and the regular Commandant are the same and that he had performed the same duties, responsibilities and functions as of the regular Commandant from 2211982 till his date of superannuation, i.e. 31.1.1986 and as such he is entitled to pay, allowances and other benefits of the Commandant on the basis of equal pay for equal work.
It is obvious that the officer holding a local rank shall exercise same functions, duties and responsibilities and be vested with the powers of an officer holding that rank.
Even the law does not make a distinction between the Officers holding a local rank and a regular rank insofar as the duties, responsibilities and functions are concerned.
Therefore, on the principle of equal pay for equal work, the petitioner cannot be denied pay, allowances and other benefits as are admissible to the regular Commandant for the above-mentioned period.
The principle of equal pay for equal work has been well settled in a series of decisions of the Supreme Court.
In this connection, it will be appropriate to refer Mewa Ram Kanojia v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences and others, AIR 1989 SC 1256, where their Lordships have held that the doctrine of "Equal Pay for Equal Work" is not expressly declared a fundamental right under the Constitution.
But Art. 39(d) read with Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution declares the constitutional goal enjoining the State not to deny any person equality before law in matters relating to employment including the scales of pay.
Art. 39(d) read with Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution enjoins the State that where all things are equal and persons holding identical posts performing identical and similar duties under the same employer should not be treated differently in the matter of their pay.
The doctrine of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' is not abstract one.
It is open to the State to prescribe different scales of pay for different posts having regard to educational qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the post.
The principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' is applicable when employees holding the same rank perform similar functions and discharging similar duties and responsibilities are treated differently.
The application of doctrine would arise where employee are equal in every respect but they are denied equality in matters relating to the scale of pay.
While considering the question of application of principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' it has to be borne in mind that it is open to the State to classify employees on the basis of qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the posts concerned.
If the classification has reasonable nexus with the objective sought to be achieved, efficiency in the administration, the State would be justified in prescribing different pay scales but if the classification does not stand the test of reasonable nexus and the classification is founded on unreal, and unreasonable basis it would be violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Equality must be among the equals, unequals cannot claim equality.
Even if the duties and functions are of similar nature but if the educational qualifications prescribed for the two posts are different and there is difference in measure of responsibilities, the principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' would not apply.
Different treatment to persons belonging to the same class is a permissible classification.
In this case, as already observed, under the Rules there is no distinction between an officer holding a local rank and an officer holding regular rank in sofar as the duties, responsibilities and functions of the command are concerned and both are working under the same master.
There is no reasonable basis for treating the officer holding local rank and officer holding the regular rank differently.
In this connection, reference may also be made to Jai Pal and others v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1504.
19.
In view of the settled principle of law, the petitioner is entitled to same pay, allowances and other benefits as are admissible to a regular commandant, w.e.f.
2211982 till his date of superannuation.
20.
However, according to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to the same pay, allowances and other benefits as are admissible to the Commandant under Rule 14(4)(c) of BSF Rules, which reads as under:  "(4) An officer or Subedar of the Force holding a local rank : (a) ........... (b) ........... (c) shall not be entitled to any extra pay and allowances for holding such rank; ..." I am afraid in view of the judicial pronouncements of the Supreme Court this clause cannot be enforced insofar as the petitioner is concerned and has to be ignored being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
21.
Viewed from different angle, the salary for the period in question as Commandant to the petitioner can also not be denied and cannot be questioned by the Union of India because of the undertaking given by them before the Jammu & Kashmir High Court in LPA 7/82 wherein they have clearly stated that they will not question the promotion of the respondent-petitioner herein as the Commandant.
It is unfortunate in such a matter the Union of India have questioned the promotion of the petitioner to the higher rank of Commandant.
22.
In the result, the writ petition succeeds and the respondents are directed to pay to the petitioner pay and allowances for the period from 2211982 till the date of his retirement, i.e. 31.1.1986 as permissible to regular Commandant of the BSF.
The petitioner will be entitled to all consequential benefits, like pension, gratuity etc. on the basis of pay.
and allowances payable to petitioner as Commandant, as ordered above.
The petitioner will also be entitled to costs of this writ petition.
Counsel's fee Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.