Vijender Jain CJ - This is an application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure preferred by respondent No. 2 Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation Limited (for short, `HSIDC') for recall of our order dated 20.7.2007 vide which C.W.P.
No. 10771 of 2007 was disposed of.
2.
While disposing of the writ petition, a direction was issued to the HSIDC to dispose of the application as well as the appeal of the petitioners (non- applicants herein) within a period of four weeks from the date of the receipt of the aforesaid order.
3.
The main reason which has been given for recall of the order in question is that on the date when the same was passed, the appeal of the petitioners as referred therein already stood disposed of after due hearing on 2412007 vide order dated 13.2.2007 which was duly communicated to them vide letter dated 2022007.
4.
Along with this application, the letter dated 14.2.2007 written by the petitioners to the Chairman, Appellate Committee, Government of Haryana has been placed on record as.
Annexure R2/1 in which that had admitted the receipt of order dated 13.2.2007 on 2022007.
The relevant extract of the aforesaid letter dated 14.2.2007 is reproduced below :  "I, Satish Gupta, along with Shri Babu Lal Bansal, appeared before Appellate Committee, on 1422008 in the evening, in pursuance of letter No. HSIDC.Estate.2008/19567-68 dated 722008.
Last time, on 2412007, I appeared alone before the Committee in reference to my appeal.
After hearing me, the Committee passed an order dated 13.2.2007, which was received by me vide letter dated 2022007, my appeal was not accepted and the same was rejected."
5.
A perusal of the record shows that the writ petition was filed by the petitioners/non-applicants on 19.7.2007 duly supported by an affidavit in which an averment was made that the appeal was still pending and the entire sequence of events regarding hearing and disposal thereof was withheld from the Court which led to the passing of order dated 20.7.2007.
6.
Dr. Surya Parkash, learned counsel for the petitioners/non-applicants could not give any plausible explanation except to say that it was a bona fide mistake.
7.
We are not entirely convinced with the stand of the petitioners/non- applicants.
A person, who approaches the Court invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, has to come with clear hands.
Unfortunately, the bona fides of the petitioners/non-applicants have seriously been clouded by the facts which have been detailed above.
The jurisdiction of the High Courts to issue directions, orders or writs including writs in the nature of Habeas Corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, Quo- warranto and Certiorari for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part-III of the Constitution and for any other purpose is essentially an equitable jurisdiction.
Therefore, the Court will decline hearing to those, who do not come with clean hands.
Likewise, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to grant leave is discretionary and relief would be declined to the one, who tried to pollute the system of administration of justice.
In Hari Narain v. Badri Das, AIR 1963 SC 1558, the Supreme Court upheld the objection raised on behalf of the respondents that the appellant was guilty of misstating the facts and revoked the leave by making the following observations :  "It is of utmost importance that in making material statements and setting forth grounds in applications for special leave made under Art. 136 of the Constitution, care must be taken not to make any statements which are inaccurate, untrue or misleading.
In dealing with applications for special leave, the court naturally takes statements of fact and grounds of fact contained in the petitions at their face value and it would be unfair to betray the confidence of the Court by making statements which are untrue and misleading.
Thus, if at the hearing of the appeal the Supreme Court is satisfied that the material statements made by the appellant in his application for special leave are inaccurate and misleading and the respondent is entitled to contend that the appellant may have obtained special leave from the Supreme Curt on the strength of what he characterises as misrepresentations of facts contained in the petition for special leave, the Supreme Court may come to the conclusion that in such a case special leave granted to the appellant ought to be revoked."
In Welcome Hotel and others etc. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others etc., AIR 1983 SC 1015, the Supreme Court held that a party which has misled the Court in passing an order in its favour is not entitled to be heard by the Court.
In G. Narayanaswamy Reddy and others v. Governor of Karnataka and another, A.I.R. 1991 S.C.1726, the Supreme Court declined relief to the appellant who had concealed the fact that the award was not made by the Land Acquisition Officer within the time specified in Section 11-A of the Land Acquisition Act on account of interim stay order passed in a writ petition.
While dismissing the Special leave petition, the Court observed :  "Curiously enough, there is no reference in the Special Leave petitions to any of the stay orders and we came to know about these orders only when the respondents appeared in response to the notice and filed their counter affidavit.
In our view, the said interim orders have a direct bearing on the question raised and the non-disclosure of the same certainly amounts to suppression of material facts.
On this ground alone, the Special Leave Petitions are liable to be rejected.
It is well settled in law that the relief under Art. 136 of the Constitution is discretionary and a petitioner who approaches this Court for such relief must come with frank and full disclosure of facts.
If he fails to do so and suppresses material facts, his application is liable to be dismissed.
We accordingly dismiss the Special Leave Petitions."
In S.P.
Chengalvaraya Naidu (dead) by L.Rs.
v. Jagannath (dead) by LRs & Others, 1994(1) RRR 253 : JT 1993(6) SC 331, the Supreme Court held that where a preliminary decree was obtained by playing fraud on the Court in-as-much as a vital document was withheld in order to gain advantage on the other side, such party deserves to be thrown out at any stage of the litigation.
In Nand Lal and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and Another, AIR 1960 Jammu & Kashmir 19, a learned Judge of Jammu & Kashmir High Court held that if a party does not disclose all the facts correctly and candidly, it is not entitled to be heard on the merits of the case.
Some of the observations made by the learned Single Judge are reproduced below:  "Where the petitioners under Article 226 have not stated the relevant facts petition or in the affidavit in support of their petition, this is by itself sufficient to entail an outright dismissal of the writ petition without going into its merits.
And even if the petitioners have a good case on merits, the Court will be entitled to decline to go into the merits and dismiss their petition, because the conduct of the petitioners has been such as to mislead the Court."
This Court has also consistently taken a serious view of the contumacious conduct of the parties and has declined relief in a large number of cases.
In Smt. Bhupinderpal Kaur v. The Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Punjab, 1968 PLR 169, a learned Single Judge held that if the High Court comes to the conclusion that affidavit in support of the application for grant of a writ was not candid and did not fully state the facts but either suppressed the material facts the Court ought, for its own protection and to prevent an abuse of its process, refuse to proceed any further with the examination of the merits and where there is such conduct which is calculated to deceive the Court into granting the order of rule nisi, the petition should be dismissed on that short ground.
In Chiranji Lal and Others v. Financial Commissioner, Haryana and Others, 1978 PLR 582, the Full Bench approved the observations made in Bhupinderpal Kaur's case (supra) and held that where there has been a mala fide and calculated suppression of material facts which, if disclosed, would have disentitled the petitioners to the extraordinary remedy under the writ jurisdiction or in any case would have materially affected the merits on both the interim and ultimate relief claimed, the writ petition should not be entertained.
In Harbhajan Kaur v. State of Punjab and Others, 1995(3) RRR 28 : 1994 PLJ 287, a Division Bench held as under :  "The writ petitioners have tried to overreach the Court.
They did not bring the correct facts to the notice of the Court and obtained an order from us by concealing material facts and without impleading vitally affected part to the writ petition.
They have been fighting litigation against the Punjab Wakf Board since, 1986 as is passed in Petition No. 363 of 1986 (Sham Singh and another v. Punjab Wakf Board).
They did not disclose that their applications for transfer of land were dismissed by the Tehsildar (Sales) and, on appeal the orders were affirmed by the Sales Commissioner and that the appeals against the orders of the Sales Commissioner were pending.
before the Chief Sales Commissioner, that the Punjab Wakf Board had been contesting their claim and in those proceedings it had been held that the Punjab Wakf Board was the owner of the disputed land and that in judicial proceedings Smt. Kuldip Kaur and her husband had made admission that the Punjab Wakf Board was the owner of the disputed land."
In CWPNo.
15448 of 1993 Jai, Bhagwan Jain v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula District Ambala, derided on 2191994, a Division Bench of this Court lamented on the growing tendency among the litigants to pollute the course of justice and observed as under :  "Satya (truth) and Ahinsa (non-violence) are the two basic values of life, which have been cherished for centuries in this land of Mahavir and Mahatma Gandhi.
People from different parts of the world come here to learn these fundamental principles of life.
However, post-independence era and particularly the last two decades have witnesses sharp decline in these two basic values of life.
Materialism has over-shadowed the old ethos and quest for personal gain is so immense that people do not have any regard for the `truth'.
Proceedings in the Courts, which were at one time considered to be pious and the people considered it their duty to tell the truth in the Court, now stand vitiated by the attempts made by the parties to pollute the ends of justice."
Similar view was expressed by this Court in Pawan Kumar v. State of Haryana & anr, 1994(4) SCT 75 : 1994(5) SLR 73; M/s Kaka Ram Pars Ram & ors. v. State of Punjab & ors, 1996(1) PLR 691; C.W.P.
No. 11686 of 1996 - Shri Kant & ors. v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(2) SCT 446, decided on 2011997; C.W.P.
No. 4381 of 1998 - M/s Arihant Super Rice Land & ors. v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 681998; C.W.P.
No. 18304 of 1998- Smt. Krishna Gupta v. State of Haryana & ors, decided on 1121998 and C.W.P.
No. 2585 of 1999 - Santa Singh v. Union of India and others, decided on 2421999; C.W.P.
No. 11538 of 1999 - Meenu Seth v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 232000, C.W.P.
No. 3520 of 2000- Rajinder Parshad and others v. Union of India and others, decided on 3152000 and CWPNo.
8239 of 2004 - Parveen Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 372004.
Reference may also be made to some of the English decisions on the subject.
In Rex v. Kensington, 1917(1) KB 486, Cozens Hardy MR made the following observations on the conduct of a party in an ex-parte application in the following words :  " On an ex-parte application uberrima fides is required, and unless that can be established if there is anything like deception practised on the Court, the Court ought not to go into the merits of the case, but simply say we will not listen to your application because of what you have done."
Lord Scrutton L.J.
said :  "It has for many years the rule of the Court and one which it is of the greatest importance to maintain, that when any applicant comes to the Court to obtain relief on an ex-parte statement he should make a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts, facts not law...  ....
The applicant must state fully and fairly the facts and the penalty by which the Court enforces that obligation is that if it finds out that the facts have been fully and fairly stated to it the Court will set aside any action which it has taken on the faith of the imperfect statement."
In R.V.
Churchwardens of All Saints Wigan, (1876)1 A.C. 611, Lord Haterlay observed :  "Upon a prerogative writ there may arise many matters of discretion which may induce the Judges to withhold the grant of it - matters, connected with delay or possibly with the conduct of the parties."
In Rex.
v. Garland, (1870)39 LR QB 269, it was held :  "Where a process is ex debito justitiae the Court would refuse to exercise its discretion in favour of the applicant where the application is found to be wanting in bona fides."
Consequently, we accept this application, recall our order dated 20.7.2007 and dismiss the writ petition on the ground of concealment of facts.
Application allowed.