Hemant Gupta, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 14833 of 2006 and 15848 of 2006, as common questions of law and facts are involved in these petitions.
2.
In CWP No. 14833 of 2006, the petitioner has invoked the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of a writ of Quo-Warranto for the quashing and setting aside the appointment of respondent No. 4-M.R.
Gupta, as Principal of DAV College, Pehowa, whereas in CWP No. 15848 of 2006, the challenge is to the appointment of respondent No. 4-J.S.
Nain, as Principal of DAV College, Ambala City.
Since the argument and the pleadings are identical in both the cases, therefore, both the writ petitions are being disposed of by the common order.
However, for the facility of reference, the facts are taken from CWP No. 14833 of 2006.
3.
The petitioner is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Home Science of FC College of Women, Hisar.
The petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court when the petitioner learnt that the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Principal of DAV College, Pehowa, has not been made in accordance with law.
It is pointed out that DAV College, Pehowa is affiliated to Kurukshetra University and is in receipt of 95% of grants-in-aid.
All appointments in an affiliated college receiving 95% grants-in-aid, have to be made in accordance with the Haryana Affiliated College (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (for short `the Act') and the Rules framed thereunder.
It is contended that in terms of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder, it is the Managing Committee of a College, which is to appoint a Principal of the College.
It is contended that respondent No. 4 has not been appointed by the Managing Committee of the College in terms of the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed there under, but by DAV College Managing Committee, New Delhi, which is the Apex Body to manage the affairs of all the DAV Institutions.
Therefore, the posting of respondent No. 4 as Principal of the College is illegal, against the statutory provisions and thus, cannot be sustained.
The petitioner also relies upon Clause 6 of the Kurukshetra University Calendar, contemplating the constitution of the Governing Body for the management of a privately aided college.
It is the case of the petitioner that the decision to post respondent No. 4 as Principal of the College has not been taken by the Governing Body as provided in the Kurukshetra University Calendar or by the Managing Committee, which is the appointing Authority, in terms of the Rule 5 of the Rules.
Therefore, respondent No. 4 is usurper of a public post.
4.
The State Government in its short reply pointed out that appointment of respondent No. 4 as Principal of DAV College, Pehowa is not a fresh appointment, but by way of a transfer.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 to the post of Principal is in accordance with the Rules.
Initially he was appointed to the post of Principal, DAV College, Naneola, which was filled up after advertisement and interview by a Selection Committee.
The said respondent joined as Principal of DAV College, Naneola after getting approval from the Kurukshetra University as well.
Subsequently, he was transferred from DAV College, Naneola to Pehowa.
Resolution to this effect was passed in the meeting of the Governing Bodies of both the Colleges, wherein nominee of the Vice Chancellor and the nominee of the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, were also present.
Kurukshetra University has issued no objection regarding transfer.
Thereafter, DAV College Managing Committee transferred the services of respondent No. 4 from DAV College Naneola to DAV College Pehowa.
It has further been pointed out that Clause 2(e) of the Act was substituted vide Haryana Act No. 1 of 1996.
The substituted clause reads as under :  "2. xxxxx  (e) "Managing Committee" means the Managing Committee of an affiliated college or colleges and includes a person or body of persons for the time being entrusted with the management of the affairs of such college or colleges."
Thus, a Common Managing Committee can be constituted for number of Institutions managed by the same Society.
5.
In reply filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 4 and 5, it has been pointed out that the petitioner is in fact, wife of Shri Anil Bhatia who was a Lecturer in DAV College, Hisar.
Shri Bhatia was transferred to DAV College, Pehowa.
He challenged his transfer order before the Civil Court; Director, Higher Education, as well as before this Court, but he lost before all the Courts.
Shri Bhatia did not join his place of transfer right from 1987 till 2004.
His services were terminated for absence from duties for more than 17 years.
The present writ petition stems out from the same grievance as the present writ petition has been filed by Shri Anil Bhatia, through his wife.
It has also been pointed that the petitioner has misled this Court by filing the present writ petition.
In fact, the appointment of respondent No. 4 to the post of the Principal was in accordance with the Rules.
His initial appointment was to the post of the Principal, DAV, College, Naneola, consequent to interview for the post, which was held on 30102001.
His appointment was approved by the Kurukshetra University on 2542003 and thereafter the appointment letter was issued after the appointment was approved by the Director Higher Education as well.
It has been also pointed out that earlier the husband of the petitioner filed a Civil Writ Petition No. 3573 of 1994, challenging the transfer of Shri GD Jindal and Shri RK Chauhan from DAV College, Ambala and DAV College, Pundri to Daya Nand Post Graduate College, Hisar and to DAV College, Ambala respectively.
The said writ petition was dismissed on 23.8.1994 by a Division Bench of this Court.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, wherein an affidavit was filed on behalf of the Management along with a joint seniority list as on 3131995 in respect of the Principals, working in DAV Colleges, having Arts, Science and Commerce Faculties in the State of Haryana.
After the filing of the said affidavit, the petitioner withdrew his SLP, which was dismissed as withdrawn on 3111995.
6.
In the affidavit dated 2822008, the respondents have pointed out that husband of the petitioner has filed another writ petition i.e. CWP No. 17306 of 1995, challenging the joint seniority list of teaching staff of the DAV Colleges in Haryana.
The said writ petition was dismissed on 471997.
The issue raised in the aforesaid writ petition was the same as is being sought to be raised in the present petition i.e. to the effect that amendment in the Act vide Act No. 1 of 1996 was to enable the Managing Bodies, which are managing more than one college, to prepare a Joint Seniority List and the posts held by employees working in the said Institutions being of transferable nature.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner filed a voluminous counter dated 10.3.2008 running into 80 pages, wherein it has been stated that Anil Bhatia is a gentleman-layman and not a lawman.
The relevant extracts read as under :  "15.
That in Paras 8 and 9 of the affidavit, the respondents have referred to some writ petitions filed by Mr. Anil Bhatia, who is a gentleman-lay man and not a law man.
These cases are not at all relevant for the decision of the case in hand."
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner for more than two and a half hours.
The petitioner has sought to argue that vide Order Annexure P6 dated 1531995 transfer of the Principals was declined by the Kurukshetra University and that vide order Annexure P.8 dated 2572002, transfer of the Principals and Lecturers working in one DAV Institution working in the State to another DAV Institution run by the management, is not permitted.
It is further argued that the bye-laws of the DAV College Managing Committee cannot override the statutory provisions and that College is to comply with the condition of service contemplated under the Act and the rules framed thereunder.
Since the transfer of respondent No. 4 is in violation of the statutory provisions and the Rules framed there under, therefore, respondent No. 4 cannot be permitted to continue on the post of Principal, DAV College, Pehowa.
Similar arguments, as are raised by the petitioner, have been dealt with by this Court in a writ petition filed by her husband, wherein it has been held to the following effect :  "It is no doubt true that the unamended definition of Managing Committee incorporated in Section 2(e) was to be a Managing Committee of an affiliated college but by virtue of Annexure R-4, which came into being on January 5, 1996, Managing Committee can be of an affiliated college or colleges entrusted with the management of the affairs of such college or colleges.
As mentioned above, while bringing about amendment in Section 2(e), in statement of objects and reasons it has clearly been mentioned that earlier definition was creating administrative and legal difficulties for bodies managing more than one college in the State and in order to enable such managing bodies to overcome these difficulties it was necessary to make suitable amendment in clause (e) of Section 2 of the Act.
Further, the matter is clinched by Annexure R-6 dealing with preparation of seniority lists of teachers in non-government recognised colleges.
Annexure R-6 came into being in terms of Clause 6 of Appendix IX to Ordinance XVI of the Recognised Colleges, clause 3 whereof clearly talks that a governing body having more than one college shall have one consolidated list of seniority.
This Court is even otherwise of the view that where a society, corporate body or any person or authority is having number of educational institutions and the employees working in the said institutions have a transferable job, it is always better to prepare a common seniority list, otherwise it can create insurmountable difficulties, both for the employees as also the bodies managing educational institutions.
It may be recalled that the petitioner lost his cause that he was pleading in the earlier writ with regard to transfer of some of the employees of the respondent institution.
That necessarily follows that employees of the respondent institute have transferable job.
As mentioned above, for such employees, working in different institutions under the same management, it is always better for proper management and administration to have common seniority list."
9.
The petitioner has not disclosed the filing of the writ petition by her husband in her petition.
In respect of the earlier petition, the petitioner as stated in the replication that the petitioner has an independent personality and is interested in the exalted position of the rule of law and she has not been party to any referred litigation.
In respect of the writ petition decided in the year 1997, the stand of the petitioner is that her husband is a gentleman-layman and not a lawman.
The fact remains that the issues as are sought to be raised by the petitioner were raised by her husband twice before this Court in the earlier writ petitions.
Both the writ petitions were dismissed and even SLP was withdrawn.
It is, thus, apparent that the petitioner is raking up the same issues as were raised earlier by her husband by filing the present writ petition by claiming a writ of Quo-warranto.
The writ petitions lack bona-fide and in fact, are gross abuse of process of law.
The sufficient time of the Court has been taken by the petitioner from September 15, 2006.
Even today, the learned counsel for the petitioner persisted with his arguments even in the face of the order passed by this Court on 471997.
10.
We are, thus, of the opinion that the petitioner has encroached upon the time of the Court without any justified reason by raising the issues, which have already attained finality.
May be that the petitioner has an independent personality, but the fact remains that it is her husband, who has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court unsuccessfully earlier.
The filing of earlier petitions has not been disclosed by the petitioner.
The petitioner was expected to disclose such facts in the petition.
The petitioner has not denied the knowledge of the cases filed by her husband, but asserted that he is a lay man.
With the assistance of a learned counsel available to the petitioner, we expect complete and true disclosure of all the facts.
Withholding of the relevant information by the petitioner is condemnable.
11.
Consequently, both the writ petitions are dismissed with costs of Rs. 25,000/- in each case.
An amount of Rs. 25,000/- shall be deposited with the Haryana Legal Services Authority and an amount of Rs. 25,000/- be deposited with the Punjab and Haryana High Court Lawyer's Welfare Fund.
Copy of the order be supplied to the Haryana Legal Services Authority and the Punjab and Haryana High Court Lawyers' Welfare Fund.
In case the costs aforesaid are not deposited within two months, it shall be open to the Haryana Legal Services Authority and the Punjab and Haryana High Court Lawyers' Welfare Fund, to recover the said amount by initiating appropriate proceedings including the proceedings under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
Petition dismissed.