Permod Kohli, J (Oral) - Petitioner was initially engaged as a Driver in Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, at Barnala on August 20, 1979 on adhoc basis.
His services came to be regularised w.e.f.
November 09, 1979.
In the year 1983, petitioner proceeded on leave w.e.f.
July 13, 1983 to July 31, 1983.
He did not join after the period of leave and was treated as absent from duty.
Consequently, his services were terminated vide order November 25, 1983.
This order of termination became subject matter of challenge in a Civil Suit No. 45 of 1988.
The suit filed by the petitioner was decreed vide judgment and decree dated October 21, 1995, whereby following relief was granted :-  "As a result of my findings on the above issues, suit of the plaintiff is decreed.
Termination order of the plaintiff passed on 25111983 and order passed by the Appellate Authority dated 2571986 are held to be not in accordance with law.
Therefore, these are set aside and quashed.
It is further held that plaintiff shall not be entitled to back wages.
His absence period shall be treated as leave of the kind due.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Decree sheet be prepared and file be consigned to the record room".
2.
Since no appeal was preferred against the judgment aforesaid, decree has attained finality.
In implementation of the judgment and decree, the respondents passed order dated December 19, 1995 allowing the petitioner to join duty on November 20, 1995.
This order also contains a stipulation that `the employee will not be granted any benefit during the period of termination'.
3.
It is the admitted case of the parties that this order came to be passed in due deference to the decree passed in favour of the petitioner.
The petitioner retired from service on June 30, 1999 on attaining superannuation.
It appears that the petitioner was denied pensionary benefits, though some of the retiral benefits have been paid.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition claiming following reliefs :-  "directing the respondents to grant pensionary benefits to the petitioner applicable w.e.f.
01.07.1999 as the petitioner was superannuated on 30.6.1999 (Annexure P-5) in view of the law laid down by the Full Bench of the Hon'ble High Court in the matter of Dr. Ishwar Singh v. State of Punjab as reported 1994(1) SCT 563 : 1994(3) RSJ 543 FB;  A writ of certiorari be issued quashing the order passed by respondent N.4 dated 25111983 (Annexure P1) terminating the services of the petitioner without holding an enquiry in violation of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar as reported, 1994(1) SCT 319 : 1994(1) RSJ 443 (SC).
It is further prayed that this Hon'ble High Court may issue any other appropriate writ, order or direction as it deems fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case".
4.
From the prayer made in the petition, it appears that main prayer of the petitioner is for pensionary benefits.
5.
In the written statement filed by the respondents-Corporation it is stated that the petitioner is not entitled to pensionary benefits as there is a break in service from 1983 to 1995.
According to the respondents, period from termination of service till reinstatement cannot be counted to qualify for pension under rules.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents has vehemently argued that the learned Sub Judge, while decreeing the suit though set aside the termination order, but the petitioner has not been treated in service during the period from his termination till passing of the decree.
According to him, because of the fact that service of the petitioner discontinued, the petitioner is not entitled to pension.
1.
This argument of the learned counsel is bereft of any factual and legal substance.
The decree itself provides for continuity of service.
Vide judgment dated October 21, 1995, while setting aside termination order, the Court has directed reinstatement of the petitioner and the period of absence has been treated as 'leave of the kind due'.
Leave can only be granted to a public servant if his contract of service is subsisting.
Mere fact that the Court has directed that the period of absence between termination and reinstatement be treated as leave itself signifies that the petitioner's service has been continued and there is no break in service.
Only relief denied to him is back wages.
Since the petitioner's service has to be continued in terms of the decree, which has attained finality, he cannot be denied pensionary benefits whatever available to him under rules.
8.
Learned counsel also referred to the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in Civil Appeal No. 548 of 2002, decided on January 18, 2002, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court made following observations :  " Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and on examining the materials on record, we fail to understand how the continuity of service could be denied once the plaintiff is directed to be reinstated in service in setting aside the order of termination.
It is not a case of fresh appointment, but it is a case of reinstatement.
That being the position, direction of the High Court that the plaintiff will not get continuity of service cannot be sustained and we set aside that part of the impugned order.
So far as the arrears of salary is concerned, we see no infirmity with the direction which was given by the lower Appellate Court taking into accounts the facts and circumstances including the fact that the suit was filed after a considerable length of time.
That part of the decree denying the arrears of salary stands affirmed and this appeal stands allowed in part to the extent indicated above.
Appeal partly allowed."
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed.
Respondents are directed to treat the petitioner in service from the date of his engagement till his superannuation without any break and pay all the benefits including pension as flow from the decree dated October 21, 1995.
Appeal partly allowed.