Vijender Jain, C.J.
- The appellants had filed six Civil Writ Petitions which have been dismissed by the Learned Single Judge by a common judgment, dated April 18, 2001.
The petitioners had made a prayer for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the orders of the respondent-Corporation by which the claim of the petitioners for regularisation of their services had been rejected and the petitioners had further prayed that they should be granted regular pay scales on the basis of "equal pay for equal work".
The petitioners claim that the respondent-Corporation grants loans to the industry.
On default being committed in repayment of the loan, the Corporation is competent to take the control of the industrial unit/factory or any premises against whom the loan has been advanced.
The properties are held as security for the loan.
On taking control of the properties belonging to the industries/companies, the petitioners were employed as Chowkidars-cum-guard to safeguard the properties of the industrial concerns.
The petitioners claim that they have been working as Chowkidars-cum-guards with the Corporation for a sufficiently long period continuously on a consolidated salary of Rs. 1,050/- but no regular pay scales were given to them.
They remain present at the premises round-the-clock on guard duty, thus, the Corporation takes duties from them for more than eight hours per day.
It was also alleged that the Corporation takes over the properties of the defaulting loanee under the provisions of Sections 29 and 31 of the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951.
This function is of permanent nature, therefore, the employment given to the appellants was also of a permanent nature.
The Corporation in its reply denied the master and servant relationship with the appellants.
It was pleaded that the Corporation does not pay the salaries or wages to these employees from its own funds, but the wages are debited to the accounts of the industrial units.
It was never the function of the Corporation that any of the petitioners is taken on the rolls of the Corporation.
In the appointment letter itself, it has been made clear that the employee will get a consolidated amount of Rs. 1,050/-.
It was also made clear that the tenure of the employment would be for a period of one month or till the disposal of a particular unit which was taken over.
2.
After hearing counsel for the parties, the Learned Single Judge has held that no vested right has been created in the appellants so that they made claim regularisation of their services.
It has also been held that the appointment of the appellants was not made by a Selection Committee.
They were appointed purely to fill an arrangement because the Corporation was eager to deploy some Chowkidars to perform watch and ward duty so that the units which have been resumed by the Corporation under Section 29 may not be damaged.
The Learned Single Judge also held that the appointment letters of the petitioners manifestly indicate that their appointments were clearly ad hoc and their services could be terminated at any time.
3.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, dated 1842001, passed by the Learned Single Judge, the appellants have preferred this appeal by filing the present LPA.
At the time of motion hearing, the Court passed the following order on October 15, 2001 :-  LPA No. 1946 of 2001  "Learned counsel contends, inter alia, that various terms and conditions of employment stipulated in the appointment letter Annexure P-1, especially those fixing pay in a pay-scale, for payment of allowances, liability to transfer at any place in the State of Punjab and admissibility of travelling expenses etc., would go to establish that the appellants were employed on regular establishment of the respondent-Corporation; and, that these terms and conditions would be distinguishable from those of the other employees, who were employed on daily wages, whose cases have been disposed of by the common impugned judgment.
Admit CM No. 4365 of 2001 Stay would operate in favour of the appellants in the same terms as those in force during pendency of the writ petition."
4.
Shri Chopra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants, has contended that the appellants have been working for the last 26 years without any interruption; they had been working continuously for 12 years before the interim orders in their favour were passed by this Court; the appellants were inducted as Chowkidars to look after and manage the various properties which had been taken over by the respondent-Corporation.
According to Shri Chopra, the properties of those industries to whom loans were advanced by the respondent-Corporation and become the properties of the financial institutions, for which the services of these Chowkidars were availed.
He has also contended that although the Chowkidars were appointed to look after and manage the properties taken over by the respondent-Corporation, however, the respondent-Corporation issued them the appointment letter (Annexure P-1), which reads as under :-  "Punjab Financial Corporation  95-98, Bank Square, Sector 17-B  Chandigarh  ** ** **  No. PFC/STF-6(169)/85-37316 Dated : 16.9.1985 Shri Sharam Ram son of Karam Ram,  C/o Tarlik Singh, GM District Industries, Bhatinda.
Subject : Employment as Chowkidar on ad hoc basis in the service of the Punjab Financial Corporation.
** ** **  1.
With reference to your application, we are pleased to offer you the employment as Chowkidar (ad hoc) for guarding the premises and the properties acquired from time to time by the Corporation at various places in Punjab on the following terms and conditions :- (i) Pay and allowances : Pay at Rs. 300/- per mensem in the pay scale of Rs. 300-5-325/5- 350/10-430.
(ii) Compensatory Allowance : You will be paid dearness allowance, additional dearness allowance and house rent allowance as also reimbursement of cost of medical treatment as may be sanctioned by the Corporation to its employees from time to time.
(iii) Duration : You will be appointed on ad hoc basis and your appointment/employment can be terminated without any prior notice, or emoluments in lieu thereof.
(iv) You shall be liable to serve at any place in the State of Punjab to guard the premises and the properties acquired, either though courts or otherwise, by the Corporation, from time to time.
(v) Reference : You will furnish the names of two respectable persons to whom a reference may be made regarding your work and conduct, which will include the faithful discharge of your duties.
They should certify that you will not do any act, which will be against the interest of the Corporation.
(vi) Indemnity : You shall be liable to indemnify the losses caused to the properties of the Corporation, placed under your guard from time to time, for which you shall furnish a surety bond in the sum of Rs. 20,000/- (Rupees twenty thousand only) in the proforma, enclosed.
(vii) Travelling Expenses : You will be granted actual travelling expenses, when transferred from place of posting to another.
However, you will not be entitled to the reimbursement of actual travelling expenses on your joining the service of the Corporation for the first time.
2.
If you accept the employment as Chowkidar on the terms and conditions mentioned above, please report to us for duty immediately, but not later than a week from the date of receipt of this letter, failing which it will be presumed that you are not interested in the offer, which will be treated to have been withdrawn.
Sd/- (N.S.
Rattan) Managing Director" On the basis of the aforesaid appointment letter, it was contended by learned counsel for the appellants that the services which were performed by the appellants were of a permanent nature; the appointments were made, although, on ad hoc basis but the appointment letter would show that that was intended to be for permanent purposes, and on the said basis, he has assailed the finding of the Learned single Judge who has dismissed the writ petition of the appellants in this LPA.
5.
We are afraid that the appellants have not taken into consideration that the appellants were not appointed by the respondent-Financial Corporation and that is how the Learned Single Judge has considered the question as to how the appellants were appointed and against what job.
The appellants were appointed to ensure that there should not be any theft or damage to the properties which have been secured by the respondent-Corporation while advancing the loans.
The appellants were inducted only to perform watch and ward duty; there was no proper mode of selection; the salaries were not paid by the respondent- Corporation to the appellants from its own funds, rather, the same was debited to the accounts of the industrial units; there was no manifest intention of the respondent-Corporation to take the appellants on its roll.
As a matter of fact, the Learned Single Judge also took note of the stipulation that the appellants were required to reside at the premises of the firm which was taken over by the Corporation by invoking the provisions of Section 29 or 31 of the said Act.
The appellants were virtually on contract for a limited period, which was co-terminus so long as a particular unit remains in the actual physical possession of the Corporation.
Learned counsel for the appellant also relied on the Secretary, State of Karnataka and others v. Umadevi and others, 2006(4) SCC 1 : 2006(2) S.C.T.
462 (paragraph 44), which is reproduced as under :-  "The concept of "equal pay for equal work" is different from the concept of conferring permanency on those who have been appointed on ad hoc basis, temporary basis, or based on no process of selection as envisaged by the rules.
This Court has in various decisions applied the principle of equal pay for equal work and has laid down the parameters for the application of that principle.
The decisions are rested on the concept of equality enshrined in our Constitution in the light of the directive principles in that behalf.
But the acceptance of that principle cannot lead to a position where the Court could direct that appointments made without following the due procedure established by law, be deemed permanent or issue directions to treat them as permanent.
Doing so, would be negation of the principle of equality of opportunity.
The power to make an order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before this Court, would not normally be used for giving the go-bye to the procedure established by law in the matter of public employment.
Take the situation arising in the cases before us from the State of Karnataka.
Therein, after Dharwad decision the Government had issued repeated directions and mandatory orders that no temporary or ad hoc employment or engagement be given.
Some of the authorities and departments had ignored those directions or defied those directions and had continued to give employment, specifically interdicted by the orders issued by the executive.
Some of the appointing officers have even been punished for their definance.
It would not be just or proper to pass an order in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 or 32 of the Constitution or in exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution permitting those persons engaged, to be absorbed or to be made permanent, based on their appointments or engagements.
Complete justice would be justice according to law and though it would be open to this Court to mould the relief, this Court would not grant a relief which would amount to perpetuating an illegality."
On the basis of the aforesaid observation of the Supreme Court, it was contended that the appellants have been in service even 12 years prior to the date of interim relief and that aspect would exclude the expression of Uma Devi's case in its wider concept so as to protect the continuity of the service of the appellants.
6.
We have given careful consideration to the arguments advanced by learned counsel for both the parties.
7.
In view of the source of appointment, the purpose of appointment, the amount paid towards their salary from the accounts of the firms for whose watch and ward purposes the staff has been appointed, the intent and purpose of their appointment, it cannot be said that the appointment was made in a regular manner.
As far as the source of appointment is concerned, there is nothing on record to show that any process of recruitment was undertaken in a regular fashion by the respondent-Corporation, therefore, the law laid down in Uma Devi's case is not attracted in the present case.
In the matter of public appointment when there is an irregularity as the appointments are not made in the regular method, no right is created for regular appointment of such class of employees.
In a recent judgment, the Supreme Court in Surender Prasad Tiwari v. U.P.
Rajya Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad and others, 2006(7) SCC 684 held :-  "20.
A Constitution Bench of this court in Secy., State of Karnataka v Umadevi has comprehensively dealt with the issues involved in this case.
The Constitution Bench has observed as follows : "2.
Public employment in a sovereign socialist secular democratic republic, has to be as set down by the Constitution and the laws made thereunder.
Our constitutional scheme envisages employment by the Government and its instrumentalities on the basis of a procedure established in that behalf.
Equality of opportunity is the hallmark, and the Constitution has provided also for affirmative action to ensure that unequals are not treated as equals.
Thus, any public employment has to be in terms of the constitutional scheme.
4.
But, sometimes this process is not adhered to and the constitutional scheme of public employment is bypassed.
The Union, the States, their departments and instrumentalities have resorted to irregular appointments, especially in the lower rungs of the service, without reference to the duty to ensure a proper appointment procedure through the Public Service Commissions or otherwise as per the rules adopted and to permit these irregular appointees or those appointed on contract or on daily wages, to continue year after year, thus, keeping out those who are qualified to apply for the post concerned and depriving them of an opportunity to compete for the post.
It has also led to persons who get employed, without the following of a regular procedure or even through the backdoor or on daily wages, approaching the courts, seeking directions to make them permanent in their posts and to prevent regular recruitment to the posts concerned.... 6.
The power of a State as an employer is more limited than that of a private employer inasmuch as it is subjected to constitutional limitations and cannot be exercised arbitrarily (see Basu's Shorter Constitution of India).
Article 309 of the Constitution gives the Government power to frame rules for the purpose of laying down the conditions of service and recruitment of persons to be appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or any of the States.
That article contemplates the drawing up of a procedure and rules to regulate the recruitment and regulate the service conditions of appointees appointed to public posts.
It is well acknowledged that because of this, the entire process of recruitment for services is controlled by detailed procedures which specify the necessary qualifications, the mode of appointment, etc.
If rules have been made under Article 309 of the Constitution, then the Government can make appointments only in accordance with the rules.
The State is meant to be a model employer.
The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 was enacted to ensure equal opportunity for employment seekers.
Though this Act may not oblige an employer to employ only those persons who have been sponsored by employment exchanges, it places an obligation on the employer to notify the vacancies that may arise in the various departments and for filling up of those vacancies, based on a procedure.
Normally, statutory rules are framed under the authority of law governing employment.
It is recognised that no government order, notification or circular can be substituted for the statutory rules framed under the authority of law.
This is because, following any other course could be disastrous inasmuch as it will deprive the security of tenure and the right of equality conferred on civil servants under the constitutional scheme.
It may even amount to negating the accepted service jurisprudence.
Therefore, even statutory rules are framed under Article 309 of the Constitution which are exhaustive, the only fair means to adopt is to make appointments based on the rules so framed."
21.
In the above case, this Court, in para 11, further observed as under : "11.
In addition to the equality clause represented by Article 14 of the Constitution, Article 16 has specifically provided for equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
Buttressing these fundamental rights, Article 309 provides that subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Acts of the legislature may regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
In view of the interpretation placed on Article 12 of the Constitution by this Court, obviously, these principles also govern the instrumentalities that come within the purview of Article 12 of the Constitution.
With a view to make the procedure for selection fair, the Constitution by Article 315 has also created a Public Service Commission for the Union and the Public Service Commissions for the States.
Article 320 deals with the functions of the Public Service Commissions and mandates consultation with the Commission on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts and other related matters.
As a part of the affirmative action recognized by Article 16 of the Constitution, Article 335 provides for special consideration in the matter of claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for employment.
The States have made Acts, rules or regulations for implementing the above constitutional guarantees and any recruitment to the service in the State or in the Union is governed by such Acts, rules and regulations.
The Constitution does not envisage any employment outside this constitutional scheme and without following the requirements set down therein."
22.
This Court, in the aforesaid case, also discussed Indra Sawhney v. Union of India.
It is observed in this case as under : "644.
The significance attached by the Founding Fathers to the right to equality is evident not only from the fact that they employed both the expressions `equality before the law' and `equal protection of the law' in Article 14 but proceeded further to state the same rule in positive and affirmative terms in Articles 15 to 18.... 645.
Inasmuch as public employment always gave a certain status and power - it has always been the repository of State power - besides the means of livelihood, special care was taken to declare equality of opportunity in the matter of public employment by Article 16.
Clause (1) expressly declares that in the matter of public employment or appointment to any office under the State, citizens of this country shall have equal opportunity while Clause (2) declares that no citizen shall be discriminated in the said matter on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them.
At the same time, care was taken to declare in clause (4) that nothing in the said article shall prevent the State from making any provision for reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the service under the State."
These binding decisions are clear imperatives that adherence to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution is a must in the process of public employment.
23.
The Constitution Bench in Umadevi case has observed that adherence to the rule of equality in public employment is a basic feature of our Constitution.
It was observed as under : "43.
Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule of equality in public employment is basic feature of our Constitution and since the rule of law is the core of our Constitution, a Court would certainly be disabled from passing an order upholding a violation of Article 14 or in ordering the overlooking of the need to comply with the requirements of Article 14 read with Article 16 of the Constitution Therefore, consistent with the scheme for public employment, this Court while laying down the law, has necessarily to hold that unless the appointment is in terms of the relevant rules and after a proper competition among qualified persons, the same would not confer any right on the appointee.
If it is a contractual appointment, the appointment comes to an end at the end of the contract, if it were an engagement or appointment on daily wages or casual basis, the same would come to an end when it is discontinued.
Similarly, a temporary employee could not claim to be made permanent on the expiry of his term of appointment.
It has also to be clarified that merely because a temporary employee or casual wage worker is continued for a time beyond the term of his appointment, he would not be entitled to be absorbed in regular service or made permanent, merely on the strength of such continuance, if the original appointment was not made by following a due process of selection as envisaged by the relevant rules.
It is not open to the Court to prevent regular recruitment at the instance of temporary employees whose period of employment has come to an end or of ad hoc employees who by the very nature of their appointment, do not acquire any right.
The High Courts acting under Article 226 of the Constitution, should not ordinarily issue directions for absorption, regularisation, or permanent continuance unless the recruitment itself was made regularly and in terms of the constitutional scheme.
Merely because an employee had continued under cover of an order of the Court, which we have described as `litigious employment' in the earlier part of the judgment, he would not be entitled to any right to be absorbed or made permanent in the service.
In fact, in such cases, the High Court may not be justified in issuing interim directions, since, after all, if ultimately the employee approaching it is found entitled to relief, it may be possible for it to mould the relief in such a manner that ultimately no prejudice will be caused to him, whereas an interim direction to continue his employment would hold up the regular procedure for selection or impose on the State the burden of paying an employee who is really not required.
The courts must be careful in ensuring that they do not interfere unduly with the economic arrangement of its affairs by the State or its instrumentalities or lend themselves the instruments to facilitate the bypassing of the constitutional mandates."
24.
In the instant case, the appellant has continued in service for 14 years because of the interim order granted by the High Court on 15.9.1992.
In the aforesaid case, the Constitution Bench has observed that merely because an employee had continued under cover of an order of the Court, which the court described as "litigious employment", he would not be entitled to any right to be absorbed or made permanent in the service.
26.
An argument was made before the Constitution Bench that the State action in not regularising the employees was not fair within the framework of the rule of law.
The Court observed that if the appointments, which have not been made according to the constitutional scheme, are regularised, that would amount to perpetuate an illegality in the matter of public employment and that would be a negation of the constitutional scheme adopted by the people of this country.
28.
In Umadevi case, this Court has also dealt with another aspect of the matter and observed as under : "47.
When a person enters a temporary employment or gets engagement as a contractual or casual worker and the engagement is not based on a proper selection as recognized by the relevant rules or procedure, he is aware of the consequences of the appointment being temporary, casual or contractual in nature.
Such a person cannot invoke the theory of legitimate expectation for being confirmed in the post when an appointment to the post could be made only by following a proper procedure for selection and in cases concerned, in consultation with the Public Service Commission".
Applying the aforesaid ratio of the Supreme Court judgment, there is no merit in the appeal, which is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.