The petitioner has been working with the respondents since 2231988.
By order dated 3172002, her services were terminated by way of retrenchment.
The petitioner challenged the order of retrenchment in CWP 13216 of 2002.
On notice of motion being issued, the respondents appeared and made a statement that the order of retrenchment has been withdrawn by order dated 2912004.
It was further stated by the counsel for the respondent that the impugned order having been withdrawn by the respondents, the writ petition was rendered infructuous.
Consequently, this Court disposed of the writ petition as having been rendered infructuous.
This order was passed by this Court on 322004.
Immediately thereafter, the petitioner made an application to the respondents for release of the consequential benefits for the period from 182002 till 222004, which included salary for the aforesaid period as well as the increments which were due in March 2002 and March 2004.
The respondents, however, did not take any action on the aforesaid representation.
The petitioner, therefore, served a legal notice dated 2072004.
Even the said legal notice was ignored by the respondents.
Hence, the present writ petition with a prayer that the respondents be directed to release her salary and other consequential benefits along with interest.
The respondents have filed a written-statement.
It is stated that the order dated 2912004 which was placed before this Court during the hearing of the petition, categorically stipulated that the retrenchment orders are withdrawn subject to the final decision of this Court.
The petitioner was also directed to deposit all the amounts of compensation which had been paid to her by the respondents at the time of retrenchment.
The order further stipulated that as regards the period of retrenchment, it would be decided on receipt of final order from the High Court.
At the time when the writ petition was disposed of by this Court on the statement of the counsel for the respondents, this Court did not issue any directions with regard to the payment of the salary or the release of any other consequential benefits.
Consequently, the petitioner cannot now be permitted to claim the salary for the period from 182002 till 222004 and the increments for the year 2003 and 2004.
2.
Mr. Bhandari, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that once the illegal order of retrenchment had been withdrawn by the respondents, they cannot now be permitted to say that the petitioner would not be entitled to consequential benefits.
On the other hand, Mr. Sehgal submits that the impugned order of retrenchment was withdrawn subject to the final orders which were to be passed by this Court in CWP 13216 of 2002.
The order passed by the Division Bench did not grant any relief for payment of salary or any other consequential relief.
3.
We have considered the facts and circumstances of the present case as well as the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
Accepting the submissions made by the respondents, would be to put a premium on the wrong which had been admittedly committed by the respondents leading to the withdrawal of the order of retrenchment.
It is a settled proposition of law that when an order of termination is set aside on the grounds of being illegal or without jurisdiction, reinstatement with full back wages is the rule.
The party that wishes to deviate from the normal rule has to justify the non-grant of consequential relief.
This view of ours will find support from Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979(3) SLR 223.
In the aforesaid case, the Full Bench considered the question as to what criteria should govern the grant of full back wages to workman under the industrial law when the termination of his services is held invalid by the Labour Court and the relief of reinstatement is granted to him.
After considering the entire matter.
The Full Bench observed as follows :-  "6.
However, all controversy now seems to have been set at rest by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, AIR 1979 SC 75, wherein the appeal by Special Leave was expressly limited to the question of grant of back wages.
It has been held therein in no uncertain terms : "Ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
Any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer."
And again :  "Full back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure".
5.
The aforesaid view has then been reiterated by their Lordships in GT Lad and others v. Chemicals and Fibres India Ltd, 1979 Labour and Industrial Cases 290.
6.
From the perusal of the above, it becomes obvious that full back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating a departure.
A perusal of the record shows that no cogent reasons have been given for departing from the normal rule.
7.
In view of the aforesaid ratio of law laid down by the Full Bench, we are of the opinion that this petition has to be allowed.
We, therefore, allow this writ petition, quash the impugned order Annexure P-7 and direct that the petitioner shall be entitled to full salary for the period from 182002 till 222004.
She will also be entitled to the increments for the years 2003 and 2004.
Let necessary consequential relief be released to the petitioner within a period of three months from today.
We, however, are not inclined to grant any interest to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.