SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The petitioner retired from service on 3132001.
On the representation dated 1792001 for the release of the retiral benefits, when no action was taken by the respondents, he served a legal notice dated 30122001.
Since the respondents did not release the retiral benefits, the petitioner was constrained to file Civil Writ Petition No. 16820 of 2003.
This writ petition was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to take a decision on the representation/legal notice submitted by the petitioner by passing a speaking order within a period of four months.
After considerable delay on 1132004, respondent No. 1 passed orders for release of the pension.
The petitioner received a bank draft in the sum of Rs. 4,09,589/- on 25.3.2004.
Still, a sum of Rs. 1,56,000/- was withheld by the respondents.
The petitioner made a representation for the release of the remaining amount.
The petitioner, thereafter, filed the present writ petition seeking a direction to the respondents to release the amount illegally with-held together with interest at the rate of 18% pa. on the delayed payment.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the respondents have released a sum of Rs. 1,39,384/-.
A sum of Rs. 17,248/- is still unpaid by the respondents.
3.
On notice of motion being issued, the respondents have filed separate written-statements.
Respondent No. 1 and 2 have stated that the liability for payment of the retiral benefits is with respondent No. 3-Municipal Corporation.
This fact is not denied by respondent No. 3 in its written statement.
The only plea taken by the respondents for delay in the release of the retiral benefits is that the petitioner did not submit the completed pension papers till 1072002.
4.
Mr. RS Longia, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that there is undue delay in the release of the retiral benefits, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to interest at the rate of 18% pa.
The State Government has issued instructions for payment of interest at the rate of 18% pa. on delayed payment of retiral dues.
These instructions are applicable to the Municipal Corporation-respondent No. 3.
Learned counsel also relies on a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of AS Randhawa v. State of Punjab, 1997(3) SCT 468 : 1997(3) SCT 468.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, submits that the petitioner would not be entitled to any interest as the petitioner himself did not complete the formalities till 1072002.
6.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
7.
We are of the considered opinion that the petitioner having retired on 3132001, was entitled to release of the pensionary benefits simultaneously.
It was the duty of the respondents to complete the pension case well before the retirement of the petitioner.
This, in fact, is the mandate of Rule 95 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules contained in Vol. 2, Part-1, Chapter IX which governs the procedure relating to Pensions.
We are unable to accept the submissions of the respondents that the delay has been caused by the petitioner in the release of the retiral benefits.
A similar matter was considered by the Full Bench of this Court in AS Randhawa's case (supra) and it has been held therein that a government employee is entitled to interest on delayed payment of pension and other retiral benefits.
The Full Bench made the following observations :-  "Before concluding, we are constrained to observe that it has been noticed that invariably in the matter of payment of pension and other retiral benefits to a retiring employee, there have been delays and sometimes to an extent that is shocking.
It must be realised by the concerned functionaries of the State at all levels that for a government servant, the only source of his subsistence after retirement is his pension and other retiral benefits and if they are not made available to him on time, he and his family are put under great mental tension making it difficult for them even to survive.
Those dealing with the preparation of pension cases at different stages and with disbursement of retiral benefits must not forget that they too have to retire one day and will be looking up for the payment of those benefits and how will they feel if they are driven from pillar to post to get their dues and if hurdles are put and delay is caused in payment thereof.
It is to save this harassment to the retired that the Rules required that the procedure to commute pension and retiral benefits should commence two years before the date of superannuation so that whatever be the apathy or the inefficiency of the concerned officials in working out the amounts, they will be able to complete the cases at least in two years and pay the dues to the retirees.
If in spite of these safeguards as provided in the Rules the working of the administrative officers at different level high or low, is so indifferent in the performance of their duties as enjoined on them it is but fair that those responsible for causing delays in the matter of payment of retiral benefits should be made personally liable for the payment of interest that may have to be paid to the retiring employee.
The loss caused to the State exchequer by avoidable payment of interest must, therefore, be replenished by recovering the same from the erring officers/employees, the extent and proportion of which will be determined in each case by the Chief Secretary of the State."
In our opinion, the aforesaid observations are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
8.
Similar view has been expressed by a Single Bench of Allahabad High Court in the case of Awadh Bihari Pandey v. Chief Development Officer, Varanasi, 1997(4) SCT 590.
In the aforesaid case, the learned Single Judge observed as follows :-  "5.
In the case of the State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, 1985(1) SCC 529 : AIR 1985 SC 356 it has been held by the Apex Court as under (at page 357 of AIR) :- "Pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to its employees on their retirement but have become, under the decisions of this Court, valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with penalty of payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment."
6.
In another decision in the case of R Kapur v. Director of Inspection (Painting and Enbl.)
Income Tax, 1995(1) UPLBEC 89 : 1995(1) SCT 233 (SC) the Hon'ble Supreme Court upheld the order of the Tribunal which awarded interest @ 13% per annum on the unpaid amount of gratuity.
7.
Similarly in the decision in Union of India v. Justice SS Sandhawalia (Retired), the Apex Court upheld the order of the High Court awarding interest @ 12% per annum on the balance amount of pension as the payment was delayed by over a year or so.
The Apex Court held that once it is established that an amount legally due to a party was not paid to it, the party responsible for withholding the same must pay interest at a rate considered reasonable by the Court."
9.
In our opinion, these observations are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
The respondents have given absolutely no justification for the release of the pension after a period of almost three years.
10.
Mr. Anil Rathee, learned Addl.
Advocate General, appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 points out that although the pension is to be released by the State Government, the same can only be released on the Municipal Corporation's depositing their share of the PF with the competent authority.
This has not been done by respondent No. 3 till date.
From the facts narrated above, it becomes apparent that respondent No. 3 has delayed the release of the retiral benefits of the petitioner without any justification.
Following the dicta of the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in AS Randhawa's case (supra), we hold that the petitioner is entitled to interest on the delayed payment.
Although the petitioner has claimed interest at the rate of 18% pa., we are of the opinion that ends of justice would be met by grant of interest at the rate of 12% pa.  11.
Consequently, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to release the retiral benefits of the petitioner with interest at the rate of 12% pa. from the date when the amount become due till actual payment.
No costs.
Petition allowed.