Ajit J Gunjal, J - In this writ petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner questions the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal (for short `the Tribunal') in Original Application No. 412 of 1998 passed on 28th October, 1999, dismissing the application.
2.
The relief sought for in the said writ petition are as follows :-  "(a) issue a writ in the nature of certiorari or such other direction quashing the order dated 2-11-1999 passed in OA No. 412/1998 on the file of the Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Bangalore Bench;  (b) Issue a writ of certiorari or such other direction quashing (i) order No. 7-15/96-Administration-5089, dated 31-12-1987 passed by the Disciplinary Authority/Director, Forest Survey of India, the second respondent, as per Annexure-B, and (ii) Order No. 6-22/98-FE, dated 4-2-1999 passed by the appellate authority/fifth respondent, as per Annexure-C;  (c) Grant all consequential benefits;  (d) Award exemplary cost of this petition and;  (e) To pass such other order as this Hon'ble Court deems fit in the facts and circumstances of the case, in the interest of justice and equity."
3.
Few facts are necessary to appreciate the controversy in question.
The petitioner joined the service of Forest Survey of India as a Field Man, which comes under the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
It is his case that he belongs to Scheduled Tribe community.
The third respondent herein is a Joint Director who bore ill-will against the petitioner as he belongs to the Scheduled Tribe community, an enquiry was instituted against the petitioner in the month of September, 1996 under R14 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 (for short `Rules'), on a complaint lodged by the third respondent herein.
The gist of the complaint dated 6th and 7th August, 1996 is that the petitioner, along with certain other members of the SC/ST association, to press certain demands relating to the employees of the Forest Department obstructed the nonnal functioning of the office by creating unruly scene of preventing the officials of the department from discharging their bona fide duties.
On 6-8-1996 the petitioner misbehaved with a lady employee of the office by name Smt. Lakshminarasamra Peon, and used filthy and abusive language and in the process tried to outrage her modesty.
In view of this, a charge memo dated 17-9-1996 was issued to him which is marked as Annexure-Al to the proceedings.
A parallel criminal complaint was also filed by the said Smt. Lakshminarasamma at the instance of respondent No. 3 herein.
While the criminal proceedings were still pending, the departmental enquiry was completed.
The petitioner had sought for postponement of the enquiry till the completion of the criminal trial, suffice it to say that the Enquiry Officer submitted his report holding that the charges were proved.
The report of the Enquiry Officer is produced at Annexure-A2.
Since no action was taken on the representation made by the petitioner to postpone the enquiry, the petitioner approached the Tribunal by filing an application in Original Appeal No. 978 of 1996.
The said application was disposed of on 2-12-1997 directing the respondents to appoint the next higher authority i.e., the Director, Forest Survey of India, Dehradun to act as Disciplinary Authority in place of respondent 1 and to consider the said enquiry report.
In view of the direction issued in the said application, the petitioner gave a representation dated 16-12-1997 to the Director, FSI, seeking de novo enquiry.
The report is produced as Annexure-A4.
But, however, according to the petitioner, since the first respondent was not well disposed towards the petitioner, passed an order which is produced at Annexure-A5.
The Disciplinary Authority after consideration of the enquiry report passed an order of dismissal.
The appellate authority while concurring with the findings recorded by Enquiry Officer by its order dated 4-2-1999 modified the penalty from one of removal from service to that of compulsory retirement.
It is his case that these orders were passed in a mechanical manner without any application of mind.
Consequently, challenged the order of compulsory retirement before the Tribunal which has given rise to the present writ petition.
4.
The contesting respondent entered appearance by filing a detailed reply statement have contended that while admitting the factual aspects, inter alia, contended that the petitioner was of pugnacious nature and always misbehaved with the fellow workers as well as superiors in the field as well as in the office.
On several occasions, it appears, the petitioner was given warnings, penalties, censure and also five increments were withheld from 1994 onwards and recovery of salary was also directed from 14-4-1986 to 24-6-1986.
They would primarily contend that the complaint lodged by Smt. Lakshminarasamma was not at the instance of the first respondent as alleged by the petitioner.
He acted only as a postman, inasmuch as; he forwarded the complaint of the said Smt. Lakshminarasamma to the police authorities.
They would further aver in the reply statement that the petitioner was given all opportunities to defend his action and he actively participated in the departmental enquiry through his defence.
Suffice it to say, the Enquiry Officer as well as the Disciplinary Authority and the appellate authority were of the opinion that the petitioner is not a fit person to continue in service in view of his actions on 6th and 7th August, 1996.
5.
The said orders, as stated, were challenged before the Tribunal by way of an application.
The Tribunal on consideration of the material on record was of the opinion that the enquiry was fair and proper and was also of the opinion that R 14(18) of the Rules were not violated, notwithstanding that they were mandatory as no prejudice was caused to the petitioner by not permitting to examine himself.
It also round that the scope of the application was limited, inasmuch as, that Reapreciation of the evidence and weighing the same as an appellate authority was not permissible; consequently declined to interfere and has dismissed the application.
The said order is under challenge.
6.
We have heard Mr. DS Ramachandra Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner as well as Mr. N.R Bhaskar, learned Central Govt.
Standing Counsel.
7.
The contentions urged by Mr. Ramachandran Reddy can be summarised as follows :  (a) He would submit that there is a material variance between the first charge and the imputation; (b) He would submit that in the charge memo, it is stated that the petitioner has misbehaved with the lady staff and the imputation is that some other person misbehaved at the instigation of the petitioner; (c) He would further submit that the petitioner was not given an opportunity as contemplated under R 14(18), inasmuch as, the evidence which was adduced by the Department which was against him was not permitted to be explained by him; (d) According to him, the said Rule being mandatory and violation of that rule would go to the root of the enquiry.
He would further submit that the evidence of the parties was concluded on 23-7-1997 and the parties were directed to file written briefs; (e) He would further submit that in the criminal proceedings initiated he was acquitted consequently, the finding recorded by the Criminal Court ought to have been taken into consideration and the departmental enquiry stood aborted.
This contention of his is based on the fact that the charges which were framed in the criminal proceedings and the charges which were framed in the disciplinary enquiry were identical.
He drew our attention to the First Information Report for comparison.
The sum and substance of his contention would be that the departmental enquiry was not fair and proper and breach of R 14(18) has caused immense prejudice to the petitioner.
In support of his contention, he has relied on several decisions.
8.
Mr. Bhaskar, learned Central Govt.
Standing Counsel, would support the order passed by the Tribunal as well as by the authorities : (a) He would contend that there is no serious infirmity which would warrant interference.
(b) He would further contend that the powers of judicial review under Art. 226 are limited, inasmuch as, the facts which are concluded cannot be reopened.
The Court exercising its power under Art. 226 are not empowered to reopen the entire gamut of the evidence adduced before the disciplinary authority.
(c) He would further submit that the order of dismissal has been modified to the one of compulsory retirement.
He would further drew our attention to the legal evidence of Lakshminarasamma to prove that the petitioner has made an attempt to outrage the modesty of the lady staff and also abused her in filthy language.
(d) He would submit that the charges of imputations are identical inasmuch as there is no variance.
In support of his contention regarding limited scope of this petition, he relied on the decision, reported in AIR 2003 SC 1571.
(e) The fact that the petitioner was acquitted in criminal case would not in any way advance the case of the petitioner, inasmuch as, both would stand on a different footing.
In the circumstances, he would submit, that under the limited power to be exercised under Art. 226, the order of the Tribunal cannot be interfered with.
9.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned Central Govt.
Standing Counsel for the respondents.
10.
The following points arise for consideration :-  (1) Whether there is any material variance between the first article of charge and the imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour insofar as the first article of charge is concerned ?
(2) Whether non-compliance of R 14(18) of Rules has in any way prejudiced the petitioner ?
(3) Whether the acquittal in the criminal proceedings would come to the aid of the petitioner in a departmental enquiry ?
11.
Insofar as the first point for determination is concerned, the article of charge would read thus :  "On 6-8-1996 Sri Chikkanna misbehaved with lady employee of this office Smt. Lakshminarasamma while she was on duty and instigated his fellow persons to do the same.
Used abusive and filthy language to her and tried to outrage her modesty.
12.
The imputation of misconduct and misbehavior insofar as first article is concerned, it is stated that the petitioner along with some members of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Association came to the office between 1300 hours and 1430 hours on 6-8-1996 to press his demand for the release of his salary.
There is a clear imputation that this "group of persons entered the main office and under his instigation they misbehaved with Smt. Lakshminarasamma, Peon, when she was on duty they used abusive and filthy language and obstructed her in discharge of her official duty; some of them even tried to outrage her modesty also."
A reading of the first article of charge and the imputation at article-1 would not show that there is variance between first article of charge and the imputation.
In fact, both the charges as well as imputation are almost identical, inasmuch as, both would in no uncertain terms state that on 6-8-1996 the petitioner misbehaved with lady employee Smt. Lakshminarasamra while she was on duty and the petitioner instigated the fellow persons to do the same.
In the imputation also it is clearly stated that the group of persons entered the main office and at his instigation, which would mean that at the instigation of the petitioner, they misbehaved with Lakshminarasamma and some of them even tried to outrage her modesty.
These articles of charges as well as the imputation are further strengthened by the complaint lodged by Smt. Lakshminarasamma to the jurisdictional police for the said offences.
A case was registered in Crime No. 504 of 1996 with Madivala Police.
There is a clear recital in the said complaint as well as in the article of charges and the imputation that the petitioner used abusive language to other staff members who were present in the office.
It would mean that the petitioner appeared to be a leader of the unruly mob who was instrumental in causing obstruction of the official work and also had instigated the other persons to outrage the modesty of the lady peon by using abusive and filthy language.
A reading of the legal evidence of Smt. Lakshminarasamma would clearly indicate that it was the petitioner who was instrumental in obstructing the working of the office.
The said Lakshminarasamma was examined as S.W.
3 before the Enquiry Officer.
She would state that between 1300 hrs and 1430 hrs on 6-8-1996 about 35-40 persons came in front of the office and they were shouting slogans "JD down down."
They were raising the slogans in Kannada.
Since some of the members were known to her, she reported the matter to the Deputy Director, who directed her to close the door.
At that point of time, when she went to close the door, the petitioner, accompanied by some other persons, namely, Sundar, Jagdish and Muniyappa, pushed her and the said Sunder raised his hand to assault her.
She would further state in her statement that the petitioner and others abused her in filthy language.
But, however, the strongest indictment came from her insofar as the petitioner is concerned.
She would state in her deposition that "I recognised him as Chikkanna" and some of them told the petitioner to "take her away and do whatever he wants to do and if you did not do anything with her, then they will do the thing.
Chikkanna, the petitioner, it appears, replied that he had not done anything, but now he will do irrespective of the outcome."
This is clinching evidence of Smt. Lakshminarasamma.
As stated earlier, the article of charges and the imputation are that the petitioner came and abused her in filthy language and tried to outrage her modesty.
A reading of the charges and the imputation are clear that there is no material variance between the charge and the imputation.
In fact in a departmental enquiry which is always on the preponderance of probability and if the delinquent is made aware of what is being charged and also the imputation and if no prejudice is caused by such variance (we do not find any variance), the first contention of Mr. Reddy cannot be accepted.
13.
Insofar as the second point is concerned, Rule 14 would deal with the disciplinary enquiry.
Sub-rule (18) of R 14 of the Rules would deal with a situation where after the Government servant closes the case and question him on the circumstances appearing against him in evidence for the purpose of enabling the Govt. servant to explain the circumstances appearing against him.
Sub-rule (18) read thus :  "The Inquiring Authority may, after the Government servant closes his case, and shall, if the Government servant has not examined himself, generally question him on the circumstances appearing against him in the evidence for the purpose of enabling the Government servant to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him."
14.
The said sub-rule (18) is in pari materia with S. 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The sum and substance and the reason for incorporating the said rule is for any evidence which is adduced against the delinquent/accused, an opportunity should be given to the delinquent to explain the circumstances which has come in evidence against him.
It is no doubt true that the said provision is in the nature of mandatory provision.
But, however, one factor requires to be noticed that by such non-examination of the delinquent to explain the evidence adduced as against him, he has to establish that some prejudice is caused to him by, not providing him with such an opportunity.
In the instant case, it is to be noticed that after the conclusion of the evidence on behalf of the department, the petitioner has adduced evidence in support of his case.
The evidence adduced by the petitioner through his witnesses would clearly explain the situation which was adduced against the petitioner.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that by not providing an opportunity to the petitioner any prejudice is caused.
In fact, the Tribunal has considered this question elaborately and has relied on a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Sunil Kumar Banerjee v. State of West Bengal, reported in AIR 1980 SC 1170.
The Apex Court has considered the scope of R 8(13) of All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969, which is identical with R 14(18) of, the Rules.
The Apex Court while dealing with almost identical situation was of the opinion that the appellant therein had sufficient opportunity to cross-examine the witness himself and submit his defence in writing in great detail and argued the case.
In view of this the Apex Court was of the opinion that the appellant therein was fully alive to the allegations against him and all the evidence which was put against him was dealt with by him in his written defence.
In these circumstances, the Apex Court was of the opinion that notwithstanding non-compliance of the said provision, it has not in any way prejudiced the appellant therein.
In the case of violation of procedural provision, it is to be stated that these procedural provisions are generally meant for affording a reasonable and adequate opportunity to the delinquent employee.
Any violation of these procedural provisions cannot be said to automatically vitiate the enquiry held and the order passed.
In fact in cases where no notice, no opportunity and no hearing categories, the complaint regarding violation of procedural provision should be examined from the point of view of prejudice which is likely to cause for not complying with the said procedural provision.
In case of a procedural provision, the complaint of violation has to be examined whether there is a substantial compliance of the said provision.
Whenever there is a violation of procedural provision which is mandatory category that has to be ascertained whether the provision is conceived in the interest of the person proceeded against or in public interest.
Then one will have to examine whether the delinquent had waived the said requirement, either expressly or by conduct.
This question regarding violation of procedural provision fell for consideration before the Apex Court in the case of State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, AIR 1996 SC 1669.
The Apex Court, while dealing with an identical situation was of the opinion that the delinquent employee will have to establish that by not resorting to comply with the provision has resulted in irreparable loss and injustice and which is in violation of the principles of natural justice and by not providing such an opportunity it has caused prejudice.
The Apex Court held thus :  "(4)(a) In the case of a procedural provision which is not of a mandatory character, the complaint of violation has to be examined from the standpoint of substantial compliance.
Be that as it may, the order passed in violation of such a provision has occasioned prejudice to the delinquent employee.
(b) In the case of violation of a procedural provision, which is of a mandatory character, it has to be ascertained whether the provision is conceived in the interest of the person proceeded against or in public interest.
If it is found to be the former, then it must be seen whether the delinquent officer has waived the said requirement, either expressly or by his conduct.
If he is found to have waived if, then the order of punishment cannot be set aside on the ground of said violation.
If, on the other hand, it is found that he delinquent officer/employee has not waived it or that the provision could not be waived by him, then the Court or Tribunal should make appropriate directions (include the setting aside of the order or punishment), keeping in mind the approach adopted by the Constitution Bench in B Karunakar, 1994 AIR SCW 1050.
The ultimate test is always the same, viz., test of prejudice or the test of fair hearing, as it may be called."
In view of the law laid down by the Apex Court on this question, we are of the considered view that no prejudice is caused to the petitioner when he did not choose to examine himself despite opportunity being I given to give evidence in support of the circumstances which were adduced against him during the course of the enquiry.
15.
This takes us to the next question raised by Mr. Reddy that the charges levelled against the petitioner in the disciplinary enquiry and that of the Criminal Court are one and the same.
He would contend that he being honourably acquitted by the Criminal Court on the same charges, the Enquiry Officer could not have taken altogether a different view and the said acquittal in the criminal proceeding ought to have been taken into consideration by the Disciplinary Authority as well as the appellate authority while scrutinising the order passed by the Enquiry Officer.
We are not inclined to agree with the said submission of Mr. Reddy for more than one reason.
It is to be noticed that a departmental enquiry is based on preponderance of probability, inasmuch as, it is in the nature of quasi- judicial.
What is required to be looked into while dealing with a departmental enquiry is that there is enough evidence which would substantiate the article of charges and also the imputation.
It is not required of an Enquiry Officer in a departmental enquiry to go in depth of the matter.
What is required is that subjective satisfaction that the delinquent has indeed committed an act and is answerable to the charges levelled against him.
The criminal proceedings would certainly stand on a different footing.
What is required to be looked into while dealing with an accused in a criminal proceeding is whether the prosecution has proved beyond all reasonable doubt of the alleged offence stated to have been committed by an accused.
If there is an iota of doubt, the accused would be handed down an acquittal order.
What is required in a criminal case is a fool-proof case, inasmuch as, there shall not be loose ends in the evidence before rendering a judgment.
If these two principles are kept in mind while dealing with a case where a delinquent is acquitted in a criminal proceeding, what would be the impact of such an acquittal on the departmental enquiry.
It is needless to say that in view of the fact that both stand on a different footing, the fact that the delinquent was acquitted in a criminal case would not come to his aid while facing the departmental enquiry.
At best an order of acquittal in a criminal case would be taken note of while considering the punishment to be imposed in a departmental enquiry.
But, however, the said order of acquittal will not in any way alter the guilt.
In identical situation the Apex Court in the case of Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank v. PC Kakkar, AIR 2003 SC 1571, in no uncertain terms has stated that the factum of acquittal at the most can be considered while awarding punishment depending on facts and circumstances of the case.
The Apex Court has observed thus  "It needs to emphasise that when a Court feels that the punishment is shockingly disproportionate, it must record reasons for coming to such a conclusion.
Mere expression that the punishment is shockingly disproportionate would not meet the requirement of law.
Even in respect of administrative orders Lord Denning M.R in Breen v Amalgamated Engineering Union, 1971(1) All ER 1148 observed : "The giving of reasons is one of the fundamentals of good administration."
In Alexander Machinery (Dedley) Ltd. v. Crabtree, 1974 LCR 120 (NIRC), it was observed : "Failure to give reasons amounts to denial of justice."
Reasons are live links between the minds of the decision-taker to the controversy in question and the decision or conclusion arrived at."
Reasons substitute subjectivity by objectivity.
The emphasis on recording reasons is that if the decision reveals the "inscrutable face of the sphinx."
it can, by its silence, render it virtually impossible for the Courts to reform their appellate function or exercise the power of judicial review in adjudging the validity of the decision.
Right to reason is an indispensable part of a sound judicial system.
Another rationale is that the affected party can know why the decision has gone; against him.
One of the salutary requirements of natural justice is spelling out reasons for the order made, in other words, a speaking out.
The "inscrutable face of a sphinx" is ordinarily incongruous with a judicial or quasi-judicial performance.
But as noted, above, the proceedings commenced in 1981.
The employee was placed under suspension from 1983 to 1988 and has superannuated in 2002.
Acquittal in the criminal case is not determinative of the commission of misconduct or otherwise, and it is open to the authorities to proceed with the disciplinary proceedings, notwithstanding acquittal in criminal case.
It per se would not entitle the employee to claim immunity from the proceedings.
At the most the factum of acquittal may be a circumstance to be considered while awarding punishment.
It would depend upon facts of each case and even that cannot have universal application," (Emphasis supplied)  16.
In view of the law as stated by the Apex Court, the fact that the petitioner has been acquitted by the Criminal Court would not in any way come to his aid.
In fact, it is to be noticed that the disciplinary authority has passed an order of dismissal which has been altered to one of compulsory retirement by the appellate authority.
In view of this, the third contention of Mr. Reddy would fail.
17.
The next question which has been raised by the learned counsel for the respondent is in respect of the powers of this Court under Art, 226 of the Constitution of India, regarding judicial review.
It is to be stated that the scope of judicial review is limited with the decision-making process and not the decision.
Judicial review can be exercised by the Courts only in limited circumstances.
Writ of certiorari under Art. 226 of the Constitution can be issued for correcting gross errors of jurisdiction, inasmuch as, where the authority has acted without jurisdiction or by overstepping or crossing the limits of jurisdiction, or acting in flagrant disregard of law or the rules of procedure or acting in violation of principles of natural justice.
The High Courts in exercise of certiorari or supervisory jurisdiction cannot convert itself into a Court of appeal and indulge in re-appreciation or evaluation of evidence not correct errors in drawing inference or correct errors of mere formal or technical character.
The power can be exercised only when error is manifest and apparent on the face of the proceedings and also when there is grave injustice or gross failure of justice has occasioned.
In fact, the law on this question regarding exercise of powers under Art. 226 of the Constitution with regard to judicial review has been dealt with by the Apex Court in the case of Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai, 2003 (6) SCC 675.
The Apex Court in the case of Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank, AIR 2003 SC 1571 (supra) has summarized after taking note of case law on the question of exercise of powers of judicial review under Art. 226 under the Administrative Law, has stated thus :-  "The common thread running through in all these decisions is that the Court should not interfere with the administrator's decision unless it was illogical or suffers from procedural impropriety or was shocking to the conscience of the Court, in the sense that it was in defiance of logic or moral standards.
In view of what has been stated in the Wednesbury's case (1948) 1 KB 223 (supra), that the Court would not go into the correctness of the choice made by the administrator open to him and the Court should not substitute its decision to that of the administrator.
The scope of judicial review is limited to the deficiency in decision making process and not the decision."
18.
Mr. Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied on several decisions to buttress his contention.
The first is the case of Sawai Singh v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1986 SC 995.
This is the case where the Apex Court has interfered with the order of the disciplinary authority on the ground of vagueness of charges.
In view of this, it was ruled that the enquiry stood vitiated.
But, however, that is not the case here.
In fact, at para 5 of the judgment, the Apex Court has stated that the statement of allegations was also sent along with the forwarding letter and it was mentioned in the said statement was equally vague.
In these circumstances, it was of the opinion that the delinquent had some difficulty in meeting the charges fairly and the evidence adduced was perfunctory and did not bring home the guilt of the delinquent.
On this ground the enquiry was held to be vitiated.
The second judgment is in the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohd.
Sharif (dead) by LRs., AIR 1982 SC 937.
It is the case of violation of principles of natural justice, wherein the charge-sheet did not contain any material particulars and the statement of witnesses was recorded during the preliminary inquiry was also not furnished.
In these circumstances, the Apex Court held that the delinquent therein was denied an opportunity, thus violating the principles of natural justice.
But, however, it is not the case here.
In this case the witnesses of the Government were cross-examined at length by the petitioner and also adduced evidence in support of his contentions.
Consequently, it cannot be said that he was denied, an opportunity to contest the matter.
Thus, violating the principles of natural justice.
In the case of Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh, AIR 1983 SC 454, the Apex Court has cautioned that in a petition under Art. 226, the High Court would not function as a Court of appeal over the findings of a disciplinary authority.
But, however, has ruled that where the finding is perverse, inasmuch as, does not based on any evidence the same was liable to be interfered with under Art. 226.
A perusal of the order of the Enquiry Officer as well as that of the disciplinary authority and that of the appellate authority would clearly disclose that they had applied their mind and had considered every part of the evidence and were of the view that the charges were proved.
It is useful to refer to a portion of the judgment, at para 10, wherein the Apex Court has stated thus :-  "Let us make it abundantly clear that we are not sitting in appeal over the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
In a petition under Art. 226, the High Court does not function as a Court of appeal over the findings of disciplinary authority."
Moreover, the Apex Court also found that the charges were really very trivial in the nature of negligence in performance of duty which did not cause any loss to the Government.
In Bhagwati Prasad Dubey v. Food Corporation of India, AIR 1988 SC 434, the case was once again where there was no substantive legal evidence to drive home the guilt.
Consequently, the Apex Court interfered.
In the case of Ministry of Finance v. SB Ramesh, AIR 1988 SC 434, the Apex Court had an occasion to deal with the scope of R 14(18) of the Rules, wherein non-compliance of the mandatory provisions was held to vitiate the proceedings.
In that case, after the enquiry was held, for recording of the evidence in support of the charges, the Enquiry Officer had set the applicant therein ex parte and had proceeded to hear the matter without adjourning the hearing to another date to enable the applicant to participate in the enquiry.
But, however, that is not the case here.
As stated earlier, an opportunity was given to the petitioner to advance his case and also to lead evidence on his behalf.
That has been done.
Even the petitioner has filed written brief in support of his contention.
Consequently, it cannot be said that sub-rule (18) of R14 has been violated.
19.
Another decision on which reliance was placed was in the case of Kuldeep Singh v. Commissioner of Police, AIR 1999 SC 677.
Once again it was a case that there was no evidence in support of the charge framed against the delinquent officer.
It is not the case here.
In fact, in para 6 of the said judgment, the Apex Court has stated that scope of enquiry under Art. 226 would not interfere with the findings recorded at the departmental enquiry by the Disciplinary Authority or the Enquiry Officer as a matter of course.
The Court cannot sit in appeal over those findings and assume the role of the appellate authority.
We are of the considered view the decisions relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner would not advance his case any further.
20.
In view of the limited scope which could be exercised by us under Art. 226 of the Constitution, we are of the considered view that the impugned order passed by the Tribunal as well as that of the authorities are based on evidence on record and also probabilities of the case.
We are also of the opinion that the alteration of punishment of dismissal to that of compulsory retirement would meet the ends of justice.
21.
Consequently, we dismiss the writ petition.
The parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.