Rakesh Tiwari, J - Heard counsel for the parties and perused the record.
2.
This writ petition has been filed against an Award dated 2792000 (Annexure 3 to the writ petition) passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court (III), UP, Kanpur in Adjudication Dispute No. 165/94.
By the aforesaid award, the Labour Court has held that the termination of the workman w.e.f.
26101969 was illegal but instead of granting relief of reinstatement in service with full back wages the Labour Court only granted wages and other benefits from 191994 to 31121997, i.e., wages from the date of reference to the date of retirement.
3.
The facts in brief are that respondent no. 1, the workman concerned was working on the post of Driver in the erstwhile UP Government Roadways.
On 15.5.1969 he was found carrying 16 passengers without tickets besides two cycles without proper booking, when the bus was checked by the checking authorities on Fatehpur-Kishanpur route.
He was removed from service on 2101969 after holding a departmental enquiry into the misconduct.
The order of removal is appended as Annexure 1 to the writ petition as under: -  (Vernacular Matter Omitted)  4.
A departmental appeal was preferred by the respondent-workman against the order of removal which was rejected on 911970.
5.
After removal from service from UP Roadways in 1969 no action was taken by the workmen challenging his termination.
Later on when the Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation was created on 161972, the workman filed a claim petition in the year 1976 before the Public Service Tribunal, Lucknow challenging his removal from service by the UP Govt.
Roadways.
Thereafter he filed Writ Petition No. 19932 of 1987, which was dismissed vide judgment dated 3111987 on the ground of latches/limitation.
6.
The contention of the counsel for the petitioner is that Writ Petition No. 1932 of 1987 having been dismissed, the industrial dispute raised by the workman relating to his removal from service was barred by the principles of res judicata as the earlier writ court judgment would amount to a ''case finally decided' within the meaning of Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
He has relied upon the decisions rendered in Pondicherry Khadi and Village Industries Board v. P Kulothangan and another, (2003 (99) F.L.R.
1175) and Ram Gobinda Daw and others v. Smt. H Bhakta Bvala Dassi etc. (AIR 1971 SC 664) in support of above contention.
7.
In the case of Pondicherry Khadi and Village Industries Board (supra) the apex court has held that although entire Civil Procedure Code is not applicable to industrial adjudication the principle of res judicata laid down in Section 11 of the Code is applicable and having got an adverse order in writ petition the petitioner could not have challenged or reagitated before the Labour Court.
8.
In the case of Ram Gobinda Daw (supra) the court has held that where a former suit was dismissed by a trial court either for want of jurisdiction or for default of plaintiff's appearance etc. it does not amount to the appeal being heard and finally decided on merits whatever may be the ground for dismissal of the appeal.
After discussing the case law the Court held that when the decision was given by trial court after contest it operates as res judicata even if appeal therefrom might have been dismissed on some preliminary grounds like limitation.
9.
The next contention of the counsel for the petitioner is that the services of the respondent-workman had been terminated as back as in the year 1969 when he was in the services of the erstwhile UP Government Roadways and since the UP State Road Transport Corporation was created on 161972 there was no privity of contract between the UP State Road Transport Corporation and respondent-workman and therefore no "industrial dispute" as defined under Section 2 (1) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 between the petitioner-Corporation and respondent-workman could have arisen.
He submits that the Reference of the dispute was thus bad and the conclusion arrived at by the Labour Court is illegal, erroneous and perverse.
In this regard he has relied upon the decisions rendered in Jagdish Prasad Gupta & Others v. State of UP & Others (1980 (6) A.L.R.
81); judgment dated 1651996 passed in Writ Petition No. 12818 of 1985 (UP State Road Transport Corporation v. State of UP & Others) and judgment dated 29.1.2004 passed in Writ Petition No. 4760 of 1986 (UP State Road Transport Corporation v. State of UP & Others).
"The petition was dismissed as far back as 1969.
This petition suffers from laches which have not been properly explained.
The petition is dismissed on the grounds of laches.
Sd/- V.N.K., J  Sd/- U Chandra  3111987"  10.
The above order in my opinion will operate as res judicata.
11.
The counsel for the petitioner further submits that admittedly the services of the workman had been terminated in the year 1969 while he was working in the erstwhile UP Government Roadways and he had not worked in the petitioner-Corporation.
The petitioner-Corporation could not place any document regarding departmental proceedings before the Labour Court being lost due to excessive delay/latches and with regard that there was no privity of contract between the petitioner-Corporation and the respondent-workman and in these circumstances where material evidence has been lost due to considerable delay or due to the fact that it was not in the possession of the Corporation the delay had become fatal and the dispute had become stale.
Therefore, the claim of the respondent-workman ought to have been rejected by the Labour Court on the ground of latches alone.
In this regard he has placed reliance upon the decision rendered in SM Nilajkar & Others v. Telecom, District Manager, Karnataka (2003 (97) F.L.R.
608 (para 17) which is as under: -  "17.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that on account of delay in raising the dispute by the appellants the High Court was justified in denying relief to the appellants.
We cannot agree.
It is true, as held in M/s Shalimar Works Limited Vs Their Workmen (supra) that merely because the Industrial Disputes Act does not provide for a limitation for raising the dispute it does not mean that the dispute can be raised at any time and without regard to the delay and reasons therefore.
There is no limitation prescribed for reference of disputes to an industrial tribunal; even so it is only reasonable that the disputes should be referred as soon as possible after they have arisen and after conciliation proceedings have failed particularly so when disputes relate to discharge of workmen wholesale.
A delay of 4 years in raising the dispute after even re-employment of the most of the old workmen was held to be fatal in M/s Shalimar Works Limited v. Their Workmen (supra).
In Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty and others (supra), a delay of 7 years was held to be fatal and disentitled the workmen to any relief.
In Ratan Chandra Sammanta and others v. Union of India and others (supra), it was held that a casual labourer retrenched by the employer deprives himself of remedy available in law by delay itself; lapse of time results in losing the remedy and the right as well.
The delay would certainly be fatal if it has resulted in material evidence relevant to adjudication being lost and rendered not available.
12.
It is lastly submitted that in any case the Labour Court has failed to appreciate that strict rules of evidence are not applicable in the departmental proceedings/before the Labour Court and the preponderance of evidence clearly proved that the respondent-workman had connived with the conductor of the bus to embezzle departmental revenue.
Further more the respondent-workman was guilty of committing perjury as he had made a false statement before the Labour Court that the writ petition filed by him had not been dismissed by the High Court due to which the Labour Court had proceeded with the reference on merits.
13.
The counsel for the respondents submits that from para 5 of the award it is clear that the petitioner-Corporation has neither filed any written statement on merits nor has filed any document.
It has also not adduced oral evidence before the Labour Court and as such the award given by the Labour Court on the basis of written statement, documents and oral evidence led by respondent-workman cannot be faulted with.
He further submits that when the petitioner had not raised any plea before the Labour Court, it cannot be allowed to be raised for the first time involving factual determination of any question/issue before the High Court in view of the decisions of this Court in 1979 (39) F.L.R.
1; 1980 (41) F.L.R.
95; and 1997 (2) UPL.B.E.C.
1972.
14.
It is urged that the order dated 20.2.1996 passed by the Labour Court holding the reference order to be legal and valid has not been challenged in the writ petition and as such the reference itself could not be raised for the first time in arguments.
He has further submitted that from a bare perusal of office order dated 26101969 (Annexure 1 to the writ petition) passed by the petitioner and the judgment and order dated 3111987 passed by this Court in Writ Petition No. 19932 of 1987, it appears that the documents were with the petitioner-Corporation which were neither filed nor the petitioner contested the case, as such the petitioner is not entitled to get any relief under equity jurisdiction from this Court in view of the law laid down in 2004 SSC (L & S) 617 State of Punjab v Savinder Jeet Kaur.
It is further submitted that the order dated 3111987 passed in Writ Petition No. 19932 of 1987 shows that this Court dismissed the writ petition on the ground of latches, meaning thereby this Court has not decided the controversy on merits and as such the principle of res judicata has no application to the present case in view of the decision of the apex court rendered in Mathura Prasad Sarjoo Jaiswal and others v Dossibai NB Jeejeebhoy (AIR 1971 SC 2355), M/s Tilokchand Motichand and others v. HB Munshi Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bombay and another, (AIR 1970 SC 898).
He has further submitted that it is the settled view of this Court as well as of the apex court that the question of applicability of principle of res judicata is a mixed question of law and facts both and such question must be raised before the trial court and be pressed for framing of additional issue but the petitioner-Corporation took no such plea before the Labour Court and as such this plea cannot be allowed to be taken or raised before this Court in the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It is further submitted that the apex court in its various judgments held that an industrial dispute could not be thrown out on the ground of delay and latches and the Labour Court may mould the relief as no limitation has been provided either under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central) or UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and as such the award of the Labour Court is fully in accordance with law laid down by the apex court in Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd and another, (1996 (6) SCC 82) and Gurmail Singh v. Principal Government College of Education and others, (2000 (84) F.L.R.
920).
15.
The counsel for the respondent-workman lastly urged that the writ petition being devoid of merits be dismissed directing the petitioner-Corporation to pay the entire back wages of the respondent-workman along with all retiral benefits with interest at the rate of 18 per cent.
16.
The Labour Court has granted wages as well as benefit of imaginary/deemed service to the respondent-workman for the period 191994 to 31121997, i.e., from the date of reference till he attained the age of superannuation.
The operative part of the award is as under:  (Vernacular Matter Omitted)  17.
Admittedly the services of the workman had been terminated on 26101969 when he was in the UP Government Roadways.
The petitioner-Corporation came into existence w.e.f.
161972 and the claim petition was filed by the workman before the Public Services Tribunal, Lucknow in 1976 challenging his removal from service.
The Writ Petition No. 19932 of 1987 filed by him was dismissed vide order dated 3111987 on the ground of laches.
It is evident from the facts of the case that there was no privity of contract between the workman and the Corporation.
The delay in raising the dispute by the workman in the circumstances would be fatal.
Had he raised the dispute when his services were terminated in 1969 by the UP Government Roadways claiming his re-instatement and continuity of service it would have been another matter.
The workman had not been able to prove that the record of his service etc. with the UP Government Roadways on termination of his services had been transmitted to the Corporation after its creation.
The burden to prove his case lay on the workman that he was the employee of the Corporation, which was not discharged by him.
Though an employer is not liable to maintain the records beyond a reasonable period of time in the instant case after closure of the UP Government Roadways and termination of his services in 1969 his services were not transferred on deputation to the UP State Road Transport Corporation.
Until and unless it was proved by the workman that the record was available with the Corporation there was no question of his record being available with the Corporation, which was created in June 1972.
The Labour Court has committed an illegality in laying burden of proof on the Corporation when according to the admitted facts the respondent-workman there was no privity of contract between and the UP State Road Transport Corporation.
He was not an employee of the UP State Road Transport Corporation as he had no jural relationship with the Corporation.
According to the UP Roadways Organization (Abolition of Posts And Absorption of Employees) Rules, 1982 (hereinafter called as 1982 Rules) framed under Article 303 of the Constitution, they had overriding effect.
In the Judgment and order dated 1651996 rendered by this Court in Writ Petition No. 12818 of 1987 it has been held :-  "By or under the Government Order no. 000/20-30-2-20-N-72 dated 7th June 1972 as amended by Government Orders no. 3414/30-2-170-N-72 dated 8th July 1972 the service of the employees of UPS.R.O.
were placed on deputation with UPS.R.T.C.
after its creation with effect from 161972 and said Government Order provides that all permanent and temporary officers and employees who were in service with the Government Roadways prior to the constitution of State Road Transport Corporation shall be deemed to be on deputation in service of the Corporation.
He further states that since UPS.R.T.C.
has not framed service rules under Section 45 of the said transport condition of service, therefore, the Government Order dated 7th June 1972 except para 1 (ka) was deemed to be cancelled.
It was further provided that the condition of service of the officers and employees shall not be inferior to those which were available to them prior to absorption in UP Government Roadways and the period of work prior to the same shall be included by the Corporation for the purposes of seniority, promotion, pay fixation, leave and financial benefits, which shall be the same as were available in the Government Service.
Therefore, the status of the respondent no. 3 continued to be that of the Government servant under the Government of UP on deputation to the Corporation and the conditions of service shall be governed by the Government Service Rules.
18.
The petitioner had never been on deputation to UP State Road Transport Corporation as his services had been terminated in 1969 and there was no question of his giving any option for the same region.
His services did not exist when the UP State Road Transport Corporation was created in 1972 and his post stood abolished as only the services of existing employees was transferred on deputation.
19.
Since there was even no jural relationship of employer and employee between the petitioner and the respondent-workman, and there being no privity of contract between them at any point of time, he does not fall within the ambit of ''workman' as defined under Section 2 (z) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 on no post in the UP State Road Transport Corporation he could be deemed to have been employed under the 1982 Rules.
20.
The workman has already reached the age of superannuation during the pendency of the case before the Labour Court.
The delay in raising the dispute against the erstwhile UP Government Roadways is fatal in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Moreover, the dispute was barred by the principles of res judicata as held above.
21.
The Labour Court has committed an illegality in granting potential amount of wages to the respondent-workman on the basis of assumption that he continued in service, after recording a finding that the real date of birth of the workman was not known and assuming his date of superannuation as 31121997.
Awarding him wages and other benefits from 191994 to 31121997 for imaginary services which he would have earned had he remained in service till his superannuation in the facts and circumstances of this case by the Labour Court was wholly illegal and without any basis.
22.
For the reasons stated above, the petition is allowed.
The impugned award passed by the Labour Court is quashed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.