PS Patwalia, J - Petitioner is a retired Superintending Engineer having superannuated in December 1986.
2.
In December 1995 he had a heart problem and was admitted in the PGI Chandigarh as an indoor patient.
He was advised bye pass heart surgery (CABG) which the petitioner decided to undergo from the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Center, New Delhi.
Before being admitted to the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Center, New Delhi, he approached the office of the Director, Health Services, Punjab, Chandigarh for permission.
The petitioner claims that the Director, Health Services declined to grant him permission unless he gave an affidavit to the effect that the petitioner would accept reimbursement at the rates of All India Institute for Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
He claims that in view of the urgency, he had no other alternative but to give the affidavit as demanded by the department.
The Director, Health Services, Punjab accorded permission to the petitioner for the bye-pass surgery vide memo dated 15011996, subject to the condition that the reimbursement of the bills would be at the rates of All India Institute for Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
The petitioner was operated upon on 14121995 and discharged on 23.12.1995.
After his discharge, on 841996, the petitioner submitted his bill amounting to Rs. 1,52,850 duly counter signed by the various signatories of the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Center, New Delhi as also all other relevant documents and sought reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by him.
The respondent-State however only reimbursed a sum of Rs. 82,000/- which was as per the rates of the All India Institute for Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
3.
Aggrieved against the action of the respondents in not granting full reimbursement to the petitioner, he filed the present writ petition claiming that he was entitled to reimbursement of the total amount spent by him on his surgery.
4.
In the writ petition, the petitioner had relied upon judgments of this Court in Surya Pandit v. State of Punjab reported as 1996(1) SLR 260 and Waryam Singh v. State of Punjab reported as 1996 (4) SLR 177, wherein this Court had taken the view that the condition imposed while granting permission restricting the reimbursement of expenditure at the rates of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi was illegal.
This court, in the aforementioned judgments had therefore quashed the said condition and had directed that the full amount spent by the petitioners therein at the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Center, New Delhi should be reimbursed to them.
The claim of the petitioner therefore was completely covered by the aforesaid judgments.
5.
The respondents had filed a written statement contesting the claim of the petitioner.
6.
The writ petition had come up for hearing on 2881997, on which date the following order was passed :-  "Adjourned sine die to await the decision/ variation by the Supreme Court by S.L.P.
No. 10355 of 1997".
7.
We have now been informed that S.L.P.
No. 10355 of 1997 had been decided on 1121998 with the following order :-  "In this SLP the respondent is the widow of one K.P.
Raikhy who was serving under Punjab Government and retired as General Manager, Punjab Roadways.
She was admitted into Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, Okhla Road on 1111995 and she was advised immediate bye-pass heart surgery and underwent byepass heart surgery on 14.1.1995.
Her claim for reimbursement of medical charges is upheld by the High Court in the writ petition.
In our view, no fault can be found with the judgment of the High Court on the facts of this case as the old policy of 1991 and the judgment of this Court in the case of State of Punjab & ors. v. Mohinder Singh Chawla & Ors. reported in (1197) 2 SCC 83 would squarely apply to the facts of the case.
The Special Leave Petition is therefore, dismissed.
Ad interim stay granted earlier shall stand vacated.
The balance of the amount payable to the respondent pursuant to the order of the High Court shall be paid over to her within six weeks from today."
A reading of the order would show that relying on State of Punjab v. Mohinder Singh Chawla and others and in view of the fact that the claim for reimbursement was under the policy of 1991, the full amount spent by the petitioner in the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Center, New Delhi, was to be reimbursed.
8.
In the present case as well, the surgery was in December 1995.
Therefore the present case is completely covered by the order made in SLP No. 10355 of 1997.
In fact, the respondents themselves had agreed that the present case should be adjourned to await determination by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 10355 of 1997.
Even apart from this, the same view has already been taken by this Court in respect of employees who underwent surgery in the year 1995 in Surya Pandit's case and Waryam Singh's case (supra).
We are therefore of the view that the petitioner in this case is entitled to be released the full amount spent by him for being operated upon at the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi.
9.
Consequently the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to verify the claim made by the petitioner for reimbursement of the expenses incurred by him at the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi and to make the payment within a period of two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this judgment.
The payment shall be made after deducting the reimbursement which the Government has already made at the rates of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
In the circumstances of the case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.