SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - The Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench (hereinafter referred to as "the Tribunal") has allowed OA No. 777-PB-98 filed by the petitioners with a direction to the respondents to extend to the petitioners the benefits of the judgments rendered in OA No. 2241/91 (PS Saini and others v. U.O.I.
and others) decided by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi on 1851992 and OA No. 739-CH of 1994 decided by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench on 29111996.
2.
The Tribunal has allowed the claim of the petitioners on the ground that their claim is similar to some other employees who had filed OA No. 101-PB- 93 which was decided by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench on 1551998.
In this matter also the benefit of the earlier order passed in the case of PS Saini (supra) had been granted.
Restricting the benefit to the past 18 months was not acceptable to the petitioners.
They have, therefore, challenged the aforesaid order (Annexure P-3) passed by the Tribunal, in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners have made a limited prayer for quashing the order passed by the Tribunal dated 2111999 (Annexure P-3) to the extent that it restricts the grant of consequential benefits to 18 months.
3.
The respondents have filed written statement.
It has been stated that the petitioners were not entitled to the benefit of the judgment rendered in PS Saini's case (supra).
The OA ought to have been dismissed on the ground of limitation.
The petitioners were seeking benefits in terms of the Office Memorandum dated 2231991.
The OA was not filed till 891998.
It has also been stated that on absorption, the petitioners had been treated as fresh entrants, and therefore, period of five years and 15 years would run from the date they were actually absorbed in the Central Public Works Department (CPWD).
4.
At this stage, we may notice the undisputed facts.
Both the petitioners had joined the Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) on 871991 and 10.8.1973, respectively, on the post of Sectional Officer.
These posts were subsequently redesignated as Junior Engineer.
Due to winding up of the work of the BBMB, a decision was taken by the Union of India on humanitarian ground to absorb the surplus employees in various departments of the Central Government, including the CWPD.
Both the petitioners were absorbed in CPWD on 1121984.
At the time of re-employment of the petitioners in CPWD, it was informed that they will not be entitled to the benefit of their past service.
After the absorption of the petitioners, an Office Memorandum (Annexure R-2) was issued on 2231991 by which pay scales on the post of Junior Engineers were revised w.e.f.
111986.
In the aforesaid Memorandum, it was provided that there will be two scales of pay for Junior Engineers/Sectional officers (Horticulture) in the CPWD.
The entry grade would be Rs. 1400-40-1800-EB-50-2300 (pre-revised pay scale of Rs. 425-15-500-EB-15-560-20-700).
On completion of five years service, the Junior Engineers were to be placed in the higher grade pay scale of Rs. 1640-60-2600-EB-75-2900.
The aforesaid benefit would be available w.e.f.
111986.
Under paragraph 3 of the aforesaid Office Memorandum, it was further provided that w.e.f.
111991, the Junior Engineers (Civil and Electrical) and the Sectional Officer (Horticulture) (of CPWD) on completion of 15 years service may also be given further higher pay scale of Rs. 2000-60-2300-EB-75-3200-100-3500.
This was styled as a personal promotional scale.
When these benefits were not granted to the erstwhile employee of BBMB, they sought the necessary relief by moving the CAT by filing numerous Original Applications.
As noticed earlier, the Principal Bench of the Tribunal decided OA No. 2241 of 1991 PS Saini and others (supra) on 1851992, it was specifically argued before the Principal Bench that in accordance with the instructions contained in the Scheme of Re-deployed Staff issued by the Government from time to time, the redeployed staff are treated as fresh entrants in the new offices/organisations for the purpose of fixing their seniority and they are placed below the employees who have already joined the new offices/organisations.
The intention behind the policy is that the benefit of past service should be allowed to them where it does not adversely affect the interest of the employees already senior in the Office/Organisation to which they were re-deployed.
Therefore, the Junior Engineers re-deployed in the CPWD are not entitled to the past service benefit for getting the benefit of the two higher pay scales as intimated by letter dated 1681991.
These arguments were rejected by the Tribunal.
It was held that the applicants were entitled to the revision of pay scale w.e.f.
111986 and 2231991.
SLP filed by the Union of India against the aforesaid judgment was dismissed.
Relying in the aforesaid order of the Principal Bench in PS Saini's case (supra), some employees filed OA No. 739-CH of 1994 (supra) before the Chandigarh Bench.
The OA was allowed by order dated 29111996.
Against the aforesaid order, SLP was also dismissed.
Thereafter, some other employees filed OA No. 101-PB-93 which was also allowed by the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal on 1551998 The claim of the petitioners has also been allowed relying on the aforesaid judgments and orders.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that since the OA has been allowed on the basis of the earlier judgments of the CAT, the petitioners were entitled to the same benefit w.e.f.
111986 and 2231991.
7.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel appearing for the UOI does not dispute the facts as narrated above.
It is accepted that SLPs against the order of the Principal Bench as also against the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal had been dismissed.
He, however, submits that the dismissal of the SLP in the aforesaid two cases is of little consequence.
He submits that dismissal of the SLP in limine would not mean that the judgments rendered by the Tribunal shave been affirmed by the Supreme Court.
In support of the aforesaid submission, learned counsel relies on the following judgments of the Supreme Court :-  (1) Saurashtra Oil Mills Assn.
v. State of Gujarat, 2002(3) R.C.R.
(Civil) 1 : 2002(3) SCC 202 (para 14); (2) Commissioner of Income Tax v. Manjunatheswar Packing Products and Camphor Works, 1998(1) SCC page 598 (para 12); (3) Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 334 (para 22); (4) Kunhayammed and others v. State of Kerala and another, 2000(3) R.C.R.
(Civil) 671 : 2000(6) SCC Page 359 (Paras 27, 40 and 44); (5) Director of Settlements, HP v. MR Apparao, 2002(4) SCC 638; (6) Asstt.
Collector C.E.
Chandan Nagar v. Dunlop India Ltd, AIR 1985 SC 330 (para 6).
8.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh further submits that in the present case, the petitioners cannot be granted any relief in view of the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court on 431998 in the case of UOI and others v. K Savitri and others, 1998(2) SCT 824 (SC) : 1998(4) Supreme Court Cases 358.
Relying on the aforesaid judgment, OA No. 895 of 2000 (Amar Singh and others v. Union of India and others) filed by the employees identically situated to the petitioners has been dismissed by the Principal Bench, New Delhi by its judgment dated 25.5.2001.
The judgment of the Tribunal dated 2111999 which is challenged in this writ petition, having been rendered per incuriam and being contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court, cannot be upheld.
In support of this submission, learned counsel relies on the following judgments of the Supreme Court :-  (1) Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1990(4) SLR 154 (Paras 44 and 50) (2) State of UP v. Synthetic & Chemicals Ltd, 1991(4) SCC 139 (Para 40).
9.
Mr. Gurpeet Singh further submits that Office Memorandum dated 2231991 and 2731991 as well as the OM No. A-11014/1/91/EC/VI dated 2731991 have been again considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Superintending Engineer and others v. A Sankariah, 2003(4) SCT 739 (SC) : 2003(11) Supreme Court Cases 641.
10.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
In view of the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of K Savitri (supra), the impugned judgment 2111999 rendered by the Tribunal is clearly per incuriam.
In the aforesaid case, the Supreme Court was considering the appeals which were directed against the orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttak Bench dated 2751994 and 27101994 passed in OA Nos. 160, 161 and 163 of 1993.
Union of India had preferred applications for review, but the Tribunal dismissed the same by order dated 27101994.
The question posed before the Supreme Court was as follows :-  "2.
The question for consideration in these appeals is whether surplus employees having been rendered surplus in the parent department, on being re- deployed under the provisions of the Central Civil Services (Re- deployment of Surplus Staff) Rules, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules" can claim the benefit of the counting of past services rendered by them for the purpose of seniority or experience in the re-deployed organisation."
After considering the entire matter, it has been held as follows :-  "8.
In exercise of the power under Rule 9 of the Rules, Government of India has issued the revised scheme indicating the manner in which and the extent to which surplus staff on being redeployed under the Rules can be given the benefit of their past services.
Paragraph 11 of the revised scheme deals with the question of benefit of past service after redeployment.
Para 111 clearly stipulates that the past services rendered prior to redeployment should not count towards seniority in the new organisation.
Para 111 is extracted hereinbelow in extenso :- "11.
No change is contemplated in the present policy that the past services rendered prior to re-deployment should not count towards seniority, in the new organisation/new post which a surplus employee joins after he is redeployed.
The same rule will also have to be applied in the case of those readjusted after redeployment".
9.
The service conditions of the redeployed employees under the Rules being governed by the provisions in the Rules as well as the instructions issued from the Government of India from time to time and in view of the clear and unambiguous language in para 111 of the instructions referred to above the conclusion is irresistible that the past services of the re-deployed staff cannot be counted for seniority in the new organisation.
The Tribunal, therefore, committed serious error in directing that the past services would be counted for the seniority of the employees in All India Radio."
11.
The aforesaid judgment was not brought to the notice of the Tribunal.
The impugned judgment of the Tribunal having been rendered per incuriam and being contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court, cannot be upheld.
The very same controversy has again been examined by the Supreme Court in the case of A Sankariah (supra).
The Supreme Court set out elaborately the previous judgments rendered by various Benches of the CAT.
After analysing the provisions of the various Circulars, it has been held as follows :-  "14.
Since the respondent had not completed 5 years of service in CPWD in terms of OM dated 2731991, he could not claim the benefit of OM dated 2731991 from the date he joined CPWD.
He could claim the benefit only after completion of 5 years of service in CPWD.
It has to be appreciated that re- deployment of the respondent in CPWD was only with a view to mitigate the hardship caused to him by his retrenchment from service in the Dandakarnya Development Authority Project.
It was to protect his retrenchment from service.
As per the terms of the policy and the letter of appointment, his redeployment in CPWD was to be treated as a fresh employment.
His past service rendered in the Dandakarnya Development Authority could not be counted for extending the benefit of OM dated 2731991."
12.
The judgment rendered by the Tribunal cannot be sustained in view of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court.
After the decision in the case of K Savitri (supra), even the Principal Bench dismissed OA No. 895 of 2000 (Amar Singh and others v. Union of India and others) by its judgment dated 25.5.2001.
In paras 5 and 19 of the aforesaid judgment, it has been obseved as under :-  "5.
In the case of other similarly placed persons viz. KP Reddy and others, the Supreme Court have given a judgment in favour of Government and have set aside the judgment dated 10101996 of CAT, Hyderabad Bench.
In the order dated 2091999 in the SLP filed against the CAT's judgment, the Supreme Court have ruled that on question of law and fact their judgment in the case of UOI and others v. K Savitri and others, 1998(2) S.C.T.
824 : 1998(4) SCC 358) fully applies to this case also.
By this judgment, Supreme Court has not allowed the higher pay scales of Rs. 1640-2900 and Rs. 2000-3500 to KP Reddy and others w.e.f.
111986 and 111991 respectively by counting past service.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 19.
In view of the aforesaid reasons and law settled by the Apex Court in the case of KP Reddy and K Savitri (supra), the present OA cannot be allowed and is liable to be dismissed.
Moreover, the various judgments of the Tribunal relied upon by the applicants will not render any assistance to them because of the judgments of the apex Court in the cases of KP Reddy and K Savitri (supra)."
13.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh has rightly submitted that the impugned judgment of the Tribunal having been rendered per incuriam and being contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court, cannot be upheld.
In the case of Punjab Land Dev.
Corp. (supra), the Supreme Court while dealing with the question of per incuriam, observed as under :-  "43.
We now deal with the question of per incuriam by reason of allegedly not following the Constitution Bench decisions.
The Latin expression per incuriam means though inadvertence.
A decision can be said generally to be given per incuriam when this Court has acted in ignorance of a previous decision of its own or when a High Court has acted in ignorance of a decision of this Court.
It cannot be doubted that Article 141 embodies, as a rule of law, the doctrine of precedents on which our judicial system is based.
In Bengal Immunity Company Ltd v. State of Bihar, 1955(2) SCR 603, it was held that the words of Article 141, "binding on all Courts within the territory of India" though wide enough to include the Supreme Court, do not include the Supreme Court itself, and it is not bound by its own judgments but is free to reconsider them in appropriate cases.
This is necessary for proper development of law and justice.
May be for the same reasons before judgments were given in the House of Lords in Re : Dawson's Settlement Llyods Bank Ltd v. Dawson and others, 1966(1) WLR 1234, on July 26, 1996 Lord Gardiner, LC made the following statement on behalf of himself and the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary : "Their Lordships regard the use of precedent as an indispensable foundation upon which to decide what is the law and its application to individual cases.
It provides at least some degree of certainty upon which individuals can rely in the conduct of their affairs, as well as basis for orderly development of legal rules.
Their Lordships nevertheless recognise that too rigid adherence to precedent may lead to injustice in a particular case and also unduly restrict the proper development of the law.
They propose, therefore, to modify their present practice and, while treating former decisions of this House as normally binding to depart from a previous decision when it appears right to do so.
In this connection they will bear in mind the danger of disturbing retrospectively the basis on which contracts, settlements of property and fiscal arrangements have been entered into and also the especial need for certainty as to the criminal law."
44.
Though the above announcement was not made in the course of judicial proceeding it shows that it is open to House of Lords to depart from the doctrine of precedent when considered justified.
Section 212 of the Government of India Act, 1935 and Article 141 of the Constitution of India were enacted to make the law declared by the Supreme Court binding on all Courts in the country excluding, as is now being interpreted, the Supreme Court itself.
The doctrine of ratio decidendi has also to be interpreted in the same line.
In England, a decision is said to be given per incuriam when the Court has acted in ignorance of a previous decision of its own or of a Court of co-ordinate jurisdiction which covered the case before it, or when it has acted in ignorance of a decision of the House of Lords.
In the former case, it must decide which decision to follow, and in the latter it is bound by the decision of the House of Lords.
It has been said that the decision of the House of Lords mentioned above, refers to a decision subsequent to that of the Court of Appeal.
However, "a prior decision of the House of Lords inconsistent with the decision of the Court of Appeal, but which was not cited to the Court of Appeal will make the later decision of the Court of Appeal of no value as given per incuriam."
But if the prior decision had been cited to the Court of Appeal and that Court had misinterpreted a previous decision of the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal must follow its previous decision and leave the House to rectify the mistake.
In Halsbury's Laws of England 4th Ed. Vol. 10 Para 745, it has been said : "While former decisions of the House are normally binding upon it, the House will depart from one of its own previous decisions when it appears right in the interest of justice and of the proper development of the law to do so.
Cases where the House may reconsider its own previous decisions are those involving broad issues of justice or public policy and questions of legal principle.
Only in rare cases will the House reconsider questions of construction of statutes or other documents.
The House is not bound to follow a previous case merely because it is indistinguishable on the facts."
Again the Supreme Court in the case of State of UP (supra) has observed as under :-  "40.
`Incuria' literally means `carelessness'.
In practice per incuriam appears to mean per ignoratium.
English Courts have developed this principle in relaxation of the rule of stare decisis.
The `quotable in law' is avoided and ignored if it is rendered, `in ignoratium of a statute or other binding authority'.
(Young V Bristol Aeroplance Co Ltd).
Same has been accepted, approved and adopted by this Court while interpreting Article 141 of the Constitution which embodies the doctrine of precedents as a matter of law.
In Jaisri Sahu V Rajdewan Debey, this Court while pointing out the procedure to be followed when conflicting decisions are placed before a Bench extracted a passage from Halsbury's Laws of England incorporating one of the exceptions when the decision of an appellate Court is not binding.
41.
Does this principle extend and apply to a conclusion of law, which was neither raised nor preceded by any consideration.
In other words can such conclusions be considered as declaration of law ?
Here again the English Courts and jurists have carved out an exception to the rule of precedents.
It has been explained as rule of sub-silentio.
"A decision passes sub-silentio, in the technical sense that has come to be attached to that phrase, when the particular point of law involved in the decision is not perceived by the Court or present to its mind."
(Salmond on Jurisprudence 12th Edn., p. 153).
In Lancaster Motor Company (London) Ltd v. Bremith Ltd, the Court did not feel bound by earlier decision as it was rendered "without any argument, without reference to the crucial words of the rule and without any citation of the authority".
It was approved by this Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur.
The Bench held that, `precedents sub-silentio and without argument are of no moment'.
The Courts thus have taken recourse to this principle for relieving from injustice perpetuated by unjust precedents.
A decision which is not express and is not founded on reasons nor it proceeds on consideration of issue cannot be deemed to be a law declared to have a binding effect as is contemplated by Article 141.
Uniformity and consistency are core of judicial discipline.
But that which escapes in the judgment without any association is not ratio decidendi.
In B Shama Rao v. Union Territory of Pondicherry, it was observed, `it is trite to say that a decision is binding not because of its conclusions but in regard to its ratio and the principles, laid down therein.'
Any declaration or conclusion arrived without application of mind or preceded without any reason cannot be deemed to be declaration of law or authority of a general nature binding as a precedent.
Restraint in dissenting or overruling is for sake of stability and uniformity but rigidity beyond reasonable limits is inimical to the growth of law."
14.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh has also rightly submitted that the dismissal of the SLP by the Supreme Court against the aforesaid order dated 29111996 passed in OA No. 739-CH of 1994 (supra) by the Chandigarh Bench is of little consequence.
It is a settled proposition of law that dismissal of the SLP in limine would not mean that the judgment rendered by the Tribunal has been affirmed by the Supreme Court.
The aforesaid proposition of law has been reiterated again and again by the Supreme Court viz. in the cases of Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association (supra), Commissioner of Income Tax (supra), Director of Settlements (supra), Kunhayammed and others (supra).
In the case of Saurashtra Oil Mills Assn.
(supra), the Supreme Court has held as under :-  "14.
.....
Repeatedly, it has been held that dismissal of Special Leave Petition without a speaking order would only mean that the Court was not inclined to exercise its discretion in granting leave to file the appeal.
It does not attract the doctrine of merger and the view expressed in the impugned order does not become the view of this Court.
The dismissal of the special leave petition by a non-speaking order would remain a dismissal simpliciter in which permission to file the appeal to this Court is not granted...." In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
15.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, at this stage, submits that since the OA was liable to be dismissed, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in K Savitri's case (supra), even the limited relief which had been granted to the petitioners could not have been granted.
Learned counsel submits that this Court can mould the relief while exercising extraordinary jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
In support of his submission, learned counsel relies on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Grindlays Bank v. ITO, AIR 1980 SC 656; Shiv Shanker Dal Mills v. State of Haryana, AIR 1980 SC 1037 and a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of AK Narula v Union of India, 2005(3) Law Herald Punjab and Haryana (DB), Page 156.
16.
We find merit in the aforesaid submission made by the learned counsel.
In the case of Shiv Shanker Dal Mills (supra), the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "6.
Article 226 grants an extraordinary remedy which is essentially discretionary, although founded on legal injury.
It is perfectly open for the Court, exercising this flexible power, to pass such order such as public interest dictates and equity projects.
"Courts of equity may, and frequently do, go much further both to give and withhold relief in furtherance of the public interest than they are accustomed to go where only private interests are involved.
Accordingly, the granting or withholding of relief may properly be dependent upon considerations as of public interest....." In the case of Badri Nath v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others, 2000(4) S.C.T.
832 : 2000(8) Supreme Court Cases 395, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "88.
We may, however, point out that it is not as if there are no exceptions to this general principle.
The occasions where the Court issued a writ of certiorari and quashed an order and had also issued a mandamus at the same time to the State or public authority could be very rare but we might emphasise that the power of this Court to mould the relief in the interest of justice in extraordinary cases cannot be doubted.
In Comptroller & Auditor General of India v. KS Jagannathan, such a power on the part of this Court was accepted by a three-Judge Bench.
Madon, J referred to the observations of Subba Rao, J (as he then was) in Dwarka Nath v. ITO wherein the learned Judge explained that our Constitution designedly used wide language in Article 226 to enable the Courts to "reach justice wherever found necessary" and "to mould the reliefs to meet peculiar and complicated requirements of this country".
Justice Madon also referred to Rochester Corpn.
RV Revising Barrister for the Borough of Hanley, Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture Fisheries and Food and to a passage from Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
Vol. 1, p. 59.
Finally Madon, J observed : (SCC pp. 692-93, para 20) "20.
There is thus no doubt that the High Courts in India exercising their jurisdiction under Article 226 have the power to issue a writ of mandamus or a the nature of mandamus or pass orders and give directions to compel the performance in a proper and lawful manner of the discretion conferred upon the Government or a public authority, and in a proper case, in order to prevent justice (injustice ?)
resulting to the parties concerned, the Court may itself pass an order or give directions which the Government or the public authority should have passed or given had it properly and lawfully exercised its discretion".
(Emphasis supplied.)
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court has the jurisdiction to mould and grant appropriate relief, in exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
We hold that the petitioners could not have been granted any benefit under Circulars dated 2231991 and 2731991, on the basis of their past service in the BBMB.
The respondents are at liberty to recall the order, if any, passed in favour of the petitioners.
In case any amount has been paid to the petitioners in view of the judgment of the Tribunal, no recovery shall, however, be made from the petitioners.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.