Pratap Kr.
Ray, J - A Transfer Order is under challenge in this writ application being the Transfer Order No. 48/2004/E-1 dated 27th February, 2004, posting the petitioner from the post of Regional Manager, West Bengal Region, Calcutta, to the post of Joint Manager (Enquiry), Zonal Office (West), Mumbai against the existing vacancy, issued with the approval of competent authority as alleged and communicated by Manager (P & E) of Food Corporation of India having his office at head-quarter at New Delhi.
This Transfer Order has been assailed on the following grounds : -  (i) That as per Transfer Policy Guidelines issued under Circular No. EP-03/2002-33 dated 21st November, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as Transfer Policy), petitioner's normal tenure of stay in the present posting have been disturbed as the policy provides normal tenure of stay at a station three years whereas petitioner only served more or less eight months.
(ii) The Order of Transfer is on violation of the promise as per said Transfer Policy providing retention at Calcutta office a "choice posting" till normal tenure is completed due to past service in the difficult station namely the North Eastern Zone, in this cafe.
(iii) Transfer Order has been issued with a mala fide action upon being motivated and influenced by the respondent no. 6, who is a party in this proceeding by name, since, during service activity being posted at Calcutta, the petitioner did not agree to accept different decisions of the said respondent no. 6, who is admittedly holding the senior position in the hierarchy of service ladder.
(iv) Transfer Order is violative of Transfer Policy since the candidates working in the same rank but spending more days herein in Calcutta than the petitioner have not been served with any Transfer Order.
(v) Transfer Order is discriminatory action and outcome of pick and choose policy.
This writ application has been opposed by the respondents by filing one Affidavit-in-Opposition armed by one Sri Paishuni Kumar, an officer of the organization, contending, inter alia:  (i) Normal tenure of posting has not been disturbed as the petitioner is working in a particular zone for more or less 20 years, save and except 2 years service in the harder zone/difficult zone namely North Eastern Zone of India at Guwahati.
(ii) There was no violation of the promise on "choice posting" after service at the difficult zone namely North Eastern Zone in India, since after completion of the tenure therein, posting was made as per choice in Calcutta where he remained for few months.
(iii) The Transfer Order was issued by delegated authority namely Executive Director (P) having his office at Headquarter at New Delhi and there is no allegation of mala fide against the said officer and the said officer also is not a party in the proceeding.
Said officer was not influenced or motivated by respondent no. 6.
(iv) Transfer Order has not violated the Transfer Policy by keeping the persons of similar rank, working for longer period in a particular zone.
(v) It is not at all a discriminatory order and outcome of pick and choose policy.
(vi) The Transfer Order has been issued for administrative exigency.
Controverting the material issue of opposition, reply has been filed by the petitioner reasserting the contentions of the writ application and taking a new point that the Transfer Order was not issued by the competent authority namely the Managing Director of the Organization but by an officer below his rank and the delegation of the power to transfer, is of without jurisdiction, as under the statute, there is no such provision to delegate such power.
2.
When the matter was moved at the motion stage, this Court passed an interim order of stay by a speaking order on 19th March, 2004 but said order was set aside and quashed by the Hon'ble Division Bench in A.P.O.T.
No. 147 of 2004 of this Court., on the ground that the final relief was passed in the form of interim order directed this Court to hear the matter on exchange of affidavits.
3.
In terms of the order dated 3132004 passed by the Appeal Court, ultimately the matter came up for hearing before this Court.
4.
Matter has been heard at length.
The Court directed production of records to satisfy the issue that the order of transfer was passed by the competent authority following Transfer Policy Guidelines and Transfer Order was not issued in colourable exercise of the power being tainted with mala fide action.
Argument was advanced from the records by both the parties also on the said issue.
Points of jurisdiction and mala fide action ultimately became the central point of argument of both the parties.
5.
The deal with the matter, the records as placed being very vital to adjudicate this case, are now required to be dealt with first.
Materials from the records as produced by FCI  6.
ADO letter was addressed by respondent no. 6, Sri Suraj Prakash to the Managing Director, Sri VK Malhotra, which is appearing at page 202 of the records reads thus:  DO No. PA/SRM (WB)/CO-ord/2004  January 31, 2004  VERY STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL  I am addressing this demi-official communication in connection with immediate shifting of Shri P K Sarkar, Regional Manager, working in West Bengal.
I have already explained in detail his negative contribution and indifferent attitude in dealing official matters on files.
Since he is of no utility to office I am even prepared to surrender him but would request considering the work load of the Region an alternative suitable Regional Manager is provided.
I have several instances to bring to your notice with reference to his contribution either nil or negative and thereby adversely affecting the smooth working of the Region.
If fact I have observed him he is working in personal vendetta against Officers and Statf and even does not try to discipline himself even if I have given him piece of advice on many occasions since his joining in mid last year.
I am getting one matter separately investigated in connection with Levy Rice Procurement about which I was informed through a senior functionary of a District about his indecent action.
I will be visiting District soon and will take necessary action and keep you informed with reference to the relevancy.
I hope you will appreciate my concern about continuance of Shri PK Sarkar in this Region and also informally apprised ED (P)and later Zonal Manager (E) as well as Dy.
Zonal Manager (E) who are also sore about the matter but are unable to help in view of shortage of hands at Zonal level."
(underlying is mine)  Office notes from page 129 to page 140 of the record are to this effect:-  "Page 129 :-  Ref:FUC at p. 207/c  FUC is a d.o.
letter addressed to MD received from Shri Suraj Prakash, SRM, West Bengal for immediate shifting of Sri PK Sarkar, RM, West Bengal.
The SRM West Bengal has reported about his negative contribution and indifferent attitude in dealing official matters on files.
Since he is of no utility to office SRM, WB is even prepared to surrender him.
But due to considering the work load he has required for posting of his substitute also.
In this connection, it is submitted that Shri PK Sarkar, JM (Genl.)
was earlier working in JM (..) in ZO (Comm.)
and on transfer from there he joined as RM, West Bengal on 1672003.
As such, he has completed only about 8 months service as RM, West Bengal.
Submitted for perusal and orders, Pl.
DM/E.1  Page: 130  SRM.
who has recommended for shifting of Sri PK Sarkar, R M, WB The officer had joined W B region on 16703.
Submitted for order pl.
(underlying is of mine)  Page: 131  PI.
Speak  Signature;  JM(EI), MC (E), JM(E)  Page: 132  Spoken to DM (E-1).
Its too early to agree with the recommendations of SRM.
We may direct ZM(E) to intervene and do same internal arrangements to see that Sri Sarkar delivers the goods.
If ZM fails, we can enter into pray.
(underlying is of mine)  Page: 133  Pl.
give details of his posting.
Did he serve outside WB (Except in Guwahati)?
Page: 134  Signature  Page: 135  With reference to the observation on pre page it is submitted that the officer was working as AM(QC) in WB region/put operation before his promotion as DM(QC) in 1998 in pursuance to a court order.
After promotion also he has been working in WB region till his promotion on JM in December, 2000 and posted to NE(z) Guwahati.
The office was transferred from Guwahati to RO Kolkata in June, 2003.
Page: 136  Please discuss with proposal for shifting Sri Sarkar and placement at his place today.
Page: 137  Discuss with MC(Z) DM(E1) to preside position and give it to M(PE) by 26204 and I will be informed.
DM(E1)  Page: 138  The latest position of deployment of JM (G) is placed below for consideration/decision pl.
Page: 139  Kindly peruse vote para 129 which is with regard to a.d.o.
addressed to Managing by Shri Suraj Prakash, SRM, West Bengal for immediate shifting of Shri PK Sarkar.
Regional Manager, West Bengal.
With regard to Shri Sarkar's working and attitude, note para 129 is self-explanatory.
Also please refer to vote para 133, further the matter was discussed with ED(P) and with DM(El) and JM(Estt) and based on the discussions, the following proposal made for consideration, please:-  1.
Shri PK Sarkar may be shifted to West Zone as  JM(lnquiry) where Shri P  Govindan was posted but has foregone his adhoc promotion.
His case has been dealt separately.
2.
If considered appropriate, Shri  Narinder Kumar may be shifted to West Bengal Region as RM West Bengal in place of  Shri PK Sarkar.
Similarly there is a request from Shri M Tulsidas presently posted in ZO(E), Kolkata who may be posted in place of Shri Narinder Kumar as JM(Opns.)
RO, Hyderabad.
Submitted for approval, please  (R.S.
CHADHA)  MANAGER (PERS.
ESTT.)
26022004.
Page: 140 ED(P)  Signature  Approved  ED(P), JM(E) 27.2.02.
From the aforesaid office records, it is ex facieproved that the petitioner suffered the Transfer Order in view of the complaint filed by Sri Suraj Prakash, respondent no. 6.
Furthermore, from the DO letter, it appears from the concluding portion of the letter, which reads thus: "apprised ED (P) and Zonal Manager (E) as well as DGM(E) who are also sore about the matter.
The Dictionary meaning of the `sore' is synonymous to irritated, aggrieved.
Hence, it is on records the proved fact that the officer who issued the Transfer Order namely ED (P) was already in irritated mood with reference to the petitioner's action.
7.
In the writ application as well as in the reply the writ petitioner has specifically averred against Sri Suraj Prakash pointing, inter alia, his animosity with the petitioner in the matter of discharging the works at Calcutta office.
Sri Suraj Prakash though has been made a party in the proceeding by name as respondent no. 6, has not filed any Affidavit-in- Opposition denying the allegations as made in writ application.
The allegation as made against Sri Suraj Prakash in the writ application as well as in the reply are very much relevant for a decision in this case as ex facieit appears that the Transfer Order was approved by Executive Director (P) only on the basis of the allegation as made against the petitioner by said Sri Suraj Prakash.
Allegation against Sri Surat Prakash which has not been denied by Sri Suraj Prakash by filing any counter affidavit:-  From the writ petition paragraph 12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22, 29 reads thus :- "12.
That your petitioner states that another important fact which requires to be placed before this Hon'ble Court for proper adjudication of the instant writ petition is as follows :-  There was an incidence of URS (Under Relaxed Specification) Rice of 1998 unfit for human consumption of 4371 MT which was intended to be sold as Feed-I category at a lower rate.
The said rice was to be sold @ Rs. 565/- per quintal normally which your petitioner too had ratified to be sold at the said rate but which the Senior Regional Manager (SRM), West Bengal being the respondent no. 6 wanted to be sold at a lesser rate of Rs. 322/- as Feed-I category.
Your petitioner raised a note dated 24012004 to this effect and the SRM had by way of telephonic conversion warned your petitioner to restrain himself rom acting on the basis of the said note and to release the stock aforementioned as Feed-I category failing which the petitioner would be transferred.
The loss to the Food Corporation of India if the said rice was sold as Feed-I category at Rs. 330/- per quintal would be around Rs. 11/2 crore.
Your petitioner craves leave to reply upon the said note and other relevant documents in support of the statements aforementioned at the time of hearing of the instant writ petition.
13.
That your petitioner states that the disapproval of the Senior Regional Manager, West Bengal to the aforementioned decision of your petitioner in respect of the said URS rice was reflected in another manner in that an officer of the procurement department of the Food Corporation of India, Regional Office, who was declared as "of doubtful integrity" to be posted in a non-sensitive post after being withdrawn from sensitive post in terms of an order dated 09122003 of the Joint Manager (Vigilance) the Zonal Manager (East) in regard to which a note had been initiated by your petitioner on 23012004 was disapproved by the said Senior Regional Manager and a "serious note" taken by the said Senior Regional Manager and your petitioner states that impugned transfer of your petitioner is a fall out of the non- release of URS rice at lower rate but which has really been reflected in the other incident of disapproval of the Senior Regional Manger, West Bengal of release of the person of doubtful integrity to Bihar Region in terms of the order of Zonal Manager (East) under office order No. Part.
1/39/304 dated 17022004.
A Xeroxed copy each of the communication dated 09122003 of the Joint Manager (Vig.)
the office note dated 31012004 of the Senior Regional Manager (West Bengal) and the office order dated 17022004 are annexed hereto and collectively marked as Annexure "P-10".
16.
That your petitioner states that from the statements made in the foregoing paragraphs it would be evident that the impugned order of transfer and subsequent order of release both dated 27022004 are a product of mala fide in violation of transfer policy and guidelines extant at FCI and such order is also discriminatory in nature.
20.
That your petitioner states and submits that the only discernable reason for the impugned order of transfer appears to be the disinclination of your petitioner to act otherwise than in accordance with the dictates of his own conscience in connection with the disposal of the URS rice lying at Dabgram, New Jalpaiguri.
21.
That your petitioner states and submitted that the impugned order of transfer is vindictive in nature and patently an attempt at wreaking vengeance on your petitioner for his refusal to allow the dictates of the Senior Regional Manager, West Bengal in regard to the disposal of URS rice which to your petitioner, appears to be contradictory to public interest as also contradictory to the obligation cast upon your petitioner arising out of entrustment upon him of public property.
22.
That your petitioner states and submits that the instantaneous release of your petitioner from his post of Regional Manager, West Bengal Region appears to be on no reason and the purpose of the transfer apparently is for the removal of your petitioner from the scene of the operation immediately so as to facilitate the exercise undertaken by the Respondent No. 6 and no time at all has been given to your petitioner, the only reason for which, as comes to the mind of your petitioner, is the principled stand taken by you petitioner as would appear from the records of the case and your petitioner prays before this Hon'ble Court for issuance of an order upon the respondent authorities to produce all the relevant records and files in particular relating to the disposal of URS rice as mentioned herein before.
29.
That the impugned order of transfer appears to be a product of malafide and/or in colourable exercise of power and the case of transfer of the petitioner contains no public service element or administrative reasons but is in the nature of a penal order of transfer for which the impugned order of transfer cannot be sustained."
The allegation against respondent no. 6 Sri Suraj Prakash and against the Executive Director (P) in the Affidavit-in Reply as reiterated are to this effect:-  "As regards the statement of myself having made out a concocted story etc.
I say that the name and designation of the competent authority who has passed the transfer order of the petitioner was not disclosed in the transfer order and it is only in the affidavit-in-opposition that the said designation was disclosed by annexing delegation of power by the Managing Director in Annexure "R-4".
1 say that after getting the information of the authority who has passed the order of transfer.
I must make it clear that the Executive Director (Personnel) is also holding the charge of Executive Director (Sales) and it is the same person who has made the transfer order mala fidely for his failure to sell URS rice stock at the lesser price as damaged category Feed-I stocks and respondent No. 6 Sri Suraj Prakash, SRM, Calcutta has disclosed the fact of the displeasure of the Executive Director (Personnel)/Executive Director (Sales) in his letter under DO No. Comml.
11(10)/URS/98-99 dated 03.02.2004 addressed to GP Pandey, Manager (QC), Food Corporation of India, 16-20 Barakhamba Lane, New Delhi-1 in para No. xii, a Xeroxed copy whereof is annexed hereto and marked as Annexure "R-5", wherefrom it will be evident that the displeasure of the ED(P)/ED(Sales), for his failure of disposal of stocks at the lesser price is the main reason for the transfer order of the petitioner.
The relevant portion of the said para is reproduced below :-  "RM who stopped dealing files relating Commercial Division long back last year itself called for the file from DM (Comm) on 230104 also failed to take proper timely action despite having called and kept the file previously between 16 to 19012004 and again between 230104- 24.01.04 citing frivolous and lame excuses grounds despite knowing the contents of Manager (QC)'s Fax dt. 20104 and fax I had issued to ZM/Mgr.
(QC) on the same very date as well as allocation letter in favour of NCCF dated.
21104, these were also known to DM (Comml), but without telling ZM who was actually in Bihar on tour about the Fax of Manager (QC) conveying displeasure of the MD w.r.t.
ZM's decision conveyed through JM(QC)/ZO on 8104 and ZM was obviously unaware of Fax of Manager (QC) dtd.
20104 and neither RM clarified/told ZM nor he has recorded about the displeasure conveyed to him by the ED(P) on 230104 for reasons when I enquired he expressed indifferent attitude."
I say that the S.RM, Calcutta and ED(P)/ED (Sales) both had threatened the petitioner over phone from Delhi to sell the stocks of URS rice as feed category stocks failing which the petitioner would be transferred; as the threatening was made over phone no documentary evidence could be produced but the same is recorded in the file in the note sheet annexed in the writ petition as Annexure "P-10".
The respondent No. 6 SRM, Calcutta has pressurized to record the threatening of ED(P)/ED(Sales) for delivery of stocks at the lesser price to for which SRM, Calcutta has made an observation that the petitioner was in different inspite of the displeasure of the ED(P)/ED(S) by way of his transfer to other places; the matter was not recorded in the file at that material time due to non-disclosure of the fact and evidence by the SRM, Calcutta for its record as submitted by SRM in the DO letter dated 03.03.04.
However, in the letter the respondent no. 6 has disclosed the displeasure of the ED(P)/ED(S) in his DO which is the evidence that the petitioner was transferred only due to the failure of ED(S) [who is also holding the post of ED (Personnel)] to sell URS rice as damaged stocks at lesser price and ED (Personnel) holding the delegated power of transfer to the petitioner did so malafide and in colourable exercise of power.
I say that in the matter of sale of URS rice as Feed-I category damages stocks, Regional Manager is the sole authority as per the delegation of power for disposal of the damages stocks; the DOP of the sale of damaged stocks is enclosed herewith and marked as Annexure "R-6".
The respondent No. 6 SRM, Calcutta had sold the stocks at his level in violation of the delegation of power/standing instruction/quality control manual as a result of which stay order was passed by the Hon'ble Justice Bhaskar Bhattacharya of this Hon'ble Court on 06022004 restraining the respondents in particular the SRM, Calcutta from disposing of the URS rice at the lower price as Feed category stocks.
I say that respondent No. 6 Sri Suraj Prakash, SRM Calcutta was out of station from 23rd and 24th January, 2004 for Headquarters, New Delhi; the petitioner has received inter office note on 23rd January, 2004-in the said note the respondent No. 6 Sri Suraj Prakash, SRM., Calcutta had made an allegation that petitioner was not looking after the work of the Commercial Section to cover up his (SRM's) misdeeds to prove that the work of the Commercial Section, in the absence; of the petitioner, was being done by the Senior Regional Manager and also to avoid any future enquiry about direct dealings with the files of Commercial Section without the processing of the files through Regional Manager is violation of the procedure and this was the motive behind the issuance of such inter office note (in short ION) dated 21012004 which is annexed hereto and marked as Annexure "R-7".
I say that I have taken serious exception to this that a senior officer has never been allowed to process the Commercial Section file since his joining on 1607 2003 with the sole motive, intent and purpose that he, the SRM may deal with all the private transactions as at his sweet will and the petitioner was never allowed to get the knowledge of his actions which is basically illegal and to avoid such irregular and illegal action of the respondent Nos. 6 Sri Suraj Prakash, SRM, Calcutta that the inter office note was issued to the concerned Deputy Manager, Commercial with a direction that henceforth not a single file of the Commercial Section be processed without the knowledge of Sri Pankaj Kumar Sarkar, Regional Manager, Calcutta so that malafide action of the SRM, Calcutta can be prevented by such illegal acts and activities of the SRM for disposing of the private parties interest as per his will without getting it processed through the delegation of power provided between Regional Manager and Senior Regional Manager (in short SRM) for disposal of all the commercial matters of the Corporation.
A copy of such instruction is annexed hereto an44 marked as Annexure "R-S".
The action of the petitioner was not approved by the respondent No. 6 immediately after getting information through his F'.A.
to Headquarters, New Delhi over phone and action was taken by the SRn4, Calcutta by issuing instruction to prevent the petitioner from processing all the files of Commercial Section through RM Calcutta with intent to hold the control of Commercial Section without any involvement of the Regional Manager, Calcutta for any matter for disposal of dealings with the private parties of Food Corporation of India.
The Deputy Manager, Commercial has brought a file before the RM, Calcutta for disposal of the URS rice as Feed category I stocks as a damaged foodgrain at lesser price through Commercial Section which is totally against bifurcation of the work of the two sections where Commercial Section deals with the sound grains i.e. URS rice and Quality Control Section deals with the damaged foodgrains and this has raised a suspicion in the mind of the petitioner that the respondent No. 6 SRM, Calcutta is trying to sell the stocks in the lesser price at the cost of the Food Corporation of India for causing loss to the Corporation of more than I crore rupees and gain to the respondent No. 6.
1 say that the deponent of the said affidavit has purported to raise the point in the affidavit-in-opposition that the petitioner has not pleaded any allegation of malafide against the competent authority who has passed the order of transfer dated 27022004 but this is due to the non- disclosure of the name and designation of the competent authority till the submission of the affidavit-in-opposition wherein it has been disclosed that the transfer order was issued by ED(P).
I say that the Executive Director (Personnel) is also holding the post of Executive Director (Sales) and this matter was brought into the records by the respondent No. 6 Sri Suraj Prakash, SRM, Calcutta in his affidavit-in-opposition.
That SRM, Calcutta and ED(P)/ED(S) both have pressurized the petitioner over phone from Delhi to sell the URS rice at lesser price as Feed-I category stocks failing which the petitioner would be transferred which was recorded by the respondent in his DO letter dated 03.02.2004 regarding the displeasure of ED(P)/ED(S) for failure to sell the stocks at lesser price; the SRM, Calcutta has directed that the file in question of disposal of Feed Category stocks be sent to DM, Commercial for his decision for delivery of the stocks at his level for not allowing the petitioner, Regional Manager, Calcutta to perform his duties as per the delegation for power of disposal of damaged stocks by the Regional Manager only, instead of that the stock was sold by the SRM, Calcutta beyond his jurisdiction and subsequently the disposal of stocks was stayed by the Hon'ble High Court, Calcutta for the irregular/illegal action of SRM, Calcutta and this has resulted in initiation of transfer order by SRM, Calcutta though ED (P) ED(S).
I say that it is noteworthy to mention that no reply has been given to paragraph 13 of the writ petition regarding respondent No. 6, SRM, Calcutta's indulgence in keeping a doubtful officer, declared by the Zonal Manager, Food Corporation of India, Calcutta office to be released by 24.02.2002, but till date the said doubtful officer Sr. SN Roy, Assistant Manager, Quality Control, is continuing in the office in as sensitive post due to the patronage of SRM, Calcutta and the respondent has not uttered any work about his malafide action raised in the writ petition for initiation of the transfer order of RM, Calcutta to Mumbai by disclosing and taking action of irregular/illegal intention for keeping a doubtful officer which has resulted the transfer of the petitioner; this has not at all been denied in the affidavit-in- opposition."
From the aforesaid contention as made in the writ application as well as in the reply by the petitioner, which has not been denied by Sri Suraj Prakash, respondent no. 6, who was party in the proceeding by name by filing any affidavit and having regard to the complaint filed by said Sri Suraj Prakash, respondent no. 6 to the Managing Director requesting the Managing Director to transfer the petitioner from Calcutta, it is crystal clear that the Transfer Order has been issued by the Executive Director (P) being directly influenced by the respondent no. 6, who was keeping a grudge against the petitioner, which have been highlighted in different paragraphs in writ application and the reply as already quoted as well as in the annexures of said affidavits.
It appears from the respective affidavits of the writ application that against respondent no. 6, Sri Suraj Prakash, the petitioner lodged grievance on two issues namely (i) proposal for sale of URS (under relaxed specification) rice, 98-99, which was unfit for human consumption measuring 4371 metric ton at lower price; (ii) interference with the decision of the Vigilance Committee, who suggested Transfer of Sri SN Roy, AM (QC) as his integrity was in question and as well as decision in the office note of the petitioner on such issue considering vigilance report.
The relevant correspondences of respondent no. 6 and the petitioner on issue of vigilance report against Sri SN Roy being relevant documents are quoted hereinbelow for effective adjudication of the impugned order.
At page 47 of the writ petition, the letter of vigilance has been annexed, which reads thus:  "Ref.
No. Vig(SS)/20/l/90 Dated: 9th December, 2003.
To  The Sr.
Regional Manager,  Food Corporation of India,  Regional Office,  6, Royd Street,  Kolkata-16 Sir, This is to inform you that it has been ordered by the Zonal Manager (E)/Disciplinary Authority that Shri SN Roy, Asstt.
Manager (QC) should be withdrawn from sensitive post and be posted in a non-sensitive post in future also.
You are, therefore, requested to take action immediately and send the action taken report to ZM (E) for his kind appraisal.
This issues with the approval of Zonal Manager (E).
Yours faithfully,  (M. Tulasi Das)  Jt.
Manager (Vigilance)  for Zonal Manager (E)."
The Office Note of the petitioner on that issue is to this effect :-  "Zonal Office (East) has already communicated Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) as an Officer of doubtful integrity and directed not to post him in any sensitive post vide their letter no. Vig.
(SS)/ZO/1/99 dated 9th December, 2003 under the signature of JM (Vig.)
of Zonal Office (East), Kolkata with the sanction of the competent authority.
In spite of Procurement Section even after requirement of shifting from the Section he is allowed the continue in a sensitive Section when he is declared as "doubtful integrity".
Now Zonal Office has directed to relieve Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) positively within 28th February, 2004 for duty to S.RM, Patna for further deployment in any non-zonal Office Order Part-I No. 39/2004 issued under Ref.
No. Estt-3(34)/2000-AM (QC) dated 1722004 (sl.
206)  In view of the above, we may comply the order of the Zonal Office and make him stand relieve from the Establishment of Regional Office on 2822004 for his joining to Bihar Region without making any scope for him to further continuation in this Office by inviting observation in vigilance angles for his continuation in this Office in any more.
(PK Sarkar) Regional Manager."
The office order of Deputy Manager (Personnel) transferring Sri SN Roy to Bihar region in a non-sensitive post due to such vigilance report, which reads thus :-  "SET OUT"  The letter dated 23rd January, 2004 of the petitioner in the Office Note to this effect :-  "FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA  ZONAL OFFICE (EAST)  10A, MIDDLETON ROW: KOLKATA-71  Ref:- No. Estt-3(34)/2000-AM (QC) Dated the 17th February' 04  OFFICE ORDER PART-1 NO. 39/2004  In accordance with FC1, Hqrs, Circular No. 2/2004 (Vig- 2(1)/2004) dated 05022004, Shri SN Ray, AM (QC), posted at Regional Office, Kolkata in West Bengal Region is hereby transferred to Bihar Region with immediate effect.
He should be posted in a non-sensitive post in Bihar Region until further orders.
Shri Ray, AM (QC) should positively be relieved by 28022004 to report for duty to the SRM, Patna for further deployment.
Transfer benefit will be regulated as per the standing instructions of the Corporation.
(P.C.
RAY)  DEPUTY MANAGER (PERSONNEL)  FOR ZONAL.
MANAGER (EAST)"  In response to such, the letter of Suraj Prakash, respondent no. 6 as appears at page 51 of the writ petition reads thus :-  "Suraj Prakash  Senior Regional Manager  FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA  West Bengal Region, 6, Royd Street, Kolkata- 700 016 Phone: 2226 5515 (0), Fax: 2226 4893  DO NO. PA/SRM(WBLCO-ORD/2004  JANUARY 31ST, 2004 STRICTLY SECRET  My dear Sarkar  I have gone through the contents of your Note No. PA/RM/WB/2004, dated 23rd January, 2004.
In fact no sooner I came to know about this note while I was at Hqrs.
On 23rd January/ 04 itself I had conveyed instructions to you on 24th January' 04 through my PA I am confirming having not approved the same note.
I am also advising you through this d.o.
letter to refrain from commenting in the manner you have done not only on the working of Shri SK Nandy, AM(A/cs), who was discharging the duties of Dy.
Manager (Comml) as well as Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) working in Procurement Division.
In respect of Shri Roy you have gone to the extent of stating that it is made clear that henceforth all the Files related to Procurement Section should be routed through RM, provided not a single File of Procurement Section to be allowed to touch by Shri SN Roy, AM (QC), who has already declared by Zonal Manager as doubtful integrity and accordingly not to be allowed to work in sensitive section.
You have also directed DM (Procurement) to put up the files related to Procurement Section to SRM through RM, and Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) may be directed not to touch any File of Procurement Section till a decision is taken for his shifting from that section and DM (Procurement) should not put up any file of procurement section processing through Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) to RM.
I hope you are aware that you are not expected to disclose names of any such staff & officers the way you have done as a part of official decency and decorum.
That is the reason for refraining you for initiating any such note openly in future.
You are also aware that decisions about shifting of Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) or otherwise from the Procurement Section with reference to the remarks you have made rests with the Competent Authority which you are not.
I had also advised you that in respect of Shri SN Roy, AM (QC) I have already taken up the matter with ZM (E) but even then you have gone to the extent of commenting in your note which is not/was not proper on your part without consulting the undersigned.
I have also taken a serious note when I had to propose to get a note sent to you through my PA on 24104 when messages were sent across to you to contract the SRM at Hqrs.
Having discussions with Senior Officers on a sensitive matter and you had shown indifference attitude commenting why SRM should not contact the RM?
Shri PK Sarkar  Regional Manager, FCI, Kolkata  Yours sincerely, (Suraj Prakash)  31104".
In a nutshell, it appears before this Court from the documents as disclosed and from the arguments of the respective parties, that the Transfer Order is not a normal and routine Transfer Order, transferring the petitioner from Calcutta to Mumbai in mid session when he has only completed roughly more or less eight months in his new posting after serving the difficult zone at Guwahati under the North Eastern Zone of the organization.
8.
It appears further that in view of in-fight between the two senior officers namely petitioner and respondent no. 6 and in view of complaint lodged by respondent no. 6, Sri Suraj Prakash, Transfer Order was issued posting the petitioner from Calcutta to Mumbai.
When there is an in fight between the two officers of any organization and when such in-fight is required to be dissolved, the common principle of law prescribes the hearing of both the parties to resolve the matter upon giving proper opportunity to the concerned employee against whom an allegation has been made by his superior officer pointing out his different actions.
Due to non-hearing the petitioner, the principle of natural justice has been infringed since on the basis of allegation of one officer, another officer has been transferred without even asking the said officer to file an explanation on the complaint as filed by another officer.
In the instant case, it appears that due to said internal DO letter alleging against the petitioner, the Executive Director (P) who was also holding the post of Executive Director (Sales) to whom respondent no. 6 lodged grievance earlier on the fact of resistance by petitioner to accept the proposal for sale of URS at under value, was motivated and acted against the petitioner transferring him from Calcutta to Mumbai to get rid of the petitioner.
On the other way, it could be said that to accommodate the respondent no. 6 to work peacefully in Calcutta region as per his own decision irrespective of injury to the organization, the petitioner has suffered Transfer Order without getting chance to place his case to the officer, who issued the Transfer Order.
9.
From the mode of service of the Transfer Order, it further appears that the Transfer Order and release order both were served in one envelope releasing the petitioner with effect from 27th February, 2004.
This promptitude of action to release the petitioner on the same date and time of Transfer Order is casting a serious doubt in the mind of this Court to lead the conclusion of mala fide as alleged by the petitioner.
Without hearing the petitioner and without asking any explanation, ex-party a decision was taken by the Executive Director (P) approving the Transfer Order as mooted through initially by Sri Suraj Prakash against whom the petitioner made several grievances as reflected in the letters quoted above.
10.
It is true that the transfer is an incidence of service and nobody has vested right to remain in a particular posting but if a question is cropped up on the factual matrix of the case that the order of transfer was not justifiable under the touch stone of `fairness doctrine' and there was no administrative purpose but solely to accommodate another officer in terms of his complaint, surely the Writ Court has the power to investigate into the issue by removing the veil of sweet coating to find out the bitter cell of mala fide segmentation as crystallized to motivate the issuance of Transfer Order.
It is a settled law under the administrative jurisprudence that in absence of any cogent administrative reasons to issue any Transfer Order, which is a powerful weapon in the hands of the administration, the Writ Court will unveil the issue.
The administration cannot use this weapon at random to suit the convenience of any particular person.
Transfer Order must satisfy the test of public element to absorb the wrath of Writ Court.
11.
Though the respondents have argued at length that it was for administrative exigency but the records of the case as has been produced has revealed a different scenario staring its face to utter high handedness unfair and arbitrary decision only for the shake of accommodating and/or pleasing another officer, the respondent no. 6 who was carrying animosity against the petitioner.
12.
From the aforesaid official records as produced as well as the respective affidavits as filed before this Court, now the only question to be considered whether the power as exercised by the Executive Director (P) even if it is assumed for argument do that power to transfer was within his jurisdiction, was exercised on good faith and bonafide.
The exercise of power by the administrative body must be addressed on bonafide, fairness and reasonableness, failing which the action would be termed as mala fide exercise of power.
Long back in the case EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, reported in AIR 1974 SC 555, the Court held :  "The basic principle which therefore, informs both Arts.
14 and 16 is equality and inhibition against discrimination.
Now, what is the content and reach of this great equalizing principle?
It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose, J, `way of life' and it must not be subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach.
We cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all embaracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude.
Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be `cribbed, cabined and confined' within traditional and doctrinaire limits.
From a positivistic point of view, equality is entithetic to arbitrariness.
In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies, one belongs to the rule of law in a public while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is there violative of Art. 14, and if it effect any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Art. 16, Arts.
14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment.
They require that State action must be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant consideration because that would be denial of equality.
Where the operative reason for State action, as distinguished from motive inducing from the antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and relevant but is extraneous and outside the area of permissible considerations.
It would amount to mala fide exercise of power and that is hit by Arts.
14 and 16.
Mala fide exercise of power and arbitrariness and different lethal radiations emanating from the same vice, in fact the latter comprehends the former.
Both are inhibited by Ats.
14 and 16."
When there is an in-fight between the two officers resulting a complaint to the higher officer as in this case, whether to transfer another officer is a remedial measures supported by Article 14 of the Constitution of India by fulfilling the doctrine of fairness and bonafide applicable to public administration.
This point has been answered in the case P Pushpakaran v. The Chairman, Coir Board, Cochin & Anr, reported in 1979(1) SLR 309, wherein Khalid, J (as His Lordship then was) in para 24 and 25 of said report held to this effect :-  "24.
The right to transfer an employee is a powerful weapon in the hands of the employer.
Sometimes it is more dangerous than other punishments.
Recent history bears testimony to this.
It may, at time, bear the mask of innocuousness.
What is ostensible in a transfer order may not be the real object.
Behind the mask of innocence may sweet revenge, a desire to get rid of an inconvenient employee or as keep at bay an activist or a stormy petral.
When the Court is altered, the Court has necessarily to tear the veil of deceptive innocuousness and see what exactly motivated the transfer.
This Court can and should in cases where it is satisfied that the real object of transfer is and what is apparent, examine what exactly was behind the transfer.
25.
From the facts and circumstances disclosed, I hold that Ext.
P3 was not passed innocently for the purpose of filling up vacancy at Bombay.
On an examination of Ext.
P3 and the reasons given it support of it and against it, I am of the view that Ext.
P3 has been passed more as a punishment than for administrative necessity.
After finding this, I think it only fair to consider the various circumstances which were brought to light in the affidavit, the counter-affidavit and the reply affidavit.
There are materials to fortify my conclusion that Ext.
P3 suffers from the vice of mala fide exercise of power.
This Court will normally lean in favour of the employer when a transfer order is challenged, for, for a proper administrative of a Government or a Department of Government or even a Private Company, transfers will be necessary in the exigencies of service or for administrative reasons.
An employee will not be lightly taken when orders of transfer are challenged.
The whole difficulty arises when under the cover of ordering a transfer an employer seeks to achieve something which he cannot otherwise achieve.
In such cases, the employees in distress seek the assistance of Courts in their unequal contest with their employers.
A transfer can uproot a family, cause irreparable harm to an employee and drive him into desperation.
It is on account of this, that transfers when affected by way of punishment, though on the face of it may bear the insignia of innocence, are quashed by Courts.
I am not satisfied with the explanation given by the respondents."
The identical question was answered by the Calcutta High Court in the case of SV Singh v. Union of India & Ors., reported in 92 CWN 276, wherein in para 15, Umesh Chandra Banerjee, J (as His Lordship then was) held to this effect:-  "Mr. Mukherjee appearing for the respondent authority submitted that two officers are involved in maligning each other and the Director General thought it fit to remove a man for administrative reasons and as such, question of transfer order being tainted with malice or motice would not arise.
I am, however, unable to accept the contention of Mr. Mukherjee.
Transfer of one officer cannot said to be alternative when two officers are fighting.
It is the responsibility of the Director General to find out as to who is responsible for the same and to take such steps as the law enjoins.
Removal of one person from the place and allowing the other to continue cannot be a solution or be termed to be a fair Governmental action.
As a matter of fact, the action, as in the present case, negates fairness.
Is it because of the fact that the administration has come to realize that the charges may not be substantiated by reason where for this order of transfer was....?
If the conduct of an officer fails short of the required standard, it is open to the authority concerned to take such step or steps as is admissible under the law but not an order of transfer when the administrative exigencies do not require the same.
On the factual impact it further appears that as a matter of fact there was no vacancy and a vacancy was sought to be created in order to give an effect to the order of transfer.
Can it be said to be a justifiable one and for administrative purpose?
In my view, `the answer ought to be in the negative.
The Secretary of the Railway Board categorically stated that transfer of the petitioner at this juncture would be administratively in opportune but the concerned authority thought it fit to effect the order of transfer even though it was administratively in opportune at the relevant time as opined by the Secretary.
While it is true that transfer is an incidence of the service of the petitioner but that does not mean and imply that the same be applied without any just cause or reason.
There must be cogent administrative reasons for such an order of transfer, in the absence of which the Law Courts will strike down the same.
It is a powerful weapon in the hands of the administration, but that does not clothe the administration to use it at random and to suit the convenience of same.
It must be fair, reasonable and as for administrative reasons.
As noted above, it ought not to be used as an alternative or disciplinary proceedings or the order of suspension.
If the facts warrant issuance of an order of suspension and initiation of a disciplinary proceeding, the authority ought not to use the strong weapon in its hand by ordering a transfer in lieu thereof and if the Law Courts permit such an action it cannot but lead to a social catastrophe."
Issuance of a Transfer Order is an administrative act by the authority empowered to do such.
It is an executive action in normal situation.
It is true that motive and reason of such action is not enquired into by the Court of law, but if a case is made out and from the documents if it appears before the Court that exercise of the power was not done for the purpose it was vested to any other purpose, surely the Court of law will go into deep of the matter for satisfaction that the action was fair, reasonable bonafide and there was no abuse of the power.
Reliance may be placed to the judgment passed in the case Eari Fitzwilliam's Wentworth Estates Co Ltd v. Minister of Town and Country Planning & Another, reported in 1951 (2) KB 2846, wherein Lords Denning held to this effect :-  "............In the ordinary way of course, the fourts do not have regard to the purpose of `motive' or `reason' of an act but only to its intrinsic validity.....
But sometimes the validity of an act does depend on the purpose with which it is done as in the case of a conspiracy and in such a case, when there is more than one purpose, the law always has regard to the dominant purpose.
If the dominant propose of those concerned is unlawful, then the act done is invalid, and it is not to be cured by saying that they had some other purpose in mind which was lawful.......
So also the validity of Government action often depends on the purpose with which it is done.
There, too, the same principle applies ....
The department cannot escape from this result by saying that its motive is immaterial.
Just as its real purpose is crucial, so also is its true motive, because they are one and something. "
Further in the case Sardar Pratap Singh v. State of Punjab, reported in AIR 1964 SC 721, the Apex Court in majority view held :-  "only question which could be considered by the Court is whether the authority vested with the power has paid attention to or taken into account circumstances, events or matters wholly extraneous to the purpose for which the power was vested, or whether the proceedings have been initiated mala fide for satisfying a private or personal grudge of the authority against the officer.
If the act is in excess of the power granted or is an abuse or misuse of power, the matter is capable of interference and rectification by the Court.
In such an event the fact that the authority concerned denies the charge of mala fides, or asserts the absence of oblique motives or of its having taken into consideration improper or irrelevant matter does not preclude the Court from enquiring into the truth of the allegations made against the authority and affording appropriate reliefs to the party aggrieved by such illegality or abuse of power in the event of the allegations being made out."
It is a settled law now that the Court of law will interfere with the order of transfer only in the event of any mala fide action of the authority in passing such Transfer Order and/or in the event of violation of any statutory rule and/or guideline applicable in the field of transfer.
In the case in hand, from the service records of this case as produced by the respondents, this Court is fully satisfied about the mala fide action of Transfer Order since ex facieit is proved that the Executive Director (P) only on the basis of complaint filed by Sri Suraj Prakash, respondent no. 6, who is a party in this proceeding by name, had passed the Transfer Order.
Hence, it is not a Transfer Order simplicitor for administrative exigency but an order infused with serious mala fide action resulting punitive action and that too ex-parte without hearing the party affected.
13.
The respondent, Food Corporation of India is an authority under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, the concerned officers of the organization are required to act fairly and reasonably in all activities including administrative action to issue Transfer Order.
In the instant case, Executive Director (P) had passed an order unfairly by not even asking my explanation from the petitioner on the allegation as made by Sri Suraj Prakash though such allegation of Sri Suraj Prakash was the only basis and/or the nucleus to pass the order of transfer shifting the petitioner from Calcutta.
14.
Hence, this Court is of the positive view that the petitioner has established a strong case of mala fide exercise of power by the Executive Director (P) by resorting to the weapon of transfer.
The said officer without verifying the allegation upon hearing the petitioner for the purpose to processing the matter departmentally, which the officer had the power to do, had passed an order of transfer following back door method in the nature of punishment, as if the petitioner has committed wrong as alleged by another officer.
In that view, holds positively that the impugned Transfer Order is punitive, abuse of the power, mala fide, unfair and unreasonable.
15.
Furthermore, from the Transfer Policy as relied upon by both the parties, it appears that in the event of rendering service at any difficult zone, the concerned officer would be entitled to have a choice posting after such service.
Relevant provision under the heading "posting to/transfer from difficult station" as it appears in the said Transfer Policy Guidelines reads thus :-  "(i) Zonal Managers are empowered to identify and declare difficult stations once in three years based on (a) list of difficult stations notified by the State/Central Government if any, and (b) conditions of basic facilities/ amenities available at different stations/places etc. covering all the regions of the Zone.
(ii) The employees posted in such declared difficult stations from outside may be transferred to other non-difficult station as far as possible after a minimum period of two years of their effective stay at the difficult station.
Leave other than causal/restricted holidays or normal earned leave of 30 days in a year availed of by the employees posted at a difficult station shall be deducted from the period of their difficult station shall be deducted from the period of their stay at difficult station for computing two years of effective service for the purpose of revoking their eligibility for a transfer.
However, these instructions do not debar the competent authority at the Headquarters in effecting the transfer of any employee at any time keeping in view of the administrative requirements and exigencies of work.
(iii) Every employee is liable to serve at least one tenure during his service at difficult stations declared by the Corporation from time to time."
The petitioner accordingly in terms of the aforesaid Transfer Policy opted Calcutta now Kolkata his first choice after serving the difficult zone.
The respondents considering such, posted the petitioner at Calcutta by issuing a Transfer Order and petitioner joined on 16th July, 2003.
The relevant circular letter being Circular 7 of 1991 stipulating the norms of such difficult zone transfer and right to exercise an option, are quoted hereinbelow :-  "POSTING OF OFFICERS ON TENURE BASIS :-  As per existing instructions, the vacancies of Cat.II Officers (if need arises) in the newly created NEF Zone should be filled up on tenure basis from other Zones and Headquarters after inviting options, which would be screened by the Committee of the respective Zones/Hgrs.
It was further mentioned in the instructions that the Asstt.
Managers, who have completed 10 years of service or less may be sent for 3 years tenure basis and 2 years at a time those who are having more than 10 yrs.
of service.
It has not been decided that the period of posting in case of Cat.
11 Officers who offer themselves for tenure posting in NEF Zone shall be 2 years instead of 3 years as prescribed earlier.
Similarly, period of posting of Cat.
I Officer in NEF Zone shall also be 2 years.
The officers posted in NEF Zone shall be asked to give three stations of choice in order of priority, for posting after their tenure in NEF Zone.
Their posting at the place of choice shall of course be subject to availability of vacancies.
Further (b) In the event of transfer from NEF Zone, the Officer shall be relieved within one month from the date of receipt of the transfer order.
(c) It is, however, made clear that the above instructions will not apply to the employees who are on the regular strength of the NEF Zone (Cat.
II, III & IV employees) posting and transfer of such employees shall continue to be governed by the general transfer policy guidelines of the Corporation."
From the Transfer Policy Guideline, it appears that the respondent no1 made a promise to transfer the petitioner as per his choice after serving the difficult zone at Guwahati.
In pursuance thereof, action was taken allowing his choice posting at Calcutta.
But posting does not mean that such posting would be of a short tenure only to satisfy the provision technically.
"Choice posting" means the posting with full tenure.
"Tenure of posting" as stipulated in the Transfer Policy Guideline under Clause (3), reads thus :-  "No. EP.3(2)/88-Vol. II Dated: 21st November, 2002 Circular No. EP-03-2002-33  3.
TENURE  (i) The normal tenure of stay of an employee at a station will be of 3 years.
The normal tenure in a Zone shall be seven years in one stretch but shall not exceed 10 years in the entire service period except in the case of Headquarters or where, exigencies of work so require.
(ii) The Executives at the level of Deputy Manager and above must have field experience of a minimum period of three years to be considered for promotion to the next higher posts.
Such Transfer Policy is applicable in terms of Clause (1) under the heading "applicability", which reads thus :-  "No. EP.3(2)/88-Vol. II Dated: 21st November, 2002  Circular No. EP-03-2002-33  1.
APPLICABILITY  These transfer policy guidelines are applicable to all the Executives/ Employees working in Food Corporation of India offices in the country and no separate transfer policy guidelines will be formulated or laid down or adopted by any District/Region/Zone of the Corporation.
These guidelines supersede all earlier guidelines laid down by the Headquarters vide circular No. 37/1995 dated 4th September, 1996 and other Zones/Regions if any."
Hence, when the petitioner on the basis of the assurance as reflected in the Transfer Policy served the difficult zone surely after return from the said zone, the petitioner very well has accrued a right to complete the normal tenure of three years unless administrative exigency demands curtailment of such tenure.
In the instanat case, petitioner has only completed seven months and few days in his Calcutta posting after serving difficult zone.
Normal tenure is three years.
Such normal tenure of three years could be curtailed surely for administrative exigency and the curtailment of the tenure on said ground cannot be assailable to nullify a Transfer Order.
But in the instant case, the picture is different.
As already held that the Transfer Order was outcome of punitive measures on entertaining the complaint against the petitioner as send by the DO letter of respondent no. 6, Sri Suraj Prakash.
It has already been held by me that the Transfer Order was not for administrative exigency but for colateral purpose satisfying ingredients of punitive action.
Hence, the curtailment of normal tenure of three years per se was arbitrary action on the part of the authorities and it has infringed the norm tenure of stay at Calcutta.
16.
Besides, when the respondents on the basis of the guideline entertained the petitioner's choice posting and thereby placed the petitioner in the Calcutta Zone, completion of normal tenure of such posting is a must.
The respondents cannot take the point that in a particular zone, petitioner already worked for last 20 years or more, as such "Zonal issue" had lost its force due to `difficult Zone Service' issue.
From the records, it appears that petitioner served at the difficult zone in terms of the Transfer Policy Guideline.
Accordingly Transfer Policy Guideline, which provides `choice posting after service in difficult zone' will override the normal zone tenure.
17.
Now the question of effect of guideline is required to be dealt with for a conclusion in this case.
Under the Service Regulation, the Transfer Policy Guideline was framed.
It is true that it is in the nature of administrative instruction and not having the force of law but the State Authorities, Food Corporation of India and its officers cannot at their sweet will depart from it without rational justification.
This point was considered by the three Judges Bench of Apex Court in the case Dr. Amarjit Singh Ahluwalia v. The State of Punjab & Ors., reported in AIR 1975 SC 984, wherein in para 8, the Court held to this effect:-  "Now, it is true that cl. (2) (ii) of the memorandum dated 25th October, 1965 was not a statutory provision having the force of law and was merely an administrative instruction issued by the State Government in exercise of its executive power.
But that does not resent any difficulty, for it is now well settled by several decisions of this Court that where no statutory rules are made regulating recruitment or conditions of service, the State Government always can in exercise of its executive power issue administrative instructions providing for recruitment and laying down conditions of service.
Vide BN Nagarajan v. State of Mysore, (1966) 3 SCR 682 = (AIR 1966 SC 1942) and Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, (1968) 1 SCR 111 : (AIR 1967 SC 1910).
It was, therefore, competent to the State Government to issue clause (2)(ii) of the memorandum dated 25th October, 1965 in exercise of its executive power laying down the principle to be followed in adjusting inter se seniority of the officers in the intergrated service."
Further on the issue of guideline, the Apex Court in the case Union of India & Ors. v. SL Abbas, reported in AIR 1993 SC 2444 para 7, though held that the guidelines as used the word "as far as possible" is not really enforceable right but observed "while ordering the transfer, there is no doubt, the authority must keep in mind the guidelines issued by the Government on the subject."
18.
Hence from the aforesaid views of the Apex Court and the factual matrix of this case, this Court accordingly is of the view that in the instant case, the concerned authority was required to take into account policy guideline of Transfer before passing the Transfer Order inasmuch as when the petitioner after serving the harder zone/difficult zone got the choice posting at Calcutta and working therein only for few months.
Non- consideration of such fact, has made the impugned decision unfair and unreasonable.
19.
Now the point as urged about "discriminatory treatment" to be dealt with.
Petitioner has highlighted the position of the other officers posted at Calcutta at paragraph 14 of writ petition, which reads thus :-  "That your petitioner states that the impugned order of transfer as against your petitioner is grossly discriminatory against your petitioner which would be evident from the following:-  There are 7 (seven) posts of Joint Manager (General) in Calcutta, out of which 2 (two) are in the Regional Office, Calcutta and 5 (five) are in the Zonal Office, Calcutta.
The tenure of the different incumbents in the said post of Joint Manager are as follows :-  (i) Sri Pausini Kumar (Zonal Office) 28.05.2001  (ii) Sri M.K.
Gogoi (Zonal Office) 08.07.2002  (iii) Sri SK Roy (Zonal Office) 15.02.2003  (iv) Sri PK Sarkar (Regional Office) 16072003 (petitioner)  (v) Sri Tulasi Das (Zonal Office) 19.11.2003  (Considered for request transfer to Hyderabad in the impugned transfer order)  Two posts of Joint Manager (General) are remaining vacant which are one in the Regional office and other in the zonal office.
Your petitioner categorically states that from the aforesaid seniority of holding posts of Joint Manager (General) in Calcutta your petitioner is an incumbent who has been there for only 7 months whereas those who were posted at Calcutta much earlier on have not been placed under transfer and thus your petitioner has been picked up and chosen in a discriminatory manner for transfer from East Zone Calcutta to far away Mumbai in West Zone although your petitioner was placed to remain in his home town at Calcutta in exercise of his option after serving two years tenure in North East Zone disturbed area."
From the aforesaid contention, it appears that petitioner, who as yet has not completed even 1/4th of his "normal tenure" in Calcutta due to service in "difficult zone" has suffered shortening of tenure on total breach of said Transfer Policy and that too on the basis of the allegation by respondent no. 6.
Hence, said action of respondents have also satisfied the tests of "unfair doctrine, discriminatory action and "pick and choose" policy.
20.
So far as the point as urged that the Transfer Order was not issued by the competent authority i.e. by the Managing Director, same now to be discussed.
From the Transfer Policy Guideline, it appears that Managing Director is the authority to transfer the officers holding the posts from the level of Junior Manager to Zonal Manager, which includes the Regional Manager also.
The relevant provision from the guideline under the heading "competent authority and the jurisdiction" under Clause 18 sub- clause (iii) reads thus :-  18(iii) COMPETENT AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION TRANSFER & POSTINGS OF CATEGORY I EXECUTIVES  (i) The Managing Director/Chairman are competent to transfer Category-I officers anywhere in the country.
However, the postings and transfer of JMs/RMs/Managers/SRMs/Eds/ZMs will normally be decided by the Managing Director.
(ii) The Executive Director (Personnel) is competent to transfer Category-I officers upto the level of Deputy Manager anywhere in the country.
(iii) The posting of District Managers including postings in sensitive procurement Districts will be decided by the Zonal Managers.
However, vigilance clearance is to be obtained from Headquarters Personnel Division before deciding posting in sensitive procurement Districts.
Zonal manages will keep the Headquarters informed of all the postings and transfers made within the Zone even on non-sensitive District/posts."
Under the Transfer Policy Guidelines, there is no provision by which the power to transfer as vested to the Managing Director could be delegated.
The learned Advocate for the respondents also failed to satisfy this Court by placing any rules and/or regulations by which such power of transfer could be vested to any officer sub-ordinate to Managing Director.
The learned Advocate for the respondents, however, has placed reliance to the order delegating the power of transfer to Executive Director (P) being the Circular Letter no. EP- 25-2003-14 dated 25th July, 2003 annexed at page 33 of the opposition.
The relevant provision reads thus :-  A.
POWER TO BE EXERCISED BY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (P) (i) Transfer and postings of all Category-I officers upto the level of Managers/SRMs.
(ii) .................  Sd/- R.P.
Singh  Manager (PSIR)"  Reliance also has been made to other Circular Letter No. EP- 25-2003-13 dated 14th July, 2003 reads thus :- "(i) Transfer and postings of all Category I officers upto the level of Managers/SRMs.
Sd/- R.P.
Singh  Manager (PSIR)"  As already held that no rules and or regulations have been produced before this Court to satisfy the Court that the power vested under the Transfer Policy to the Managing Director could be divested to the Executive Director (P) by the respondents.
It is true that under administrative exigency, the normal routine and casual actions, which does not require any administrative decision could be delegated, but in the case of a transfer, it requires an application of mind for exercising such power.
Hence, such power of transfer when already stipulated in the Transfer Policy Guideline, which is outcome of service regulation framed under the Food Corporation of India Act, cannot be modified or changed by delegating such power to a Subordinate Officer unless such provision to delegate the power is provided in the concerned Act and the Regulation.
From the Regulation and the Act as produced, however such power of delegation has been stiplulated.
It is a settled law that unless and until power of delegation is vested to any authority, the power if is exercised, would be bad in law.
21.
Hence, this Court is of the view that the Executive Director (P) had no power to transfer the petitioner exercising power as delegated authority.
22.
Having, regard to aforesaid findings and observations, accordingly, I am of the view that the Transfer Order was passed not to satisfy the administrative exigency but for co-lateral purpose and the power was exercised to punish the petitioner on colourful exercise of the power and by resorting the power to transfer as a weapon only to oust the petitioner from Calcutta solely to satisfy the ego of another officer, Sri Suraj Prakash and same was passed by an officer who had no jurisdiction to pass such.
23.
Considering all aspects and having regard to the aforesaid findings, accordingly, I do hereby quash and set aside the order of transfer dated 27th February, 2004 annexed at page 35 of the writ application and the order of release dated 27th February, 2004 annexed at page 36 of the writ application.
Respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to work in the post of Regional Manager, West Bengal at Calcutta i.e. his earlier posting forthwith and to release his all salary, service allowances and benefits.
The concerned employee of the organization, if any, who is now holding the charge of the said post or who now has been posted to that post, is directed to vacate the post forthwith by handing over the charge to the petitioner.
24.
Before parting with the matter, I am now dealing with judgments as relied upon by the learned Advocate appearing for the respondents.
The judgment Rajendra Roy v. Union of India & Anr, reported in AIR 1993 SC 1236 as relied upon, is helping the petitioner as in paragraph 7, the Apex Court held to this effect :-  "Unless such order is passed mala fide or in violation of the rules of service and guidelines for transfer without any proper justification, the Court and the Tribunal should not interfere with the order of transfer.
In a transferable post an order of transfer is a normal consequence and personal difficulties are matters for consideration of the department.
We are in agreement with the Central Administrative Tribunal that the appellant has not been able to lay any firm foundation to substantiate the case of malice or mala fide against respondents in passing the impugned order of transfer.
It does not appear to us that the appellant has been moved out just to get rid of him and the impugned order of transfer was passed mala fide by seizing an opportunity to transfer Shri Patra to Orissa from Calcutta.
It may not be always possible to establish malice in fact in a straight cut manner.
In an appropriate case, it is possible to draw reasonable inference of mala fide action from the pleadings and antecedent facts and circumstances."
In the instant case, there is a guideline of transfer, which has been breached.
Furthermore, in the instant case, petitioner has been able to establish that the Transfer Order as issued is punitive in nature, which has been proved from the service records as quoted above.
Hence, there was no administrative justification to issue the impugned order.
25.
The judgment M Sankaranarayanan, IAS v. State of Karnataka & Ors., reported in AIR 1993 SC 763 has no relevancy in the instant case.
26.
The judgment as relied upon State Bank of India v. Anjan Sanyal & Ors., reported in 2001(5) SCC 508 also supports the case of the petitioner wherein the Apex Court held in para.
4 to this effect :-  "An order of transfer of an employee is a part of the service conditions and such order of transfer is not required to be interfered with lightly by a court of law in exercise of its discretionary jurisdiction unless the court finds that either the order is mala fide or that the service rules prohibit such transfer or that the authorities, who issued the order, had not the competence to pass the order."
The judgment State of Punjab & Ors. v. Chaman Lal Goyal, reported in (1995) 2 SCC 570 is not at all relevant to adjudicate upon this case as it was relating to a departmental enquiry and consequential relief.
The case relied upon Union of India & Ors. v. Ganesh Dass Singh, reported in 1995 Supp.
(3) SCC 214 is also not applicable in the instant case, as it is not a case where Transfer Order was passed for administrative exigency.
27.
Writ application accordingly is allowed.
Due to very nature of action, which is unfair, punitive abuse of power as well as of without jurisdiction, a cost of Rs. 5000/- is imposed upon the respondent no. 6 and ED (P), which to be paid from their own pocket to the petitioner within a month.
01.07.2004  28.
The petitioner is at liberty to communicate the gist of the order by taking note from the judgment.
29.
Since the respondents are present, they will act in terms of the judgment as pronounced in the open Court.
All parties are to action a signed xerox copy of the operative portion of the judgment on usual undertaking  Petition allowed.