MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus or any other direction to respondents directing them to reimburse the air fare, boarding and lodging charges incurred by the petitioner for representing Chandigarh/India in the International Veteran Athletic Championships held abroad.
A further prayer has also been made to quash order dated 26101999 (P-16) and also an order dated 672001, passed by the respondent rejecting the claim of the petitioner for reimbursement of those expenses.
2.
Facts necessary for disposal of this petition are that the petitioner, who is a senior citizen, a Veteran Athelete, National and Asian Champion and a Record Holder in 5 kilometers Rapid Race Walk, has approached this Court for reimbursement of expenses, which he had incurred to attend the 1Xth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship held at Seoul, South Korea.
The petitioner participated in Carnival Walk held at Sukhna Lake in November, 1995 and he stood first.
Taking inspiration from his first position in the Carnival Walk, he proceeded to take part in the Veteran Athletic Championships.
He represented Chandigarh in the XVIII National Veteran Athletic Championship held at Mysore.
He won gold medal and smashed the National Record in 5 kilometers walk (3212 minutes) in the Men category of the age of 60 plus (P- 1).
On 2751996 he was selected by the Indian Veteran Athletes Federation (registered) (for brevity the `Federation') to represent India at the IX Asian Veteran Athletic Championship which was to be held at Seoul (South Korea).
His case for grant of financial assistance was forwarded by the Federation to respondent on 561996 (P-3).
It is claimed that under the Sports Council (Chandigarh) Rules, 1989 (for brevity `the Rules'), the expenditure in support of the following items is reimbursable :  A.
Air Fare; B Boarding/Lodging; and C Ceremonial Kits.
3.
The respondent made an offer of Rs. 25,000/- to the petitioner on the condition that if he failed to secure a gold medal then he had to refund the amount paid to him.
The condition although stated to be very harsh yet the petitioner accepted the same and filed an affidavit to the effect that if he failed to win the gold medal then full expenditure incurred by him was to be reimbursed (P-5).
On furnishing an affidavit, respondent released an amount of Rs. 25,000/- by a Cheque No. 341953 dated 2591996.
The petitioner actually won gold medal in October 1996 and established a new Asian Record 2712 minutes in 5 kilometers walk in the Men 60 plus category (P-6).
Another certificate has also been attached with the petition showing that the time of the petitioner was better than all categories of veterans from 40 plus onwards.
The petitioner requested for reimbursement of the remaining amount as per the stipulation made in the affidavit (P-8), however, the same was not paid.
4.
On 1771998 (P-9), petitioner was selected by the Federation for representing India in the Xth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship, Okinawa, Japan.
The details of the expenditure were given in the letter written by the Federation on 681998 (P-10).
The petitioner again approached the respondent for grant of financial assistance to pay a sum of Rs. 25,000/-.
5.
On 491998, he remitted a sum of Rs. 31,575/- vide Bank draft No. 305072 dated 491998, by Bank of Baroda in favour of the Federation to cover the air fare etc. On 1751999, the petitioner submitted to respondent the clearance issued by Government of India and the details of expenditure.
He requested for reimbursement of remaining amount of Rs. 38,075/-, his claim was however, reduced vide letter dated 19.5.1999 to Rs. 11,575/- (P-13).
6.
On 2151999, the petitioner was again selected (P-14) for participation in XIII World Veteran Athletic Championship, which was to be held at Geteshead New Castles, England.
The rough expenditure involved in the Air Ticket was Rs. 30,000/-, Kit Rs. 4,000/- and Boarding and Lodging œ 300/-.
On 571999 (P- 15), the petitioner requested the respondent for payment of the aforesaid amount.
However, on inquiry made after return from England the application was not traceable with the respondent.
A photocopy of the application was taken and on 26101999 (P-16), the respondent intimated to the petitioner that his claim for balance amount of financial assistance incurred at Okinawa and assistance for participation at Geteshead have been rejected because there was no provision in the rule.
The petitioner again made a representation on 28.19.1999 (P-17) to the Administrator, UT, Chandigarh, claiming the balance amount as well as the amount incurred by him for participating in the event at Geteshead New Castles, England, however, his representation was again rejected (P-18).
7.
In the written statement filed by the respondent, the stand taken is that the petitioner cannot claim financial assistance as of right.
A reference to Rule 9 to the Sports Council (Chandigarh) Rules, 1989, have been made to submit that in a meeting of the Executive Committee held on 1871984, the Council had decided to meet 100% of the total expenditure that the States Sports Association may have to pay to the respective National Federation provided the trip is approved by Chandigarh Sports Council/Sports Authority of India/Ministry of Education, Govt. of India.
Demand of any affidavit by the respondent as alleged by the petitioner has been denied.
It is claimed that the financial assistance given to the petitioner for participating at the Xth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship was by relaxing the rules and at no stage the petitioner was assured that all expenditure got to be made by the respondent.
However, when the petitioner applied for participation in 13th Veteran Athletic Championship no financial assistance was granted to him as the respondent had refused to relax the rules.
In both the events, the result of the petitioner were disastrous.
It has been accepted that relaxation was granted to one Mrs. Banta Singh and Mr. Garg.
Mrs. Banta Singh was the first Veteran Women Athletic from Chandigarh to have qualified and was selected.
The financial assistance given to Mr. Garg was got refunded.
8.
In the replication filed by the petitioner, the averments made in the writ petition have been reiterated.
9.
When the case came up for consideration before this Court on 372004, it was felt that instead of adjudicating the matter in detail the Administrator may sympathetically consider the claim of the petitioner.
The order passed on 372004 by this Court reads as under :  "Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, I deem it appropriate to ask the Administrator, Union Territory, Chandigarh to reconsider the case of the petitioner sympathetically as he appears to have incurred the expenses by visiting and participating in the aforementioned International Veteran Athletic Championship.
Let a decision be taken within a period of two months from today.
A copy of the decision may be placed on the file of this case.
If the view taken by the Administrator on reconsideration goes in favour of the petitioner, then the amount shall be paid to him within a week thereafter".
10.
According to the affidavit of Shri Inderjit Singh Sandhu, PCS, Director Sports-cum-Secretary, Chandigarh, it has been pointed out that the Administrator by his order dated 24112004 had decided that it is not a fit case for reconsideration.
11.
Mr. GS Virdi, who has appeared in person has argued that according to Rule 11 of the Chandigarh Sports Council Rules, the Council may sanction financial assistance to the eligible sports bodies for holding of Annual State Championships, for participation in National, International, Asian, Olympic and World Test Matches and holding of Zonal, National and International competitions.
The rule further provides that the sports bodies, which are affiliated to the Chandigarh Olympic Association or recognised by the Council are eligible for financial assistance.
Learned counsel has maintained that the Federation is presumably recognised by the respondents because at one time or the other on the selection made by the Federation, the petitioner has been paid the financial assistance.
Drawing my attention to the letter dated 451998 sent by the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, Govt. of India, vide which All India Veteran Athletic Federation and the Indian Veteran Athletic Federation have been recognised by them, Mr. Virdi has argued that in accordance with Item No. 8 in the policy of financial assistance, grant of financial aid to the selected sportsmen including the Veterans for recognised International competition duly sponsored by the Government of India, has to be made and, therefore, the balance amount of expenditure incurred by him for attending the sports event at IX Asian Veteran Athletic Championship at Seoul, South Korea, is liable to be paid and the whole expenditure incurred by him to participate in the XIIIth World Veteran Athletic Championship held at Geteshead New Castles, England, is also liable to be paid to him.
He has claimed a total amount of Rs. 58,620/- along with interest on the ground that he was duly sponsored by a recognised body like the Federation.
According to Mr. Virdi, earlier also he has paid expenditure to attend sports event on the recommendation made by the Federation.
12.
Mr. Ajay Tiwari, learned counsel for the respondent has argued that there are no statutory rules framed by the respondent authority, which may entitle the petitioner to claim reimbursement of expenditure incurred by him to participate in the sports events which have been held abroad.
According to the learned counsel unless there is a legal right vested in the petitioner, there could not be any corresponding duty caste on the respondent.
In these circumstances, the learned counsel has emphasized that no mandamus can be issued commanding the respondents to reimburse to the petitioner the expenditure incurred by him with regard to air fare, boarding and lodging and ceremonial kit.
However, on repeated query the learned counsel has not been able to apprise the Court as to the existence of any objective criteria which may constitute the basis for grant of bursaries in respect of airfare, boarding and lodging and ceremonial kit.
Learned counsel has also not been able to point out that when Mr. Garg, who was also selected for XIIIth World Veteran Athletic Championship, which was to be held at Geteshead New Castles, England, and the amount was sanctioned in his favour then what was the reason to refuse sanctioning of amount in the case of the petitioner, especially when Mr. Garg did not avail the financial assistance for participation in XIIIth World Veteran Athletic Championship held at Geteshead New Castles, England and the amount was got refunded.
13.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the considered view that this petition deserves to be accepted.
It is admitted position that the respondent Council has published `Rules' in the official gazette.
14.
These Rules are admittedly being followed for giving grants to sports person of eminence.
In Vimal Kumari v. State of Haryana, 1998(3) SCT 54 (SC) : 1998(4) SCC 114, it has been held that if the draft rules are intended to be notified in the near future, then such rules can be followed.
Similar observations have been made in para 27 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of High Court of Gujarat v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor, 2003(2) SCT 370 (SC) : 2003(4) SCC 712.
In the present case these are being followed and have already been notified.
Therefore, such rules cannot be ignored and are required to apply.
15.
According to Rule 112, the Council is competent to sanction financial assistance to the eligible sports bodies for the specified purposes by imposing terms and conditions as specified in Rule 113.
Rule 11 of the Rules is reproduced hereunder for the facility of reference :  "11.
Financial Rules : 111.
(a) These rules shall be called the Chandigarh Sports Council Financial Rules.
(b) These rules shall come into force w.e.f.
the date of notification.
(c) These rules shall be administered by the Executive Committee of the Council.
(d) Any doubt arising at any time as to the interpretation of rules or their application to a particular case, the matter will be referred to the Vice- President, whose decision shall be final.
(e) The Council shall have an account in a bank as decided by the Executive Committee.
(f) The bank account shall be operated by cheques to be signed by the Member- Secretary of the Council.
During his absence the cheques will be signed by Joint-Secretary.
(g) Cash books and other registers as required for the proper maintenance of accounts shall be maintained.
(h) The funds of the Council shall be utilized for the various purposes detailed in the constitution of the Council or for any other purpose prescribed and approval by the Executive Committee.
(i) The power to sanction the expenditure without the approval of the Council on any one item at a time shall vest in the following to the extent indicated against each :- (i) Executive Committee Full powers subject to the condition that the provision has been made in the approved budget of Council.
In other cases, financial powers will be upto Rs. 10 lacs at a time on any one item.
(ii) President Rs. 2,00,000/-,  (iii) Vice-President Rs. 50,000/-,  (iv) Member-Secretary Rs. 25,000/-,  (v) Joint Secretary Rs. 10,000/-,  (j) The General Annual Statement of Income and Expenditure prepared by the Secretary and duly audited by Chartered Accountant shall be placed before the Council in the first meeting that may be held after the commencement of the next financial year.
(k) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Chartered Accountant yearly.
The appointment and audit fee of the Chartered Accountant shall be approved by the Executive Committee.
112.
The Chandigarh Sports Council may sanction financial assistance to the eligible sports bodies for the following purposes : (a) Holding of a Annual State Championships.
(b) Participation in National, International, Asian, Olympic and World Test Matches.
(c) Holding of zonal, National or International competitions.
113.
Terms and conditions for financial assistance: The financial assistance will be granted subject to the following conditions :- (a) Only those sports bodies which are affiliated to the Chandigarh Olympic Association or which have been duly recognized by the Chandigarh Sports Council shall be eligible to financial assistance from the Chandigarh Sports Council.
(b) The grantee shall submit the Utilisation certificate supported by the Income and Expenditure statement duly signed by the chartered accountant to the Secretary of the Council within one year of the sanction of the grant.
(c) The records/accounts of such sports associations shall be opened to inspection by an authorized representative of the Council.
(d) The rules and regulations regarding the items of expenditure as determined by the Council from time to time shall be observed by such Sports Associations.
(e) The amount of grant sanctioned may be advanced in one or more instalments.
(f) A representative of the Council shall be invited by the Sports Association to attend their Executive Committee meetings and General Body meetings, particularly election meetings.
(g) A representative of the Council may attend State Championships or other competitions/tournaments, for which the grants is sought as an observer.
(h) A representative of the Council/Sports Department, shall be associated with the selection of teams participating in the National/International Championships.
(i) A copy of the constitution of each association to be supplied to Chandigarh Sports Council.
(j) Application for financial assistance by the Sports bodies should be accompanied with the list of selected players.
114.
Contingent Expenditure :  There would be a provision for contingency expenditure and the power to sanction any one item at a time vest in the following to the extent indicated against each :-  (a) Executive Committee Full Powers, (b) President Rs. 10,000/- (c) Vice-President Rs. 6,000/- (d) Member-Secretary Rs. 4,000/- (e) Joint Secretary Rs. 1,000/-" A perusal of the above rule shows that various amounts could be sanctioned even without the approval of the Council on any of one item at a time by one of those office-bearers who have been specified in Rule 111(a)(i) to (v).
A further perusal of Rule 112 makes it patent that the Council may sanction financial assistance to the eligible sports bodies for the purposes of participation in National, International, Asian, Olympic and World Test Matches.
According to Rule 81 the Council is empowered to grant recognition to the Sports Bodies subject to fulfilling certain conditions.
It is admitted position that when the petitioner was selected for the IXth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship, held at Seoul (South Korea), by the Indian Veteran Athletes Federation to represent India, he was granted financial assistance to the tune of Rs. 25,000/- by the respondent.
An affidavit in that regard was obtained from the petitioner (P-5) dated 2191996 where the petitioner had stated that he may be paid full expenses and in case he remained unable to smash the world record by winning a gold medal then he was to refund the whole amount.
According to the details given in the petition his expenses were as under :-  (i) Air ticket : Rs. 25,000/- (ii) Singapore visa fees and charges : Rs. 600/- (iii) South Korea visa fees and charges : Rs. 950/- (iv) Airport tax : Rs. 300/- (v) Entry Fee : US $ 25/- (vi) Accommodation and food " US $ 330/- Out of the above mentioned amount only airfare to the tune of Rs. 25,000/- was paid and the rest of the amount which roughly comes to about Rs. 16,000/- was not paid.
The payment of Rs. 25,000/- itself shows that the recommendation made by the Federation has been accepted.
It also shows that it is a body recognized by the respondent.
Once that is the position then rejection of claim of the petitioner to represent India in Xth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship, Okinawa, Japan, on the recommendation made by the Federation (P-10) has not been understood.
The petitioner incurred the expenditure of Rs 31,575/-, which was to cover the airfare.
He requested for reimbursement of Rs. 38,075/-, however, his claim has been reduced to Rs. 11,575/- (P-13).
The decision with regard to the reimbursement for participation in XIIIth World Veteran Athletic Championship, held at Geteshead New Castles, England, is even worse.
There, one Mr. Garg was selected but he did not avail any financial assistance for his personal reasons whereas the petitioner, who was the Asian Champion, was not given any financial assistance even after Mr. Garg has himself dropped the idea of participating.
16.
There is no objective criteria laid down by the respondent which may constitute the basis for accepting or declining the claim of the meritorious sports person for participation in the world events like World Veteran Athletic Championship, Asian Veteran Athletic Championship and so on and so forth.
It is now well settled that largesses of the State cannot be distributed in any arbitrary manner because any subjective method of distributing the State largesses would directly come in conflict with the principles laid down in Article 14 of the Constitution.
These principles have been re-emphasised and reiterated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ramana Daya Ram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628.
The observations of their Lordships in this regard read as under :-  "....
Some interests in Government largess, formerly regarded as privileges, have been recognized as rights while others have been given legal protection not only by forging procedural safeguards but also by confining/structuring and checking Government discretion in the matter of grant of such largess.
The discretion of the Government has been held to be not unlimited in that the Government cannot give or withhold largess in its arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will.
It is insisted, as pointed out by Professor Reich in an especially stimulating article on "The New Property" in 73, Yale Law Journal 733, "that Government action be based on standards that are not arbitrary or unauthorized."
The Government cannot be permitted to say that it will give jobs or enter into contracts or issue quotas or licences only in favour of those having grey hair or belonging to a particular political party or professing a particular religious faith.
The Government is still the Government when it acts in the matter of granting largess and it cannot act arbitrarily.
It does not stand in the same position as a private individual.
12.
We agree with the observations of Mathew, J, in V Punnan Thomas v State of Kerala, AIR 1969 Ker.
81 (FB) that : "The Government, is not and should not be as free as an individual in selecting the recipients for its largess.
Whatever its activity, the Government is still the Government and will be subject to the restraints, inherent in its position in a democratic society.
A democratic Government cannot lay down arbitrary and capricious standards for the choice of persons with whom alone it will deal".
xxx xxx xxx xxx ".... the Government is not like a private individual who can pick and choose the person with whom it will deal, but the Government is still a Government when it enters into contract or when it is administering largess and it cannot, without adequate reasons, exclude any person from dealing with it or take away largess arbitrarily.
The learned Chief Justice said that when the Government is trading with the public, "the democratic form of Government demands equality and absence of arbitrariness and discrimination in such transactions.....
The activities of the Government have a public element and, therefore, there should be fairness and equality.
The State need not enter into any contract with anyone, but if it does so, it must do so fairly without discrimination and without unfair procedure."
This proposition would hold good in all cases of dealing by the Government with the public, where the interest sought to be protected is a privilege.
It must, therefore, be taken to be the law that where the Government is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing quotas or licences or granting other forms of largess, the Government cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will and, like a private individual, deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be in conformity with standard or norm which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
The power or discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of largess including award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences etc., must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non- discriminatory standard or norm and if the government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the Government would be liable to be struck down, unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory."
17.
The aforementioned view has also been expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and another, 1974(4) SCC 3, and Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597.
The view of the Supreme Court as expressed by the Constitutional Bench in the case of EP Royappa (supra) deserve to be quoted in extenso and the same read as under :-  "....
In other words, Article 14 is the genus while Article 16 is a species.
Article 16 gives effect to the doctrine of equality in all matters relating to public employment.
The basic principle which, therefore, informs both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and inhibition against discrimination.
Now, what is the content and reach of this great equalizing principle ?
It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose, J, "a way of life", and it must not be subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach.
We cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude.
Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be "cribbed, cabined and confined" within traditional and doctrine limits.
From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness.
In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it affects any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16.
Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment.
They require that State action must be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant considerations because that would be denial of equality.
Where the operative reason for State action, as distinguished from motive inducing from the antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and relevant but is extraneous and outside the area of permissible considerations, it could amount to mala fide exercise of power and that is hit by Articles 14 and 16.
Mala fide exercise of power and arbitrariness are different lethal radiations emanating from the same vice : in fact the latter comprehends the former.
Both are inhibited by Articles 14 and 16."
18.
The aforementioned judgments have laid down the law in 1970's, which have been applied to myriad of cases by the Supreme Court as well as various High Courts.
An action of the State is required to conform to the principles of equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
The traditional principle used to be that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group.
The differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
The classification may be founded on intelligible differentia, namely geographical or according to objects or occupations or the like.
What is necessary is that there must be a nexus between the basis of classification and the object of the Act under consideration [State of Bombay v. FN Balsera, AIR 1951 SC 318; Asgar Ali v. State of Bombay, AIR 1957 SC 503].
However, this traditional and classical principle has been supplemented by a new principle laid down in EP Royappa case (supra).
According to the new principle, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness and both are sworn enemies and, therefore, such an act would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
19.
The action of the respondent in refusing to honour the commitment made by it to the petitioner with regard to reimbursement of the expenses when he went to represent the country at the IXth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship held at Seoul, South Korea, is simply an act of arbitrariness.
An affidavit was obtained from the petitioner, which was to the effect that he was to refund the partial amount of Rs. 25,000/- paid to him, if he did not win a gold medal.
The outstanding amount which was required to be paid by the respondent is about Rs. 16,000/-.
The petitioner not only won the gold medal but smashed the world record in 5 Kms.
Walk in the Men 60+ category.
The new record established was 2712 minutes, which in fact was better than all categories of veterans from 40+ onwards.
The petitioner kept his promise of winning a gold medal but the respondent miserably failed.
Similarly, no reimbursement has been granted with respect to sports event held at Xth Asian Veteran Athletic Championship, Okinawa, Japan.
A sum of Rs. 38,075/- is claimed by the petitioner.
Similarly, the petitioner spent Rs. 30,000/- + Rs. 4,000/- + boarding and lodging charges amounting to œ 300/-.
There is no explanation forthcoming for granting incentive to one Mr. Garg and refusing the same to the petitioner.
In the absence of any explanation submitted by the respondent, it has to be assumed that inclusion of Mr. Garg in preference to meritorious claim of the petitioner is discriminatory and arbitrary.
Moreover, Mr. Garg eventually had dropped out and the amount was refunded.
Despite that the petitioner has not been considered entitled to reimbursement of his dues.
It is a very sad commentary on the working of the respondents and despite indication given by this Court in its order dated 372004, the claim of the petitioner has not been considered at all.
The view taken by the Supreme Court by laying down the principles in EP Royappa case (supra) and in Ramana Daya Ram Shetty (supra) would become handy to apply to the facts of the present case.
20.
Even otherwise according to Rule 11, financial assistance has been made available to various sports bodies and the Federation is recognized by the respondent and on that score also the petitioner is entitled to claim reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by him.
The rules may not have required statutory status inasmuch as these rules continued to be draft rules.
However, such rules if followed in practice then such rules have to be followed.
21.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the following directions are issued so as to enable the respondent to evolve some objective criteria to avoid arbitrary consideration of sports persons for granting them reimbursement :-  (a) At present there is no provision in the rules or doctrine of any objective criteria for grant of incentives to the deserving sports persons who have been selected by recognized sports bodies to participate in a National/International event.
Let an objective criteria for the aforementioned purpose be framed by the respondents within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
However, in the meanwhile the respondent shall be bound by the following direction.
Whenever a recognized sports body sponsor a sports person for participation in a National/International event then his air ticket, bus fare or rail fare, as the case may be, boarding and lodging expenses on ceremonial kits etc. must be borne by the respondents provided the sports person falls within the territorial jurisdiction of the Council and subject to available financial resources.
It shall be appreciated if adequate funds are made available to the Council by the Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh.
This direction has become necessary for a sports man may be deprived of participation in an event where he may secure a Gold Medal for the Country; (b) In case the recognized sports body has recommended more than one person, then obviously the person who is more meritorious than the other should be preferred; (c) No condition of refund should be imposed stipulating that in case the sponsored sports person fails to win a gold medal then he was to refund the amount paid; (d) In case of an event for which no names have been sponsored by the recognized sports body then the Council itself may hold a competition so as to select someone meritorious enough to participate in the National or International event and such a selected candidate should be given the full incentives; and (e) The Council shall also make efforts to gain more funds by way of budgetary allocation or other legitimate ways and means.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 26101999 (P-16), order dated 672001 (P-18) and order dated 24112004, passed by the Administrator are hereby quashed.
The respondents are commanded to pay the petitioner in respect of all the three events, the reimbursement to the tune of Rs. 16,000/-, which is due since 1101996, an amount of Rs. 38,075/-, which is due since 181998, and an amount of Rs. 58,000 [air-ticket Rs. 30,000/-, kit Rs. 4,000/- and boarding and lodging œ 300/- (300 x Rs. 80 - Rs. 24,000/-)], which is due since 171999.
All the aforementioned payments shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum.
The needful shall be done within a period of one month from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
It is further made clear that all the directions issued in the preceding para for bringing objectivity in the claim of financial incentives payable to the eminent sports persons, action shall be taken within a period of six months.
Petition allowed.