SS Nijjar, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
In the year 1996, Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as "the Commission") advertised two posts of Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer in the Department of Labour and Employment, Haryana.
The selection and appointments were to be made according to Haryana Labour Department Service Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as "the 1987 Rules").
The petitioner fulfilled the necessary qualifications and was also otherwise eligible for selection and appointment.
He duly applied for the post and participated in the selection process.
He was called for interview on 1981998.
On 1631998.
On 16.3.1999 the selection list was published, in which the name of the petitioner did not appear.
The petitioner, however, noticed that although only two posts had been advertised, the names of four persons appeared in the select list.
Two were kept in the waiting list and two were given appointments.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were in the waiting list.
Although respondent No. 4 and 5 were given appointments within a year of this selection, respondent No. 6 and 7 have been given appointments, after a gap of 1-1/2 years on 1092000.
The petitioner submits that even if there was a select list, the same would be valid only for one year from the date of selection.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7, therefore, could not have been given appointments.
Aggrieved against the action of the respondents, the petitioner filed CWP No. 3618 of 2001 which was withdrawn to enable the petitioner to file a representation before the respondents.
The petitioner duly submitted a representation before the respondents.
The petitioner duly submitted a representation in May, 2001, but the respondents still did not take any action, and therefore, he filed CWP No. 441 of 2001.
The writ petition was disposed of by this Court with a direction to the respondents to take a decision on the representation filed by the petitioner.
The respondents have rejected the representation of the petitioner by order dated 2662002.
The petitioner had also submitted a representation to the Commission which has also been rejected by order dated 2752002.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid orders, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeking the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned orders (Annexure P-6 and P-7).
The petitioner also seeks the quashing of selection and appointments of respondent No. 4 to 7.
3.
All the respondents have filed separate written statements.
The petitioner has also filed a replication to the reply filed by respondent No. 3- Commission.
It is submitted on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner is estopped from filing the present writ petition by his own act, conduct and acquiescence.
The petitioner having participated in the selection process and having never raised any objection to the criteria of selection adopted by the Commission, cannot now be permitted to challenge the same.
4.
With regard to the recommendations and appointments of respondent Nos. 4 to 7, it is stated that their names were recommended in terms of the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary contained in Circular letter No. 66/32/1988-7GSI dated 28101993.
The instructions dated 28101993 relate to appointment of candidates from the waiting list prepared by the Commission and Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana.
In these instructions, it is provided as follows :-  "2.
The original list of Haryana Public Service Commission shall remain valid for a period of six months only and all the Departments shall complete the process of issuing appointment to the candidates of original list within six months.
The validity of original list shall expire after six months.
3.
The waiting list prepared by Haryana Public Service Commission shall remain valid for another six months after expiry of the original list i.e. Its validity shall be for a period of total one year.
4.
Appointments from waiting list shall be made only after exhausting the original list and appointments from the waiting list shall be made only against the vacancies becoming available within six months of receipt of the list.
Fresh requisition shall be sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission for the vacancies becoming available after six months."
5.
Since there is no other rule applicable to this matter, the aforesaid circular is binding on the respondents.
Thus, the appointments have been made in accordance with law.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were appointed on 2651999.
Respondent No. 7 submitted representation on 11.5.1999 stating therein that promotion on the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer in the department had been made in excess of the quota meant for promotion.
These promotions have been made against the posts meant for direct recruitment quota.
He, therefore, requested to be posted against one of the existing posts.
Under Rule 9(i)(d) of the 1987 Rules, 50% of the posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer are to be filled up by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion.
In May, 1999, there were total 17 posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer in the department.
Thus, there was eight posts for the quota of direct recruits and 9 for the promotee quota.
In reality, upto May, 1999, only 4 posts were occupied by direct recruits and 11 were held by promotees.
After appointment of respondent No. 4 and 5, the number of direct appointees rose to six.
Therefore, two promotees were holding the posts in excess of their quota.
The process of reversion of the two promotees commenced on 162000.
Simultaneously, issuance of orders to respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were processed.
The recommendation of the select list of the Commission was dated 2499.
The validity period of the select/waiting list, therefore, expired on 242000.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were, however, entitled to appointment in May, 1999.
In order to avoid undue hardship to respondent Nos. 6 and 7, the matter was referred to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana for extending the validity period of the select list under the instructions dated 28101993.
By order dated 2962000, the Chief Secretary extended the validity period of the select list dated 241999 for a period of six months from 2962000.
Thus, according to the respondents, the select list dated 241999 did not lapse.
At the same time when the matter of reversion of excess promottees was being processed, the aggrieved promotees approached the Civil Courts by way of filing civil suits for permanent injunction.
The Civil Court granted ad interim injunction restraining the respondents from reverting promotees.
In the meantime, the Government created two more posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer in the Labour Department due to exigencies of work by order dated 3182000.
These posts were to be filled by direct recruitment to make up the deficiency of their quota.
Since respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were already available, they were issued the appointment order in September, 2000.
6.
The Commission has stated that the petitioner having been duly interviewed did not come within the zone of selection.
The criteria of selection adopted by the Commission is reasonable and cannot be said to be either unreasonable or arbitrary.
The function of the Commission is to make recommendation.
The appointments have been by the State of Haryana.
7.
Respondent No. 4 has pointed out that in the advertisement itself, it is clearly mentioned that the posts advertised were subject to variation to any extent.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be permitted to say that only two posts could have been filled.
8.
Respondent No. 7 has further stated that the petitioner does not even fulfil the necessary qualifications, and therefore, he is not even eligible to participate in the selection process.
The petitioner possesses the Degree of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture i.e. B.Sc.
in Agriculture.
In such a degree there is no subject of Economics, Public Administration, Commerce, Sociology and Psychology.
Since the petitioner does not fulfil the basic qualification of being a Graduate as prescribed under the 1997 Rules, he has no locus standi to challenge the selection and appointment of the answering respondents.
9.
The petitioner has filed two separate replications.
He has reiterated the averments made in the petition and stated that the respondents are trying to divert the attention of the Court from the real issue.
According to the petitioner, the controversy involved in the present writ petition is as to whether the candidates can be appointed beyond the posts advertised and that too, after the lapse of 1-1/2 years of the select list.
10.
Mr. Puneet Bali, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submits that the matter is squarely covered by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hoshiar Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC) : JT 1993(5) SC 63, in which it has been held that the waiting list cannot be used for making appointments against the posts which are created or which become available after the initiation of process of recruitment.
He also relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Gurnam Singh v. Chief Secretary to Pb.
Govt. Chandigarh, 1999(3) SCT 28 (P&H) : 1999(2) RSJ 101.
In this case, it has been held by the Division Bench that mere inclusion of the name of the candidate in the waiting list is not sufficient to entitle a candidate to be appointed, as of right.
It has been held by the Division Bench relying on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha and others, AIR 1973 SC 2216, Jatinder Kumar v. State of Punjab, AIR 1984 SC 1850 and Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, JT 1999(2) SC 380, that the petitioner could not have succeeded in persuading the Court to issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus for his appointment because the employer has the prerogative not to appoint all the candidates recommended by the recruiting agency.
It has also been held that the so-called waiting list prepared by the Departmental Selection Committee could not have been used for making appointment against the post which became available after 1991.
In support of this conclusion, the Division Bench relied on the judgments rendered in the cases of Hoshiar Singh v. State of Haryana, JT 1993(5) SC 63; State of Bihar v. Madan Mohan Singh, 1994(1) S.C.T.
530 : 1994(3) RSJ 534; Madan Lal v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, 1995(2) S.C.T.
880 : AIR 1995 SC 1088; Prem Singh v. Haryana Banking Service Recruitment Board, 1996(3) S.C.T.
563 : 1996(1) SCC 283.
Prem Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board, 1996(3) RSJ 98 and Surinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another, 1997(4) SCT 133 (SC) : JT 1997(7) SC 537.
Factually, the Division Bench noticed that the petitioner had not placed on record any documentary or other contemporaneous evidence to substantiate the statement that his name was included in the waiting list prepared in the year 1991.
It was also held by the Division Bench that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
The petitioner had not offered any cogent explanation for the delay of seven years in filing the writ petition.
In support of this conclusion, the Division Bench relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in the cases of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhai Lal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006 and PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53.
From the aforesaid, it becomes apparent that the observations made by the Division Bench would be of little assistance to the present petitioner.
The petitioner therein had failed to establish that his name was included in any waiting list.
He had also filed the writ petition, after a period of seven years.
The vacancies had clearly arisen after the initiation of process of recruitment.
Therefore, it was held that no appointment could have been made, on the basis of the alleged inclusion of the name of the petitioner in the waiting list.
11.
Mr. Puneet Bali has also relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar and another v. Madan Mohan Singh and others, 1994(1) SCT 530 (SC) : AIR 1994 Supreme Court 765.
In that case, the Supreme Court has held that selection process had been confined only to fill up 32 vacancies.
Therefore, the merit list prepared on the basis of written test as well as the viva voce will hold good only for the purpose of filing up those 32 vacancies and no further because the said process of selection for those 32 vacancies got exhausted and came to an end.
It was held that if the same list has to be kept subsisting for the purpose of filling up other vacancies also that would naturally amount to deprivation of rights of other candidates who would have become eligible subsequent to the said selection process.
These observations were made, on the submission made on behalf of the appellant-State of Bihar that there was no advertisement that a panel would be prepared which will be valid for one year and there was no rule also to that effect.
The Supreme Court was considering the question as to whether in fact the advertisement and the initial decision of the High Court were meant to fill up only 32 vacancies.
It was observed that if the answer is in the affirmative, then the question of same list subsisting for one more year for filling up the subsequent vacancy did not arise.
On consideration of the entire material placed before the Supreme Court, it was held that "It is, therefore, crystal clear that the advertisement and the whole selection process that ensued were meant only to fill up 32 vacancies".
In our opinion, the aforesaid observations are not applicable to the peculiar facts of this case.
The selection process, in this case, cannot be said to be limited to only two posts.
The advertisement had made a very bold announcement as follows :-  "Applications are invited for the following posts (number of posts subject to variation to any extent)."
Such a clause in the advertisement would clearly envision a departure from the number of posts which may have been advertised.
It would give a discretion to the appointing authority to fill more than the advertised posts.
Needless to say, this discretion will have to be exercised by the concerned authority within the well-defined parameters for exercise of such a power.
It cannot be exercised whimsically or for extraneous considerations.
In the present case, respondent Nos. 4 and 5 had been selected and appointed.
Respondent Nos 6 and 7 had been placed on the waiting list.
The posts against which respondent No. 6 and 7 have been appointed, had been occupied by promotees in excess of their quota.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were entitled to be appointed against the aforesaid posts on 2651999 at the time when respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were appointed.
Therefore, it would not be possible to hold that the vacancies filled by respondent Nos. 6 and 7 became available after the validity period of the select list/waiting list had been exhausted.
In our opinion the Government has rightly appointed respondent Nos. 6 and 7 against the posts which were meant for direct recruits, but had been occupied by the promotees in excess of the quota.
From the pleadings of the respondents, it emerges that respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have endeavoured to do justice to respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
It was detected on 162000 that promotees were holding two posts in excess of the quota.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 had been placed on the waiting list on 241999.
According to the Government instructions dated 28101993, the validity of the selection/waiting list expired on 242000.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were entitled to appointment alongwith respondent Nos. 4 and 5 on 2651999.
They could, however, not be appointed without the two junior-most promotee officers being reverted.
In order to avoid injustice to respondent Nos. 6 and 7, the matter was referred to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana for extending the validity of the select list by way of giving relaxation in the instructions dated 28101993.
The Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana examined the matter and by letter dated 2062000, extended the validity period of select list dated 241999 for a period of six months from 2962000.
Thus, it becomes apparent that the select list/waiting list dated 241999 did not lapse at the time when the appointments were given to respondent Nos. 6 and 7, in September, 2000.
Thus, it can be seen that respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have exercised the discretionary power within the well-defined limits.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondents have relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Virender S Hooda and others v. State of Haryana and another, 1999(2) SCT 652 (SC) : (1999)3 Supreme Court Cases 696.
In this case, the appellants were seeking appointment according to Circulars dated 2231957 and 26.5.1972, according to which the vacancies which arise within six months from receipt of recommendation of the Commission should be filled up from the waiting list maintained by the Commission.
The Circulars also provided that if additional vacancy occurred after the Commission had made recommendations, such additional vacancies can also be filled up from amongst the candidates recommended by the Commissioner.
Although the appellants did not get selected for appointment in the HCS Executive Branch, they were offered appointments as Excise and Taxation Officer and Tehsildar, respectively.
Within six months, however, some vacancies became available against which the appellants could have been appointed.
They made representations, seeking the necessary relief which was not granted by the respondents.
The writ petition filed by the appellants challenging the decision of the Government was dismissed by this Court.
It had been submitted before this Court and reiterated before the Supreme Court that the Government of Composite Punjab had issued instructions prescribing the procedure to be adopted by the Commission that apart from those selected against the vacancies or notified additional vacancies which arise within six months from the recommendation of the name could be filled up from amongst the names recommended by the Commission.
Similar instructions were issued by the Government of Haryana on 26.5.1972.
The High Court, however, dismissed the writ petition by observing that the administrative instructions cannot be read as making it obligatory for the appointing authority to appoint candidates in excess of the advertised posts.
It was further held that the claim for directing the respondents to make appointment against the posts which became available, after the initiation of the process of recruitment is not justified.
Considering these conclusions, the Supreme Court held as follows :-  "4.
The view taken by the High Court that the administrative instructions cannot be enforced by the appellants and that vacancies became available after the initiation of the press of recruitment would be looking at the matter from a narrow and wrong angle.
When a policy has been declared by the State as to the manner of filling up the post and that policy is declared in terms of rules and instructions issued to the Public Service Commission from time to time and so long as these instructions are not contrary to the rules, the respondents ought to follow the same.
5.
Therefore, we have no hesitation in directing the respondents to consider the cases of the appellants for appointments to posts of the Haryana Public Service (Executive Branch).
However, it is made clear that the appellants shall be fitted to the posts ranking below to those who had been selected alongwith the appellants at the time of recruitment made pursuant to the result declared on 19.6.1992.
The appellants will be fitted in appropriate posts and they will be accorded appropriate scale of pay by giving them the benefit of increments, if any, but they will not be entitled to any monetary benefits for the period for which they have been kept out of employment.
Let such action by action be taken by the Government expeditiously but not later than a period of three months."
13.
In our opinion, the case of respondent Nos. 6 and 7 herein is squarely covered by the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court.
As noticed earlier, posts were available for the direct recruits, even at the time when respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were appointed.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 could not be appointed as the posts had been occupied by promotees in excess of the quota.
Therefore, it could not be said that the vacancies became available or arose after the select list/waiting list exhausted.
14.
Mr. Patwalia has also relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Suvidya Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others (Civil Appeal Nos. 6976-6977 of 1999), decided on 6121999.
In that case, on 16121991, Haryana Public Service Commission had issued an advertisement indicating the number of posts of Principal for being filled up in Higher Education Service Class-II.
It was specifically mentioned in the advertisement that the number of posts would be subject to variation to any extent.
On 161993 before the Commission finalised the selection and made the recommendations pursuant to the earlier advertisement, a fresh requisition was made to the Commission indicating a number of vacancies available for 1991 which was more than 18.
On 1101993, the Commission recommended the names of 30 persons for appointment on the posts of Principal.
One person who was not selected, filed a petition before this Court contending, inter alia, that the advertisement having been issued for only 12 posts, the Commission committed gross error in recommending names of more than 18 selected candidates.
The writ petition was allowed, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Hoshiar Singh (supra).
It was held that the selection of persons beyond 12 is bad.
The decision of the learned Single Judge was upheld by the Division Bench which was challenged in the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court, on consideration of the entire matter, upheld the selection and set aside the judgments of the Single Bench and Division Bench of this Court.
In our opinion, the observations made in this judgment are also applicable to the case of respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
The Supreme Court was considering a case where a subsequent requisition increasing the number of posts had already been made on 161993 before the Commission had finalised the selection.
Therefore, it was held by the Supreme Court that since the subsequent requisition of the Government was for posts more than 18 (in fact 37), there was no bar on the power of the Commission in recommending 30 names.
Furthermore, we are of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner would have to be rejected in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Virender S Hooda (supra).
The Haryana Government has merely given effect to the instructions of 1957- 1972 requiring the vacancies which arise within a period of six months, after the announcement of the previous selection to be filled up from the waiting list maintained by the Commission.
These very instructions had been held to be enforceable in Virender S Hooda's case (supra).
Learned counsel for the respondents has also submitted that the petitioner having participated in the selection process, would now be estopped from challenging the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 7.
However, at the time of arguments, counsel for the petitioner did not challenge the process of selection.
He has challenged only the appointments of respondent Nos. 6 and 7 on the ground that they had been appointed on vacancies which have arisen subsequent to the commencement of the selection process.
He has also contended that respondent Nos. 6 and 7 have been appointed after the validity of the select list and the waiting list had expired.
In such circumstances, it cannot be held that the petitioner would be estopped from challenging the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
15.
Mr. Puneet Bali has further argued that if respondent Nos. 6 and 7 had not been appointed, the posts would have to be re-advertised.
The petitioner would then be eligible to compete again.
We do not find any substance in the submission of the learned counsel.
The rationale of the judgment in Hoshiar Singh's case (supra) was to give protection to the candidates who become eligible for being considered for appointment on a post after the last date for receipt of the applications as may have been provided in the advertisement.
It was not to give an eligible, though unsuccessful, candidate a second chance.
This is apparent from the observations of the Supreme Court which are as follows :-  "10.......
The Board, on its own, could not recommend names of 19 persons for appointment even though the requisition was for eight posts only because the selection and recommendation of larger number of persons than the posts for which requisition is sent.
The appointment on the additional posts on the basis of such selection and recommendation would deprive candidate who were not eligible for appointment to the posts on the last date for submission of applications mentioned in the advertisement and who became eligible for appointment thereafter, of the opportunity of being considered for appointment on the additional posts because if the said additional posts are advertised subsequently those who become eligible for appointment would be entitled to apply for the same."
16.
In the present case, it is the petitioner's own case that he was eligible for the post.
He did participate in the selection process.
His name did not even find mention in the waiting list.
In such circumstances, he cannot now be permitted to claim that the posts should be re-advertised so that he can make another attempt to be selected.
Such a proposition would not find support from the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Hoshiar Singh's case (supra).
The argument of the petitioner also cannot be supported in view of the fact that in the advertisement, it had been categorically provided that "Applications are invited for the following posts (number of posts subject to variation to any extent)".
Once it is mentioned in the advertisement itself that the posts are subject to variation, it would be difficult to hold that the selections would be limited only to the two posts mentioned in the advertisement.
To hold that the selection would be limited only to two posts, would amount to deletion of the aforesaid Clause in the advertisement.
The petitioner has not even cared to challenge the aforesaid Clause as being beyond the powers of the respondents.
On the basis of the advertisement, the two posts could clearly have been offered to respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
There was no need for fresh advertisement.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.