Tapan Sen, J - In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner prays for :- (a) Quashing the Order dated 1132003 (Annexure P-10) issued by the Respondent Company whereby and whereunder the petitioner was informed that the Board of Directors of M/s Punjab Communication Limited (hereinafter sometimes referred to for the sake of brevity as "the Company" and sometimes, as "M/s. PUNCOM") had changed his terms of appointment vide Resolution dated 732003 and had decided to terminate his services on payment of 30 days' remuneration in lieu of Notice and, therefore, a Cheque bearing No. 748127 dated 1032003 drawn on the ICICI Bank for a sum of Rs. 3,44,323/- as dues plus one months' salary, was enclosed therein.
(b) Quashing Agenda No. 12103 (Annexure P-12) whereby and whereunder the Board decided to alter the existing terms and conditions of appointment of the petitioner.
(c) Quashing the Minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 2532003 (Annexure P-13) in which the aforementioned decisions were approved.
(d) Alternatively, the petitioner prays, that the respondents be directed to compensate him by paying 36 months' remuneration for the remaining term in terms of Section 318(4) of the Companies Act, 1956.
2.
According to the petitioner, M/s PUNCOM is a public limited Company having been established in the year 1981 under the Companies Act, 1956.
Since the Govt. of Punjab exercises deep and pervasive control over its affairs, it is an Industry of the said Government and "an authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The petitioner's further case is that while he was working as Deputy Director in the Department of Telecommuncations, Govt. of India, he was sent on deputation to M/s PUNCOM on their own request.
He joined as its Director Technical vide Appointment Letter dated 2071988 (Annexure P-1)  Subsequently on 19101993 (Annexure P-2), he was made a regular Director Technical w.e.f.
7.3.1993.
Clause 2 of the Appointment Letter re-designated him as "Joint Managing Director (Radio)" w.e.f.
16.4.1993.
The petitioner asserts that his date of retirement would be 30.4.2005, i.e. the day on which he would attain the age of 58 years.
On 2951996, the Board of Directors of the Company held its 78th Meeting to decide his terms and conditions of appointment and, by a Resolution of the same day (vide Annexure P-3), the petitioner was appointed as a full-fledged Managing Director the Company for a period of 5 (five) years w.e.f.
3041996.
The petitioner states that while joining on the post of Managing Director, he neither resigned from the regular post of Joint Managing Director nor was he asked to do so.
The terms and conditions were thoroughly discussed in the said meeting in which the petitioner also participated.
It was only after the Board of Directors and the petitioner fully agreed on the terms and conditions, that they were reduced to writing and "Minutes" were drawn up in the shape of the said Resolution dated 2951996 (Annexure P-3).
The petitioner also asserts that in terms of the provisions of Section 302 of The Companies Act, 1956, the details of his appointment were duly sent to all the shareholders of the Company.
These details were also filed in the Office of the Registrar of Companies at Jalandhar.
According to the petitioner, the normal termination clause of 3 (three) months' Notice or Pay in lieu thereof, on either side, like any other terms and conditions of appointment, was discussed but the petitioner did not agree saying that it would confer unbridled powers on the Board of Directors which would take away his independence to work in the interest of the Company.
Upon his disagreement, the said termination clause was, therefore, not included in the terms and conditions of appointment of the Managing Director of the Company.
On 6122000 (Annexure P-4), the Board of Directors, in their Meeting, decided to extend the term of office of the petitioner as per Section 317 of the Companies Act, 1956, from 3042001 (i.e. the date on which his term as MD was to expire), for a further period of 5 (five) years w.e.f.
152001.
The petitioner asserts that on a perusal of the aforementioned extension vide Annexure P-4, the Board approved 25% enhancement in his basic pay and rounded it off to the next increment w.e.f.
152001 along with enhancement of pay scale for a further period of 5 years without effecting any change in the other terms and conditions of his employment.
Once again, the Board of Directors did not include the termination clause for the extended term.
Moreover, as required under the law, all these information regarding the petitioner's extended term as Managing Director for an additional period of 5 years along with the fresh terms and conditions were duly sent to the Registrar of Companies, Jalandhar vide Annexures A to A-3 appended to Civil Misc.
Application Nos. 15114-15 of 2004 filed in this case and by Order dated 3122004, one of us directed that these Miscellaneous Applications will come up along with the main case.
Accordingly, they have been considered along with the main case.
4.
Upon a perusal of these documents as contained in Annexures-A to A-3, it is evident that intimation regarding the extended period of 5 years along with the fresh terms and conditions were duly sent to the Registrar of Companies.
The Petitioner claims that as against the net worth of Rs. 373 crores in the year 1988 when he had joined, the Company's worth as on date is Rs. 18177 crores.
The company has now more than Rs. 100 crores in cash in its Bank account and these are proof of the good work done by the petitioner.
It is not necessary to go into the details of the pleadings made by the petitioner in relation to what happened during the process of disinvestments etc., save and except to record that as per the pleadings made, things did not apparently work out well in the disinvestment process and some influential people with vested interests and with mala fide intentions, started trying to target the petitioner who was preventing gross irregularities in the said disinvestment process.
According to the petitioner, he "presumably got in the way of hidden agenda of certain powerful persons by throwing open the entire correspondence in the BOD meeting."
[extracted from Para 7(ii) infra].
5.
The petitioner has further stated that during various meetings of the Board of Directors relating to finalization of the share purchase agreements for the ongoing disinvestment of the Company, the matter relating to compensation payable to the MD for loss of office [in the event it was decided to replace him by a new MD] was discussed.
Acording to the petitioner, since there was no termination clause, it was decided to dispense with his services as Managing Director by giving 36 months' remuneration under Section 318(4) of the Companies Act.
The matter was recorded in Resolution No. 11911 of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 10.2.2003 and it was resolved that necessary amendments in Clause 34 of the share purchase agreement be made so as to conform to the provisions of Section 318(4) of the Companies Act, 1956.
6.
Meanwhile, legal opinion was taken by the Punjab Government from legal experts and their opinion was that the "existing full time Directors shall be entitled to such compensation from the company as per provisions of the Act read with the existing agreements in respect of such Directors."
7.
The petition has further stated that in order to meet the requirement of disinvestment procedure, a draft resignation incorporating a provision that the petitioner was entitled to compensation of 36 months' salary was placed in the agend of the 119th meeting of the Board of Directors held on 10.2.2003 vide Annexure P-9.
The petitioner was required to present this resignation at the closing meeting of the Board of Directors which was to take place after finalization of the successful bidder and after two other stages had been followed.
However, the petitioner states that the first step was not completed and yet, in the bid opening meeting dated 632003, the petitioner was asked to submit an advance, undated and unconditional letter of resignation.
He partially complied by signing the draft resignation (Annexure P-9) on the spot leaving the date column blank and handed it over to the bid opening committee.
However, when the persons with "mala fides intentions" were unable to extract a blanket resignation from the petitioner, two resolutions were drafted and moved by limited circulation as a result whereof, without any notice or information to the petitioner, his terms and conditions of appointment were altered by inserting a new clause to the effect that his services can be terminated without assigning any reason by giving 30 days' Notice or 30 days' remuneration in lieu of notice.
The petitioner came to learn that the ex officio Government Director obtained the signatures of fellow ex officio Government Directors and rushed a senior subordinate officer to Delhi to secure signatures of at least one more Director to achieve majority and on 732003 itself, hurriedly completed the formalities of terminating the services of the petitioner.
On the basis of the resolution dated 732003, the petitioner was given the impugned termination letter dated 1132003 (vide Annexure P-10).
8.
The petitioner has stated that three independent Directors demanded an emergency meeting of the Board of Directors to know the reason for this sudden action in terminating his appointment.
These demands are collectively marked Annexure P-11.
According to the petitioner, an emergency meeting was deliberately fixed on 2532003 because on that day, one of the independent Directors, namely Mr. Arun Kumar, Chief General Manager, J&K Telecom was to hold a Telephone Adalat in Srinagar.
It was known to them that this date could not be changed as these Adalats are advertised in the newspapers well in advance.
Other Directors, namely Mr. Prithpal Singh, MD BSNL, who was also an independent Director and Shri DS Kalha, Secretary, Service and Technology, Government of Punjab, could also not attend the meeting on 2532003 because of their preoccupations.
However, the two Resolutions altering the terms and conditions of the petitioner's appointment and then terminating his services by payment of 30 days' remuneration in lieu of Notice, were nonetheless put up in the agenda of the meeting of 2532003 and then it was approved on the same day.
The agenda items and the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 2532003 are marked as Annexures P-12 and P-13.
9.
According to the petitioner, both from the agenda as also from the minutes of the meeting of 2532003, it will appear that they are totally silent and no reasons have been given for the two emergency resolutions.
According to the petitioner, from a perusal of the minutes, it would be evident that there are some cuttings on the crucial parts of the recorded minutes marked as Annexure P-13/A.
This is suggestive of the fact that the decision was taken without application of mind and on the directions of some powerful persons who had set their eyes on the post of MD and who had apparently used their connections in the Government with an ulterior motive to drain out as much as possible from the huge amount lying with the company in its Bank account in cash to the extent of Rs. 100 crores and which the petitioner was "zealously guarding".
10.
The petitioner has further stated that being totally disillusioned and frustrated, three out of the four independent Directors, namely Prithpal Singh, VP Chandan and Arun Kumar resigned from the Board of Directors under protest vide letters of Resignation which have been marked as Annexure P-14.
11.
The petitioner submits that the actions of the Board of Directors in changing the terms and conditions of the petitioner's appointment as Vice Chairman and Managing Director without any notice and thereafter, terminating his services as per the said changed terms and conditions, are illegal, arbitrary and against statutory provisions and have been rescorted to with mala fide intentions.
Consequently, the petitioner prays for quashing Annexures P-10, P-12 and P-13 and in the alternative, prays that the Respondents be directed to compensate him by paying remuneration for the remaining tenure of his service and to allow him to join the post of Joint Managing Director.
He also prays for quashing Rule 35 of the PUNCOM Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1997.
12.
In the written statement, the respondents have stated that the petitioner was working initially as the Managing Director and subsequently as Vice Chairman and Managing Director of the company which is neither an "authority" or nor a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It is their further case that initially, M/s. Punjab State Industrial Electronics Development and Production Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as PSEDPCL) owned 100% shares of PUNCOM but in the year 1994, the Company came out with Public Issue and ultimately, the holding of PSEDPCL was reduced to 70% The remaining 30% of its shares are with the general public.
Therefore, the Company can neither be said to be a "government owned Company" nor a "government controlled Company".
Therefore, the present Writ Petition is liable to be dismissed as being not maintainable.
13.
The respondents have further stated that even otherwise, the respondent No. 2 Company is not getting any financial aid or grants from the Government.
The company is not discharging any business activities on behalf of the Government.
Furthermore, it does not enjoy any monopoly status and that it is a totally commercial organization.
The Punjab Government does not exercise a deep and pervasive control over the Company.
The Rules and Regulations of the Punjab Government do not apply upon the company.
The company is an autonomous body and a commercial organization created under the Companies Act, 1956.
Therefore, it is not a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
14.
On merits, the respondents state, that no cause of action has accrued to the petitioner that can be said to give him the right to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court by filing the present Writ Petition.
They have further stated that the company is not a Government Undertaking and the Government of Punjab does not have a deep and pervasive control over its affairs.
PSEDPCL does not hold the total share of the respondent No. 2 company.
15.
They further say that the petitioner has admitted that he was appointed as Managing Director on 3041996, but for reasons best known to him, he has withheld the letter by which he was appointed as Managing Director on 3041996 by PSEDPCL.
In fact the petitioner has done so in order to withhold relevant information to the effect that he was appointed on contract basis and that in the letter of appointment dated 3041996, (Annexure R-1/2) there did exist a clause to the effect that his services could be terminated by giving him 3 (three) months' Notice.
By not attaching the said letter, the petitioner has tried to project that in fact, his appointment was actually made by the Respondent No. 2 company keeping in view the resolution dated 2951996 which is totally incorrect and false.
In fact vide Resolution dated 2951996, in pursuance to the appointment of the petitioner by PSEDPCL dated 3041996, only the detailed remuneration was fixed because the letter dated 3041996 appointing the petitioner had fixed salary as Rs. 30,000/- plus usual perks.
Only to clarify the usual perks which were to form part of the remunerations, the resolution dated 2951996 was passed.
It is incorrect that on the basis of deliberations in the meeting of 2951996, the clause relating to termination of service by giving 3 (three) months' Notice was either discussed or withdrawn by Respondent No. 2 because the petitioner did not accept the same.
These, statements are totally incorrect and false.
16.
It is further stated that the major contributor towards increase in the worth of the company were the proceedings of the Public Issue of 1994, including premium of Rs. 240/- on Rs. 10/- face value share by virtue of which the company received public funds to the tune of Rs. 106 crores and this happened much before the petitioner took over as Managing Director of the company.
The net worth of the company had already reached Rs. 17065 crores as on 3131996 but over the next seven years ie upto 3132003, the same had been reduced to Rs. 16172 crores and even if Rs. 1086 crores as expenditure incurred on VRS as part of disinvestments is added to the net worth of the company, the increased value comes to Rs. 17258 crores as on 3132003, which is merely an increase of 113% over a span of 7 (seven) years.
This negligible increase would even fail to beat the ongoing inflation rate.
Moreover, the Company continuously incurred losses from operations from 1996-97 onwards.
The total loss incurred from operations for the period from 1996-97 to 2002-2003 is Rs. 7137 crores and it is this period when the petitioner was heading M/s. PUNCOM.
Moreover, the profits which the company showed during the aforesaid period were on account of income from treasury operations and lease rentals for equipments sold on lease worth about Rs. 18 crores to the then Department of Telecommunications in 1995.
The petitioner had nothing to do with it.
17.
In answer to the bald statement of the petitioner to the effect that the President of Videocon and the Managing Director of Shyam Telecom had given appreciating comments for the work done by the petitioner, it is stated that there is no written communication by any of the above mentioned companies giving these comments and in fact these words have been taken from a letter which was written by the petitioner himself, wherein it was stated that the President of Videocon and Managing Director of Shyam Telecom had made these comments in favour of the Company.
It is further stated that the petitioner is merely trying to take advantage of his own letter to project an impression that he had done commendable job and had helped in the disinvestments of the respondent No. 2 company.
In fact the petitioner was all out against disinvestments and was creating all types of hurdles.
18.
On Annexure P-5, the petitioner has tried to convey an impression that he was asked to withhold certain information from the Board of Directors.
According to the respondents, this statement/attempt is totally incorrect and false because the letter, Annexure P-5, only states that the business plan should not be circulated with the agenda as the same is a confidential document.
Since confidential documents are actually given to the Board of Directors at the time of the meeting, the petitioner was advised not to send these confidential documents as there was a risk that they may be made public if someone were to get hold of the same while preparing the agenda.
The respondents have stated that letter dated 722003 is being totally misinterpreted by the petitioner for his own advantage and that it is incorrect on his part to assert that the Government or anybody else wanted to by-pass the Board of Directors in any manner.
They also state that in order to delay the disinvestment project, the petitioner was trying to apply all kinds of tactics so that his position as Vice Chairman and Managing Director in the company could be saved.
Therefore, all the acts of the petitioner were for his personal benefit and not at all for the benefit of the general public as asserted by him.
19.
The respondents have also stated that the petitioner was misleading everybody including the Board of Directors in trying to project that there was no termination clause in his appointment as Managing Director.
In his pursuit to mislead, he tried to extract whatever he could in his favour by misrepresenting facts although and as mentioned earlier, his appointment and the terms and conditions were clear on the issue that he was appointed purely on contract basis for a period of five years with a clear indication that his services can be terminated by giving him 3 (three) months' Notice.
20.
Upon the applicability of Section 318(4) of the Companies Act, 1956, the respondents state that the same is not at all applicable to the petitioner.
By misrepresenting the fact, the petitioner was trying to bring his case under Section 318(4) of the Companies Act to get compensation if his services were terminated on the disinvestment of the Company.
The legal opinion Annexure P-8 obtained by the petitioner does not give him any benefit because the same clearly states that the provisions of the Act are to be read with the existing agreement in respect of Directors and in case of the petitioner, it was clear in his terms and conditions that his services could be terminated by giving him 3 (three) months' Notice which was later on changed to 1 (one) month's Notice.
21.
The respondents have further pleaded that the petitioner has attempted to make bald statements of "mala fide intention" without giving specific details as to who was/were the person/s interested in seeking the resignation of the petitioner.
They submit that such vague allegations cannot be considered and that too, in the absence of actual persons said to be inimically disposed towards the petitioner.
Allegations levelled specifying the name/s of the person/s is nothing but an attempt on the part of the petitioner to mislead this Court.
22.
According to the respondents, the allegations to the effect that resolutions were moved by limited circulation with the only intention of terminating the services of the petitioner, is wholly misconceived and the fact is that the resolutions were sent to all the Directors.
They were personally handed over to those who were available and sent by post to those who were not.
In any event the majority of the members had already approved the resolutions and all those members who attended on 2532003 later ratified them in the meeting.
The respondents claim that they, therefore, had the authority to reduce the period of notice and, therefore, the period of three months' notice was reduced to one month or pay in lieu thereof.
It is further submitted that the impression being attempted to be given out by the petitioner to the effect that the resolution was managed to be approved by the three ex-officio Government Directors, is totally misconceived and false because the Directors passed the Resolution absolutely voluntarily and the same was duly ratified by all the Directors on 2532003.
There was only one dissenting note and this was also considered.
23.
The respondents have explained that as per the normal practice, the date, 2532003, was requisitioned by the Company Secretary on 1432003 for convening the meeting.
If a particular Director did not attend, his non- attendance could not be attributed to anybody.
Moreover, there was nothing irregular when all the Directors (except for one dissenting note), approved the resolutions relating to the termination of the services of the petitioner by giving him one month's salary in lieu of notice.
24.
So far as "cuttings" in the minutes of the meeting of 2532003 are concerned, it is stated that all allegations to the effect that these were made/done with malice or with some ulterior motive, are totally false and slanderous.
The Chairman has the responsibility to enter the actual developments in a meeting and in any event, these "cuttings" are totally irrelevant as the petitioner was fully aware that all the Directors who attended the meeting, approved (except for one dissenting note) the action of reducing the notice period from three to one month for purposes of terminating his services and doing so by giving one month's pay in lieu of notice.
25.
The allegation made by the petitioner to the effect that an attempt is being made to drain out Rs. 100 crores lying with the company, has been vehemently denied by saying that the said allegation is totally incorrect, false and baseless and that too, without specifying the name of the person/s who is/are interested to do this.
26.
Upon the attempt made by the petitioner to impress upon this Court that some of the Directors resigned to protest against the manner in which the petitioner was being dealt with, the Respondents have stated that the independent Directors tendered resignation in their own wisdom having been guided by their own independent decision.
However, their subjective and independent decision cannot affect or influence the decision taken by the majority of the Directors to change the conditions of service of the petitioner by altering the period of notice from three months to one month.
27.
Since the respondents are competent to alter the conditions of service of the petitioner, no opportunity of hearing was required to be given and therefore, the respondents were justified and within their jurisdiction to change the terms and conditions of the petitioner.
28.
On the issue that there has been violation of the provisions of the Memorandum of Association, it is stated that it is incorrect to state that Article 152 applies to the petitioner.
The petitioner was a Managing Director and in case of his removal, Article 171 is the required Article under which the petitioner can be removed.
The petitioner is trying to misrepresent and mislead this Court by citing wrong Articles of Association to project that his termination was wrong.
It is further stated that there was absolutely no requirement of giving 14 days' notice to its members/share holders for a meeting.
The petitioner is governed by terms and conditions to which he had agreed and which formed part of his letter of appointment as the Managing Director and therefore, those terms and conditions can be brought into effect at any point of time.
Therefore, even if the petitioner attempts to take benefit out of Article 152 (which is not applicable), even then, the procedure for the removal of a Director will not be applicable in the present case because the petitioner, right from day one, was aware and knew that in his appointment letter appointing him as the Managing Director, there did exist a clause that his services could be terminated by giving him three months' notice.
That apart, even the Board of Directors of PSEDPCL, in their meeting held on 2941996, had decided in clear terms that the appointment of the petitioner would be on contract basis, terminable on three months' notice on either side.
Consequently, it cannot be said that there was no termination clause by which the services of the petitioner could be brought to an end by giving him three months' notice.
It is also equally important to bear in mind that even while his services were being extended, they were done so on the same terms and conditions.
Consequently, the contention of the petitioner to the effect that he did not know about the termination clause, cannot be believed.
29.
It is further stated that having been aware of the termination clause all along, the petitioner cannot now turn around and challenge the same and in any case, if he feels that there has been any violation of the contract (though, from the facts of the case there is none because the Board of Directors had full powers and the competence to alter his terms and conditions of service), the remedy which is available to the petitioner is by moving the Civil Court and not by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
30.
The Board of Directors having the power to terminate the services of the petitioner as per terms and conditions of his appointment, no reason was required to be given once the termination was as per the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
Therefore, once the terms and conditions of appointment of the petitioner was altered the same was given effect to by giving him one month's pay in lieu of notice.
31.
The high sounding claims of the petitioner that he was responsible for augmenting the finances of the company have been pooh-poohed by the respondents by saying that in fact, the net worth of the company had plummeted down from the beginning of 1996-97 (i.e. the year when his services were terminated).
It was prior to his appointment as Managing Director of the Company that during the year 1994 the worth of the Company increased to Rs. 106 crores as a result of the inflow of the public issue.
32.
The respondents have sharply reacted to the unwarranted criticisms being made by the petitioner by saying that he has made frivolous allegations of bias and malice without any justification and without naming the persons.
Such bald statements without disclosing as to who is the so called "influential person" who is influecting the decision of the Board of Directors cannot be taken into consideration.
Additionally, nobody has been impleaded as party by name in the Writ Petition and therefore the petitionr cannot raise the plea of bias, malice or interestedness in the absence or behind the back of persons whom he has not impleaded.
According to the learned Counsel for the respondents, these scandalous averments have been resorted to with the sole intention of prejudicing the mind of this Court.
33.
The respondents have denied the claim of the petitioner for salary by saying that he is not entitled for any salary much less the salary for 36 months as claimed.
The petitioner's services have been terminated keeping in view the terms and conditions of his appointment which is perfectly valid and legal.
34.
Further reply of the respondents is that the provisions of PUNCOM Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1997 are not applicable to the petitioner as he has not been removed by way of punishment.
He has been removed merely in pursuance of the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
The averments to the effect that the order of termination is punitive have been denied by saying that no part of the order can ever be said to project or suggest that the same is punitive.
35.
In reply to the respondents, the petitioner has repeated that the Company is a "State" - being a public Ltd. Company and that the State of Punjab has deep and pervasive control over it with 70 per cent of its present shares being held through the Punjab State Industrial Electronics Development and Production Corporation (i.e. PSEDPCL).
So long as it retains 51% of shares a Govt. body reserves the right to appoint/nominate majority of the Directors and/or the top functionaries such as the Chairman, Vice Chairman, Managing Director and whole time Director under Articles 158 and 171 of the Memorandum and Articles of Association (Annexure P-15).
He has further stated that in order to keep total control over the Company, the Punjab Government has always ensured that a vast majority of the Directors are Government Directors.
At the time of filing of the present Petition the Company had six Government Directors and one non-government Director.
Six Government Directors were :-  1.
Shri KR Lakhanpal, IAS (Principal Secretary, Finance).
2.
Shri SC Aggarwal, IAS (Principal Secretary, Industries & Commerce).
3.
Shri DS Kalha, IAS (Principal Secretary, Science and Technology).
4.
Shri NS Kalsi, IAS (Director-cum-Secretary, Department of Information System and Administrative Reforms and PICTEL).
5.
Shri Vishwajeet Khanna, IAS (Managing Director, PSIDEC).
6.
Mr. RK Nangia (Director, Punjab State Electronic & Production Corporation/PICTEL).
36.
It is further reiterated that the Company is a Government of Punjab Undertaking and that every letter-head and visiting card of its employees describe the Company as a `A Government Undertaking'.
The petitioner relies one such letter-head and visiting card which he has appended to the Replication and marked it as Annexures P-16 and 17.
37.
The petitioner has further stated in his replication that he is challenging the violation of his fundamental rights - i.e. the right to livelihood enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution by a State Government controlled body that too, without following principles of natural justice.
Therefore, the writ petition is maintainable.
38.
The petitioner has vehemently denied that he was appointed purely on contract basis.
He submits that a perusal of the resolution dated 2951996 passed by the Board of Directors in its 78th meeting appointing him as the Managing Director (Annexure P-3) and of the Minutes of the 100th meeting by which the Board of Directors extended his term as Managing Director (Annexure P-4) would establish that no where the word "Contract" has been used.
The Board of Directors of PUNCOM is the approving authority of the appointment of the petitioner even as per letter (Annexure R2/2) and hence, the terms and conditions approved by the said Board of Directors of PUNCOM are only relevant and effective.
39.
The petitioner further states that he was a regular employee of the Company working as its Director (Technical)/Joint Managing Director (Radio) against a regular permanent post when he was chosen for the appointment as Managing Director.
While joining as Managing Director, he neither resigned nor he was asked to do so.
It is, therefore, clear that the petitioner was not appointed as Managing Director on contract basis and if the word "Contract" is used to his prejudice, it would be misconceived and would be a misnomer.
40.
According to the petitioner, even Annexure R-2/2 which is the letter/Order dated 3041996 [which the petitioner refers to as an "intermediatory" letter made in the process of finalizing the terms and conditions of his appointment], clearly mentions that the appointment is subject to the approval of the Board of Directors and Shareholders of the Punjab Communication Ltd In fact, this letter was a formal letter to authorize the petitioner to join formally as Managing Director and meet the statutory requirements.
This is a common practice adopted by Respondent Company because wherever exigency of work requires, candidates are requested to negotiations/finalization/approval of the terms and conditions etc. For example :- In petitioner's own appointment as Director (Technical) in the Respondent Company, although the appointment letter (Annexure P-2) is dated 19101993, the petitioner was working w.e.f.
7.3.1993 and the last para of the appointment letter covers the intervening period with back-dated acceptance.
In fact the contents of this "intermediatory" letter were never discussed with the petitioner.
Therefore, as per the appointment letter, when this "intermediatory" letter was put up before the Board of Directors, as agenda item No. 7805 in its 78th meeting (Annexure R2/3), the petitioner objected to the three months' Notice clause saying that it was whimsical and arbitrary and hence, after discussions, it was dropped from the terms of appointment of the petitioner as Managing Director.
This fact is clear from the Annexure R2/3 (Resolution) and the letter which was sent to all the Shareholders contained all the terms and conditions of appointment except the clause pertaining to three months' termination notice.
A copy of the letter containing the terms of appointment of the petitioner which was sent to the Shareholders is annexed as Annexure P-18.
The petitioner states that the same terms and conditions which were "minuted" by the Board of Directors in the form of a Resolution did not contain any termination clause and they were sent to the Registrar of Companies, Department of Company Affairs, Government of India.
It is further submitted that as per practice, for the post of Managing Director, a formal offer containing terms and conditions is made to the selected candidate and he is given choice to accept/reject/negotiate the same.
The petitioner states that this is corroborated by the copy of the advertisement for the post of Managing Director, a copy of which has been marked as Annexure P-19 which clearly says that candidates were to apply on plain paper.
No terms and conditions were specified which have been left to mutual negotiations by specifying in the advertisement that "Salary and perks will not be a constraint for the right candidate".
Therefore, in the process adopted, the negotiation part was left to Board of Directors of the Company of which the petitioner was already a member.
This was also suitable to the petitioner as he was an internal candidate on regular appointment.
In case of non-agreement of any of the terms and conditions, he could always have fallen back on his regular appointment.
Moreover, the person who signed the letter dated 2941996, was a member of the Board of Directors and he did not record any dissent in the meeting held on 2951996 when the Resolution relating to the petitioner's appointment containing various terms and conditions (excluding any termination clause) was finally passed.
41.
It is the further case of the petitioner that no document except Annexure R2/2 which is an "intermediatory" letter, mentions the termination clause.
The petitioner, while tendering his draft resignation, asked for 36 months' compensation which was not objected to by any one at any stage.
The petitioner further states that there was no need to take legal opinion (Annexure P-8) if there was any termination clause in the terms and conditions of his appointment.
Moreover, a detailed letter sent by Mr. VP Chandan, an independent Director (Annexure P-11) to the Chairman of the Board of Directors on petitioner's termination which was discussed in the meeting of the Board of Directors, mentions in its first para that there is no termination clause in the appointment letter of the petitioner which was never objected to by any Director of the company in the meeting.
Further, in the impugned Agenda (Annexure P-12) and minutes of Board of Directors (Annexure P-13) vide which the petitioner's services as Managing Director have been terminated, there is no mention of the termination clause of three months' notice or pay in lieu thereof.
In fact there is no mention of three months' termination clause.
Rather, both the agenda and the minutes added a fresh clause saying that the petitioner's terms of appointment can be terminated.
Further, there cannot be two simultaneous operative termination clauses qua the same appointment.
42.
On the basis of the above, the petitioner asserts that there was no termination clause in the final terms and conditions of appointment of the petitioner as Managing Director as approved by Board of Directors and the respondents were also aware of this and in fact, it is they who are trying to mislead this Court by projecting an intermediary letter pertaining to finalization of the terms of appointment as the final document of appointment of the petitioner as Managing Director.
43.
The petitioner submits that the respondents' own appointment letter (Annexure R2/2) says that this appointment is subject to the approval of Board of Directors and Shareholders of the Company and both these documents i.e. Annexures P-13 and P-18 (as explained above) do not contain any termination clause while all other terms and conditions of appointment are mentioned therein.
The petitioner vehemently denies that vide Resolution dated 2951996, only remuneration was approved/fixed.
44.
The petitioner contends that the letter dated 3041996 (Annexure R2/2) was not the final appointment letter but an intermediatory letter pertaining to finalization of the terms and conditions of his appointment which were finalized and approved by the Board of Directors and minuted in the form of a resolution (Annexure P-3) which did not contain any termination clause.
It was again these terms which formed the basis of his extension as Vice Chairman and Managing Director of the Company for another five years.
45.
The petitioner further contends that the Respondent Company made phenomenal progress after his association with it as Director (Technical).
It rose from a mere net worth of Rs. 373 crores in 1988 to 18177 crores.
This progress was due to petitioner's technical inputs which were duly appreciated from time to time.
A copy of one such appreciation letter is Annexure P-16.
In fact, even excellent response in public issue came due to Company's excellent progress and technical strengths.
Further almost every State has a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) like PUNCOM (Respondent-Company) but during the period PUNCOM grew and preserved its earning almost all other Telecom PSUs, like PUNCOM, perished like GCEL of Gujarat, MELTRON of Maharashtra, KELTRON of Kerala, KTL of Karnataka, and UPTRON of UP etc. Against a meager investment of Rs. 74 lacs by Government of Punjab, the Respondent Company has paid a dividend of about Rs. 33 crores and still had more than about 100 crores in Bank Fixed Deposits etc. and was paying dividends when the service of the petitioner was terminated.
According to the petitioner, no other Indian telecom PSU has demonstrated performance close to PUNCOM.
46.
He contends that if the Board of Directors was not satisfied with his performance, then why did they extend his term as Managing Director by another five years ?
Still further, the resignation of three independent Directors was due to the petitioner's termination (Annexure P-14) and this speaks volumes in favour of the petitioner's performance.
47.
The petitioner vehemently denies that he was creating any hurdle and inconvenience in the disinvestments.
In fact, his efforts were to get the entire disinvestment process completed as per norms laid down by Board of Directors after detailed discussion on each aspect as is apparent from Annexures P-5 to P-7.
In fact by pointing out errors, the petitioner prevented gross irregularities in the disinvestments and hence the allegation that he was causing hindrance is totally incorrect and have been restored to with ulterior motives of certain influential persons because the petitioner had become an eyesore for some people which led to his termination by throwing to the winds all settled norms of law.
48.
The petitioner reasserts that in his case, the discussions were held in the subsequent meeting only after he had pointed out that it was against settled norms of the Board of Directors who could not alter his terms and conditions of service.
The petitioner denies that he was doing anything for his personal benefits because he was not going to lose anything because of the disinvestments and in any case, he would have got his compensation for the remaining tenure as per Section 318(4) of the Companies Act in case of his ouster as Managing Director because he has the regular post of Joint Managing Director (Readio)/Director (Technical) to fall back upon.
49.
The petitioner submits that if there was any termination clause in the terms and conditions of his appointment, then there was no need of getting a legal opinion and he could have been straightaway terminated as per terms and conditions.
In any event, the legal opinion (Annexure P-8) says that in case of loss of office, the incumbent is entitled to compensation as per the Companies Act.
50.
The petitioner contends that there was no rationale behind the fact that no other Director tendered his resignation and it was only the petitioner, who was asked to tender his resignation and that too, when the disinvestment process was still in its early stages and the Board of Directors had decided that resignation had to be a blanket resignation.
The petitioner submits that he had tendered a draft resignation before the Board of Directors.
He further states that in fact, it was the "game plan of the certain vested interests" to get the petitioner out of their way.
51.
The petitioner vehemently denies that the resolution altering the terms and conditions of his appointment and his subsequent termination was ever circulated to all the Directors as per requirement.
He further submits, with reference to Annexure P-11, that two independent Directors, viz. Mr. Arun Kumar and Mr. VP Chandan did not receive the copy of the resolution although they were available in their respective places at the relevant time.
The meeting was scheduled at such a time when some of the Directors could not come in spite of their best efforts.
It is apparent from the records (minutes of meeting of the Board of Directors-Annexure P-13) that out of the seven members of the Board of Directors, one was the Company Secretary who cannot vote, four were Government Directors and two were independent Directors.
So, out of five members who passed the resolution, four were Government Directors and one i.e. Mjr.
Gen. Bains, who was an independent Director, raised his voice against the resolutions although he signed it but later on, asked for an emergency meeting.
The petitioner states that the period of termination notice was not reduced and in fact, a new clause i.e. the termination clause was added in the terms and conditions of his appointment without informing him.
This was illegal and it could not have been done without any information to him.
52.
The petitioner reiterates that the entire action of terminating his services was at the behest of the State of Punjab on behalf of certain vested interests who have close links in the Punjab Government and this would be further clear from the "cutting" appearing in the minutes (Annexure P-13A).
Due to these mala fide intentions, the resolutions were not sent to all the independent Directors and got signed by some members of Board of Directors with "lightning speed" A meeting of the Board of Directors was called on such a date when some of the Directors were already occupied and this was in the knowledge of everybody.
Then in the meeting also, only Government Directors approved the impugned resolutions except one independent Director, who expressed his discomfort at his decision which is apparent from the minutes of the meeting (Annexure P-13) and also asked for an emergency meeting to discuss this issue.
It is submitted that three independent Directors resigned under protest.
Further, Mr. Prithpal C.MD BSNL gave a milder reason for leaving the meeting of the Board of Directors as being pre-occupied but he nevertheless, condemned the termination of the petitioner's service as Managing Director in strongest possible terms (Refer Annexure P-14).
53.
The petitioner asserts that no employee is competent to change the terms and conditions of appointment of any employee to his/her disadvantage without hearing and informing him.
If that was so, then there was no need to give VRS to 400 employees of PUNCOM by giving about 36 months' remuneration amounting to Rs. 1086 crores.
Their terms and conditions of appointment could also have been changed like that of the petitioner and they could also have been thrown out like the petitioner without any information and hearing.
54.
The petitioner reiterates that Article 152 is applicable upon the petitioner.
Under Article 171, PSEPDC has the power to appoint and discuss full-time Directors, MD, VC and Chairman from amongst the Directors.
But there is no separate provision for the procedure to be adopted to remove the Managing Director, Vice Chairman or Chairman.
Hence Article 152 (laying down the procedure to be followed for removing the Director) is to be followed as Managing Director is appointed from amongst the Directors of the Board of Directors and is also one of the Directors.
Therefore, as per Article 152, 14 days' advance notice for the meeting is required to be given to all the Directors including the petitioner for removal of even the petitioners.
But in the present case, the petitioner was directly handed over the termination order without even intimating the resolutions passed against him by which it had been decided that he could be removed by the addition of a new clause.
The petitioner also states that two independent Directors, viz. Mr. Arun Kumar and Mr. VP Chandan were not even intimated about the impugned resolution although they were available at their respective places and nothing has been placed on record to prove that they were communicated about the resolutions.
55.
The petitioner states that he was not a party to the proceedings of the meeting held on 2941996 (Annexure R2/1).
He further states that even assuming that his appointment was on contract basis (which he does not admit), this was all the more reason why he should have been informed about the change being made in his contract of service so as to enable him to consider either to accept or not to accept.
He further states that the Board of Directors did not have the jurisdiction to change the terms and conditions of his appointment to his disadvantage.
No such clause of the Articles of Association or any relevant Statute has been pointed out.
In fact all such averments have been made in the air without corroborating them with any rules/evidence.
56.
The petitioner has submitted that it is incorrect to allege that the net worth of Company came down during his tenure because if it were so, his term of Office would not have been extended.
There is apparent malice and bias in the impugned action of the respondents.
Mere non-impleadment of any party by name does not make the allegations of bias and malice invalid.
The action of the respondents was high handed and resorted to with ulterior motives.
57.
The petitioner further states that he is entitled to 36 months' remuneration as per Section 318(4) of Companies Act and as per legal opinion (Annexure P-8).
58.
The petitioner denies that his appointment as Managing Director was on contract basis and therefore, for an illegal act of terminating his employment, a Writ Petition is maintainable.
59.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondents, has submitted at the very outset, that the Punjab Communications Limited (Respondent No. 2) is not a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
He has further submitted that initially M/s. Punjab State Industrial Electronics Development and Production Corporation Limited (PSEDPCL) owned 100% shares of M/s. PUNCOM but thereafter in the year 1994 this company (PUNCOM) came out with public issues as a result of which ultimately the share holding of PSEDPCL was reduced and as on date it holds only 70% while the remaining 30% is held by the general public.
Mr. Patwalia submits that in this view of the matter, the respondent No. 2, company cannot be said to be a Government Company at all.
He relies upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in India in the case of M/s. Zee Telefilms Limited and another v. Union of India and others, JT 2005(2) SC 8.
60.
This Court rejects the aforementioned contention to the effect that the Company is not a "State" for the following reasons.
From the written statement filed by the respondent Nos. 2 and 3, it has been admitted that at least, the holding of PUNCOM is M/s. PSEDPCL which is the Punjab State Electronics Development and Production Corporation Limited and which holds 70% of the shares of PUNCOM.
Now under the definition of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, a Government Company means "any Company in which not less than fifty-one per cent of the [paid-up share capital] is held by the Central Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or party by the Central Government and partly by one or more State Government, [and includes a company which is a subsidiary of a Government Company as thus defined].
61.
Admittedly, PSEDPCL which is a State Government Corporation owns 70% of the shares of PUNCOM.
This apart, Annexure P-1 is a letter dated 2071988 addressed to the petitioner sent by M/s. PUNCOM and this letter of 1988 is a letter head describing Punjab Communications Limited as "a Government Undertaking".
Similarly, the other letter head dated 19101993 is Annexure P-2 and this also is the letter head of M/s. PUNCOM describing the said Company as "a Government Undertaking".
In this context, it is necessary to mention that in Paragraph 2 of the Writ Petition, the petitioner has specifically stated that PUNCOM is an industry of the Government of Punjab and every letter pad of the company recites that it is a Government Undertaking.
The contents of Paragraph 2 of the Writ Petition have been answered in Paragraph 2 of the written statement but this specific assertion has not been answered.
Additionally, it is evident from reading Annexure R-2/1 that it is the minutes of the 95th meeting of the Board of Directors of PSEDPCL held on 2941996 in which decision was taken to appoint the petitioner on the post of Managing Director on a contract basis for a period of five years.
Moreover, item 9506 which approves the appointment shows that the petitioner was interviewed by a Committee consisting of various persons including the Secretary, Department of Industries and Commerce, Government of Punjab and the Member, Telecom Communications, Government of India.
It would be relevant to mention here at this stage that under the provisions of Section 192 of the Companies Act, 1956, a copy of every resolution taken in a meeting is required to be filed, within 30 days, before the Registrar for registration.
The decisions taken in the Resolutions appointing the petitioner and thereafter extending his term by another five years was duly registered under the provisions of Section 192.
Proof in support thereof has been filed in this case vide CM Nos. 15114 and 15115 of 2004.
These documents include the prescribed Forms and details required for registration in terms of the provisions of the Companies Act and they include the registration of details relating in terms and conditions of appointment of the petitioner and the subsequent changes.
From a perusal of these documents, it is evident that necessary information was given in the prescribed manner and were accordingly registered through Form 25-C relating to the decision taken on 2951996 concerning the appointment of the petitioner as Managing Director for a period of five years w.e.f.
3041996.
From 23 is the registration of the subsequent decision taken renewing the contract for a fresh period of five years.
In this document i.e. Form 23, it has been mentioned that the name of the company is M/s. Punjab Communications Limited and under Column No. 3, this company has been described to be a Government Company.
Finally, Annexure P-19, which has been brought on record by the petitioner in his replication to the written statement is the advertisement dated 20.2.1996 published in the Economics Times, New Delhi under the banner of PSEDPCL calling for applications for the post of Managing Director.
In this advertisement, it is stated that M/s. PSEDPCL "requires Managing Director for its subsidiary company, Punjab Communications Limited".
62.
For these reasons, this Court is of the view that the argument of M/s. PS Patwalia to the effect that PUNCOM is not a Government Company or that it is not a State, cannot be accepted.
In this context, it is also necessary to take into consideration a judgment of this Court passed in the case of Lt. Col. Guriqbal Singh v. Punjab Communications Limited, 1994(2) SCT 533 (P&H) : 1994(2) Recent Services Judgments 313 wherein it has been held in Paragraph 9 infra that the company was receiving full assistance from the State and that the State had full control over it and, therefore, the Corporation was a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and consequently, a Writ Petition was maintainable.
In view of the aforementioned reasoning, it does (not) lie in the mouth of the respondents to say that the respondent Company is either not a Government Company or is not a State within the meaning of Article 12.
These arguments are consequently repelled and it is held that M/s. PUNCOM is a Government Company and the State has deep and pervasive control over its affairs and therefore, it is amenable to writ jurisdiction.
63.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Sr. Advocate appearing for the petitioner submits that by reason of Annexure P-3, it will be evident that the appointment of the petitioner as Managing Director of PUNCOM was pursuant to the provisions of the Companies Act and that his appointment and extension were duly registered under the provisions of Section 192 of the said Act.
Learned Counsel then contends that the impugned Order dated 1132003 as contained in Annexure P-10 informing the petitioner that the Board of Directors had taken a decision to alter his terms and conditions of appointment and to terminate his services on payment of 30 days' remuneration in lieu of notice together with one month's salary, is illegal and without jurisdiction because in the Order appointing him as a Managing Director of the Company vide Annexure P-3 there was no condition that his services could be terminated or that he could be removed by giving three months' notice.
He further submits that in any event, his services could not have been dispensed with in the manner in which it was done because contrary to the provisions of Section 289 of the Companies Act, 1956, circulation of the impugned Resolution being Agenda No. 12103 (Annexure P-12) was not made to all the Directors.
He further submits the independent Directors dissented and some of them resigned.
He submits that these Directors were of the view that since there was no termination clause in the letter of appointment, the services of the MD could be dispensed with only by giving him 36 months' remuneration.
They also stated that the manner in which the petitioner was removed was not proper.
These views of the Directors are to be found between pages 89 to 93 and 110 to 115.
64.
Learned Counsel further submits that in fact, it is really at the behest of the State of Punjab that his services were terminated and this would be evident from the fact that vide Resolution No. (c) of the Agenda No. 12103 of the meeting of the Board of Directors, (Annexure P-12) it was decided that the Government of Punjab had appointed one Shri Vishwajeet Khanna, IAS as Vice Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Company vide letter dated 1132003.
65.
Learned Counsel further submits that once it is held that the Company is an authority and a "State" within the meaning of Article 12, the manner in which the services were terminated must be held to be totally in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
He further submits that the action of the respondents in terminating his services amounts to following a policy of "Hire and Fire" which is totally illegal and unconstitutional.
66.
After having carefully gone through the facts of this case and having considered the rival submissions made by the parties before this Court, it must be held that ultimately this Writ Petition cannot succeed and it has to be dismissed.
No doubt, the Writ Petition is maintainable and to that extent Mr. Patwalia's arguments are rejected but at the same time, the elaborate arguments and points of law propounded by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram cannot be entertained for the simple reason that the appointment itself was absolutely contractual in nature and the termination was also strictly as per the contract and therefore, this Court would not issue a Writ to enforce a contract of personal service.
From a perusal of the Written Statement, it is evident that the respondents have very ably demonstrated this point.
With reference to Annexures R-2/1 and R-2/2, it is established that the petitioner was actually appointed on 3041996 as Managing Director.
This appointment was purely on contract basis for a fixed period of 5 years and therefore, his services could certainly be terminated by giving three months' Notice on either side.
The appointment of the petitioner being contractual, the same therefore, cannot be enforced through a Writ Petition before this Court.
The present Writ Petition is in fact, in the nature of enforcement of a contract which is therefore, not maintainable and consequently, liable to be dismissed.
67.
This Court is therefore, not able to understand as to what prompted the petitioner not to disclose the aforesaid two documents (Annexures R-2/1 & R- 2/2) at the time of filing the Writ Petition.
These documents are so very crucial that they certainly demolish all arguments of the petitioner that his services could not have been terminated in the manner that it has been so done.
This Court has therefore, no option but to draw an adverse inference against the petitioner to the effect that he deliberately withheld these two documents from the notice of this Court so as to prevent it from coming to the conclusion that the appointment of the petitioner was (a) contractual and (b) that it did contain a termination clause contrary to what the petitioner has been painstakingly attempting to argue ad nauseam.
This Court is therefore, inclined to accept the statement of the respondents in their Written Statement to the effect that the petitioner has attempted to mislead this Court at various stages.
He has intentionally withheld the Order of Appointment dated 3041996 by which he was appointed as Managing Director of PUNCOM and it was pursuant to that appointment that he had already joined on the same date, i.e. on 3041996.
In fact, his appointment was as a result of the Resolution passed by PSEDPCL in their meeting held on 2941996.
The Board of Directors considered the appointment of Managing Director and decided to appoint the petitioner as such on contract basis for a period of 5 years.
It was clearly mentioned in the resolution itself that the said contract was terminable on 3 months' Notice on either side.
That Resolution dated 2941996, which is Annexure R-2/1 & the consequential Order dated 3041996 which is Annexure R- 2/2 read thus :-  Annexure R-2/1 : "After due consideration, the Board approved the appointment of Sh. AS Gill to the post of Managing Director for a period of five years on contract basis, terminable on three months notice on either side on a monthly salary of Rs. 30,000/- in the scale of Rs. 30000-2500-50000 plus usual perks as admissible to the Chief Executive of Punjab Wireless System Ltd The Board authorized the MD to issue letter of appointment to Sh.
Gill."
Annexure R-2/2 : "In terms of the provisions of Article 171 of the Articles of Association, we are pleased to appoint you as Managing Director of Punjab Communications Limited, our subsidiary company.
The appointment shall be for a period of 5 years on contract basis, terminable on 3 months' notice on either side, on a monthly salary of Rs. 30,000/- in the scale of Rs. 30000- 2500-50000 plus usual perks as admissible to the Chief Executive of Punjab Wireless Systems Limited."
68.
Thus it is clear that the both the resolutions as well as the letter of Appointment did contain terms to the effect that the contract could be terminated by 3 (three) months' Notice.
It is, therefore, manifestly clear that the petitioner deliberately and conveniently withheld these crucial documents so that he could argue before this Court that the terms and conditions of his appointment did not contain any termination or notice clause.
Had it not been for the respondents, this Court would not even have known about the existence of these two documents and in the absence of such vitally important facts, this Court would perhaps have been led to believe that :-  (a) that the appointment was not on contract basis; (b) that the appointment was not for a specified period of time; and (c) that the appointment could not be terminated by giving 3 (three) months' Notice.
69.
If, on the basis of non-production and non-disclosure of these two documents, the Court would have concluded as indicated above, it would have been totally contrary to the facts and the judgment of the Court would have been rendered ludicrous !!.
It is thus evident that in fact, the petitioner was appointed as Managing Director on 3041996 for a period of 5 years on contract basis with a clear understanding that the employment could be terminated by giving 3 months' Notice on either side and this fact has been suppressed/concealed by the petitioner.
70.
Consequently, this Court refused to believe the story built up by the petitioner in paragraph 4 of the Writ Petition to the effect that the 3 (three) months' Notice clause for termination of his services was discussed by the Board of Directors on 2951996 but the same was not included in the terms and conditions of his appointment because of his disagreement.
This is nothing but an attempt to "spin a yarn" as there is nothing on record to establish these tall claims of the petitioner and this Court therefore, has no hesitation in holding that in fact, no such deliberation took place because the appointment of the petitioner had already been made by PSEDPCL one month earlier on 3041996.
The Minutes of the Meeting attached by the petitioner as Annexure P-3 was only to clarify his remuneration and this would be evident from the agenda of the meeting held on 2951996 which clearly stated that the petitioner had already been appointed by the PSEDPCL on 3041996 (one month earlier) and therefore, his remuneration was accordingly fixed.
71.
It is further evident that vide Agenda No. 7805, which again has been brought on record by the respondents in their Written Statement vide Annexure R-2/3, the respondents, in order give a formal shape to the appointment dated 3041996, resolved that the BOD should give ex post facto approval of the appointment at the remuneration fixed by the Holding Company.
It is thus clear that there was no deviation from the terms already fixed by the appointment letter dated 3041996 which contained a clause that the services of the petitioner could be terminated by giving 3 (three) months' Notice and that the appointment was purely contractual.
These same terms and conditions were also repeated while extending his appointment w.e.f.
152001 and therefore, it is evidence that the petitioner has misled this Court by withholding material information and relevant documents which were so very crucial for this case.
72.
In the aforesaid background, if one notices the contents of the impugned Order dated 1132003 (Annexure P-10), it would be seen that it is in terms of a pure and simple contract which was decided not to be extended.
It is not punitive in nature and all that it says is that the Board of Directors of Punjab Communications Limited had decided, after changing the terms of his appointment, to terminate his term of Office as Vice-Chairman and Managing Director of PUNCOM after paying 30 days' remuneration in lieu of Notice and therefore, a Cheque towards dues + one month's pay amounting to Rs. 344323/- was enclosed therewith.
Such an order is a mere termination of contract without any stigmas attached and without the same being indicative of being punitive in nature.
Such an order, if allowed to be processed through a Writ Petition, would amount to processing a contract through a Writ Petition, would amount to processing a contract of personal service, which is beyond the scope of judicial review under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
73.
Moreover, it is also evident that these contractual terms and conditions of appointment were readily accepted by the petitioner at the time when the assignment was being offered to him or were being extended for another period of 5 years.
However, what is extremely important is that while extending his term for a fresh period of 5 years w.e.f.
152001, the Board of Directors, in their 100th Meeting vide Agenda No. 10204 as contained in Annexure P-4, resolved, inter alia, to so extend the period for another 5 years "without any change" in the other terms and conditions of his employment - in other words, the initial terms and conditions emanating from the 1st Resolution dated 2941996 and followed by the formal letter of appointment dated 3041996, were left absolutely intact.
74.
On this alternative prayer that the respondents be mandated to pay compensation to the petitioner by paying him 36 months' remuneration for the remaining term in terms of Section 318(4) of the Companies Act, 1956, this Court has no hesitation in rejecting the same as being a totally misconceived prayer resorted to with the intention of causing loss to the Exchequer and gain to the himself.
75.
No doubt the Section 318 of the Companies Act provides the payment of compensation to a Managing Director but the word used is "may" and, therefore, this cannot be construed to be mandatory especially more so in view of the remaining words contained therein and which includes the interpretation of sub-section (3) of Section 318 of the Companies Act.
Sub-section (3) lays down that no payment of compensation shall be paid to a Managing Director in the following cases :-  (a) where the Director resigns his Office in view of the reconstruction of the Company, or of its amalgamation with any other body corporate or bodies corporate, and is appointed as the Managing Director, Manager or other Officer of the reconstructed Company or of the body corporate resulting from the amalgamation; (b) where the Director resigns his Office otherwise than on the reconstruction of the Company or its amalgamation as aforesaid; (c) where the Office of the Director is vacated by virtue of Section 203 or any of the Clauses (a) to (l) of sub-section (1) of Section 283; (d) where the Company is being wound up, whether by (Order of the Tribunal) or voluntarily, provided the winding up was due to negligence or default of the Director; (e) where the Director has been guilty of fraud or breach of trust in relation to, or of gross negligence in or gross mismanagement of, the conduct of the affairs of the Company or any subsidiary or holding Company thereof; (f) where the Director has instigated, or has taken part directly or indirectly in bringing about, the termination of his office.
76.
In view of the statements made in paras 6 infra read with those contained in para-7 infra of the Written Statement suggesting inter alia :- (a) that the total loss incurred from operations being Rs. 7137 crores from 1996-97 to 2002-03 being the period when the petitioner was heading PUNCOM; and (b) that in order to delay the disinvesements, the petitioner was trying to apply all kinds of tactics so that his position as Vice Chairman and Managing Director in the company could be saved and, therefore, all acts which were being done by the petitioner were for his personal benefit and not at all for the benefit of the general public as asserted by him, this Court is of the view that the respondents could perhaps be held to justified if they took Section 318(3)(e) as a possible defence in refusing to pay compensation.
However this Court hastens to add that such an observation should not be construed to be conclusive because whether the petitioner was guilty of any of the misdemeanours indicated in Section 318(3)(e), would obviously involve giving findings on questions of fact after appreciating evidence and therefore, it would be sufficient to observe, that for a claim for compensation under the provisions of Section 318 of the Companies Act, 1956, as alternatively prayed for by the petitioner, he may move any other appropriate forum prescribed under the law but for such a remedy/grievance, he cannot invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court because such a grievance is really in the nature of a declaration declaring that the petitioner is entitled to recover damages arising out of breach of contract which cannot form subject matter of a writ proceeding.
77.
For the foregoing reasons, this Court is not inclined to entertain this Writ Petition.
This Court is also not inclined to consider the other arguments of the learned Counsel for the petitioner relating to statutory violations of the Companies Act, 1956, for the plain reason that for such violations, the Act itself has provided adequate forum where these can be agitated.
78.
The other reason why this Court is not inclined to interfere is because it has been held in the preceding paragraphs that the petitioner has misled this Court by withholding material information and relevant documents which were so very crucial for this case.
This Court would, therefore, have taken a very serious view of the matter and would have imposed heavy costs on the petitioner but in the facts and circumstances, leaves the matter at that.
Consequently, this Court holds that barring the argument that the Company is a "State", all other submissions made on behalf of the petitioner are rejected as being misconceived and devoid of merit.
The Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.