GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for quashing order dated 22111996 (Annexure P.8) passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Fatehgarh Sahib (respondent No. 3), vide which he terminated the petitioner's service on the allegation of remaining absent from duty without leave.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Special Police Officer on 1101993 in District Fatehgarh Sahib.
In June, 1996, he is said to have fallen sick and proceeded on leave for 5 days.
After treatment, he is said to have resumed duty.
On 22111996, his services were terminated vide order Annexure P.8, the relevant portion of which is reproduced below :  "The Incharge Traffic Wing, Gobindgarh vide his report No. 2214/5-A dated 13.11.1996 has reported that SPO Dharminder Kumar No. 49 was appointed in Traffic Wing Gobindgarh has been marked absent from 28.6.1996.
He has not joined so far.
This SPO by remaining absent without leave for such a long time has violated the discipline of the police department.
It is, therefore, recommended that he may be discharged from the police department.
While agreeing with the report of the Incharge Traffic Wing, Gobindgarh, the aforesaid SPO Dharminder Kumar No. 49 is ordered to be discharged from Police Department w.e.f.
28.6.1996."
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on several grounds including the one that the same is vitiated due to violation of the rules of natural justice.
He has averred that before terminating his service, respondent No. 3 neither held any enquiry nor gave him opportunity of defence against the allegation of remaining absent without leave and in this manner, he has been condemned unheard.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the petitioner was discharged from service because he remained absent from duty from 28.6.1996.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was holding a temporary assignment and, therefore, it was not necessary to hold enquiry before terminating his service.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
It is settled law that service of a temporary, ad hoc and officiating employee can be terminated in accordance with the terms of contract of employment without holding enquiry in accordance with the rules, if any, applicable and the principles of natural justice and without assigning reasons.
It is equally well settled that if the order terminating the services of such an employee is stigmatic or is by way of punishment, then notwithstanding the employer's assertion that it had taken action in accordance with the terms of contract of employment, the court can declare such order to be nullity on the ground of violation of the rules of natural justice.
6.
In Parshottam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36, the Supreme Court considered various facets of the termination of service of an employee.
Speaking for majority of the court, SR Das, J laid down the following proposition :-  "Any and every termination of service is not a dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
A termination of service brought about by the exercise of a contractual right is not per se dismissal or removal, as has been held by this court in Satish Chander Anand v. The Union of India, AIR 1953 SC 250 (supra).
Likewise the termination of service by compulsory retirement in terms of a specific rule regulating the conditions of service is not tantamount to the infliction of a punishment and does not attract Article 311(2) as has also been held by this Court in 1955-1 SCR 26 : AIR 1954 SC 369 ......
In short if the termination of service is founded on the right flowing from contract or the service rules then, prima facie, the termination is not a punishment and carries with it no evil consequences and so Article 311 is not attracted.
But even if the Government has, by contract or under the rules, the right to terminate the employment without going through the procedure prescribed for inflicting the punishment of dismissal, or removal or reducation in rank, the Government may, nevertheless, choose to punish the servant and if the termination of service is sought to be founded on misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or other disqualification, then it is a punishment and the requirements of Article 311 must be complied with ..... As already stated, if the servant has got a right to continue in the post, then, unless the contract of employment or the rules provide to the contrary, his services cannot be terminated otherwise than for misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or other good and sufficient cause.
A termination of the service of such a servant on such grounds must be a punishment and, therefore, a dismissal or removal within Article 311, for it operates as a forfeiture of his right and he is visited with the evil consequences of loss of pay and allowances.
It puts an indelible stigma on the officer affecting his future career ....
But the mere fact that the servant has no title to the post or the rank and the Government has, by contract, express or implied, or under the rules, the right to reduce him to a lower post does not mean that an order of reduction of a servant to a lower post or rank cannot in any circumstances be a punishment.
The real test for determining whether the reduction in such cases is or is not by way of punishment is to find out if the order for the reduction also visits the servant with any penal consequences......
The use of the expression, "terminate" or "discharge" is not conclusive.
In spite of the use of such innocuous expressions, the court has to apply the two tests mentioned above, namely, (1) Whether the servant had a right to the post or the rank or (2) whether he has been visited with evil consequences of the kind hereinafter referred to ?
If the case satisfies either of the two tests then it must be held that the servant has been punished and the termination of his service must be taken as a dismissal or removal from service....." 7.
In The State of Orissa and another v. Ram Narayan Das, AIR 1961 SC 177, another Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered the question whether termination of service of a probationer could be treated as dismissal or removal within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
The facts of that case were that the respondent was appointed as Sub Inspector in the Orissa Police Force in 1950 and was placed on probation.
On receipt of adverse report dated 2871954, the competent authority issued notice to the respondent calling upon him to show-cause why he should not be discharged from service "for gross neglect of duties and unsatisfactory work".
In the notice, ten specific instances of negligence of duty and two instances of misconduct i.e. acceptance of illegal gratification and fabrication of official record were set out.
In his reply, the respondent denied the allegations of misconduct and submitted that the same were based on the uncorroborated statements of witnesses, who were inimical to him.
He also asked for opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police considered his explanation and ordered his discharge from service.
The formal order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police contained the following words :-  "Probationary S.I.
Ramanarayan Das of Cuttack District is discharged from service for unsatisfactory work and conduct with effect from the date the order is served on him."
8.
The writ petition filed by the respondent questioning the termination of service was allowed by the High Court of Orissa and the order of discharge was quashed on the ground of violation of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the principles of natural justice.
While reversing the order of the High Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court referred to the earlier judgments including Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India (supra) and State of Bihar v. Gopi Kishore Prasad, AIR 1960 SC 689 and held :-  "The respondent had no right to the post held by him.
Under the terms of his employment, the respondent could be discharged in the manner provided by Rule 55-B Again mere termination of employment does not carry with it "any evil consequences such as forfeiture of his pay or allowances, loss of his seniority, stoppage or postponement of his future chances of promotion, etc.
It is then difficult to appreciate what "indelible stigma affecting the future career" of the respondent was cast on him by the order discharging him from employment for unsatisfactory work and conduct.
The use of the expression "discharge" in the order terminating employment of a public servant is not decisive : it may, in certain cases, amount to dismissal.
If a confirmed public servant holding a substantive post is discharged, the order would amount to dismissal or removal from service; but an order discharging a temporary public servant may or may not amount to dismissal.
Whether it amounts to an order of dismissal depends upon the nature of the enquiry, if any, the proceedings taken therein and the substance of the final order passed on such enquiry.
Where under the rules governing a public servant holding a post on probation, an order terminating the probation is to be preceded by a notice to show-cause why his service should not be terminated, and a notice is issued asking the public servant to show-cause whether probation should be continued or the officer should be discharged from service the order discharging him cannot be said to amount to dismissal involving punishment."
9.
The Supreme Court then referred to the facts of that particular case and held that the use of the expression "unsatisfactory work and conduct" in the order of discharge did not make the termination of the respondent's service as punitive.
10.
In Ranendra Chandra Banerjee v. Union of India, AIR 1963 SC 1552, termination of the appellant's service, who was a probationer, was upheld by the Supreme Court by observing that the limited purpose of the enquiry held by the employer was to find out whether he could be retained or not in the service.
11.
In Champaklal Chimanlal Shah v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 1854, the Supreme Court considered the question whether termination of the service of an employee which was preceded by the preliminary enquiry held for the purpose of finding out if a prima facie case is made out to start regular enquiry did not amount to stigma.
Wanchoo, J (as his Lordship then was), observed :-  "Once the preliminary enquiry was over, it was open to the employer not to make a regular enquiry for proving the guilt of the employee.
The employer could stop at that stage and pass a simple order of termination.
The facts as gathered or revealed in the preliminary enquiry would be the `motive' and not the `foundation' because there was no enquiry as to their correctness was made.
Such an order could not be treated as punitive."
12.
In Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 2192, the Supreme Court referred to the fact that the High Court had got conducted an enquiry into the allegation of misconduct through Director of Vigilance and then discharged the probationary officers by passing innocuous orders and held :-  "The order of termination of the services of Ishwar Chand Aggarwal is clearly by way of punishment in the facts and circumstances of the case....
The form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is by way of punishment.
Even an innocuously worded order terminating the service may, in the facts and circumstances of the case establish that an inquiry into allegation of serious and grave character of misconduct involving stigma has been made in infarction of Article 311.
In such a case, the simplicity of the form of the order will not give any sanctity.
That is exactly what has happended in the case of Ishwar Chand Aggarwal.
The order of termination is illegal and must be set aside."
13.
In Gujarat Steel Tubes v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sangh, 1980(2) SCC 593, Krishna Iyer, J highlighted the distinction between `motive' and `foundation' in the following words :-  "Masters and servants cannot be permitted to play hide and seek with the law of dismissals and the plain and proper criteria are not to be misdirected by terminological cover-ups or by appeal to psychic processes but must be grounded on the substantive reason for the order, whether disclosed or undisclosed.
The court will find out from other proceedings or documents connected with the formal order of termination what the true ground for the termination is.
If, thus scrutinised, the order has a punitive flavour in cause or consequence, it is dismissal.
If it falls short of this test, it cannot be called a punishment.
To put it slightly differently, a termination effected because the master is satisfied of the misconduct and of the consequent desirability of terminating the service of the delinquent servant, it is a dismissal, even if he had the right in law to terminate with an innocent order under the standing order or otherwise.
Whether, in such a case the grounds are recorded in a different proceedings from the formal order does not detract from is nature.
Nor the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the master abandons the enquiry and proceeds to terminate.
Given an alleged misconduct and live nexus between it and the termination of service the conclusion is dismissal, even if full benefits as on simple termination, are given and non-injurious terminology is used.
On the contrary, even if there is suspicion of misconduct the master may say that he does not wish to bother about it and may not go into his guilt but may feel like not keeping a man he is not happy with.
He may not like to investigate nor take the risk of continuing a dubious servant.
Then it is not dismissal but termination similiciter, if no injurious record of reasons or punitive pecuniary cut-back on its full termination benefits is found.
For, in facts, is conduct is not then the moving factor in the discharge.
We need not chase other hypothetical situations here."
14.
In Radhey Shyam Gupta v. UP State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd and another, 1999(1) SCT 366 (SC) : JT 1998(8) SC 585 their Lordships of the Supreme Court referred a large number of judicial precedents on the subject and laid down the following propositions :-  "It will be noticed from the above decisions that the termination of the services of a temporary servant or one on probation, on the basis of an assessment that his work is not satisfactory will not be punitive inasmuch as the above facts are merely the motive and not the foundation.
The reasons why they are the motive is that the assessment is not done with the object of finding out any misconduct on the part of the Officer, as stated by Shah, J (as he then was) in Ram Narayan Das's case.
It is done only with a view to decide whether he is to be retained or continued in service.
The position is not different even if a preliminary inquiry is held because the purpose of a preliminary inquiry is to find out if there is prima facie evidence of material to initiate a regular departmental inquiry.
It has been so decided in Champaklal's case.
The purpose of the preliminary inquiry is not to find out misconduct on the part of the Officer and if a termination follows without giving an opportunity, it will not be bad.
Even in a case where a regular departmental inquiry is started, a charge-memo issued, reply obtained, and an enquiry Officer is appointed - if at that point of time, the inquiry is dropped and a simple notice of termination is passed, the same will not be punitive because the enquiry officer has not recorded even nor given any findings on the charges.
That is what is held in Sukh Raj Bahadur's case and in Benjamin's case.
In the latter case, the departmental inquiry was stopped because the employer was not sure of establishing the guilt of the employee.
In all these cases the allegations against the employee merely raised a cloud on his conduct and as pointed by Krishna Iyer J in Gujarat Steel Tubes case, the employer was entitled to say that he would not continue an employee against whom allegations were made the truth of which the employer was not interest to ascertain.
In fact, the employer, by opting to pass a simple order of termination as permitted by the terms of appointment or as permitted by the rules was conferring a benefit on the employee by passing a simple order of termination so that the employee would not suffer from any stigma which would attach to the rest of his career if a dismissal or other punitive order was passed.
The above are all examples where the allegations whose truth has not been found, and were merely the motive.
But in cases where the termination is preceded by an inquiry and evidence is received and findings as to misconduct of a definitive nature are arrived at behind the back of the Officer and where on the basis of such a report, the termination order is issued, such an order will be violative of principles of natural justice inasmuch as the purpose of the inquiry is to find out the truth of the allegations with a view to punish him and not merely to gather evidence for a future regular departmental inquiry.
In such cases, the termination is to be treated as based or founded upon misconduct and will be punitive.
These are obviously not cases where the employer feels that there is a mere cloud against the employee's conduct but are cases where the employer has virtually accepted the definitive and clear findings of the Inquiry Officer, which are all arrived at behind the back of the employee - even though such acceptance of findings is not recorded in the order of termination.
That is why the misconduct is the foundation and not merely order of termination.
That is why the misconduct is the foundation and not merely the motive, in such cases."
15.
In Dipti Parkash Banerjee v. Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and others, 1999(1) SCT 861 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 983, the Supreme Court quashed termination of the appellant's service, who was a probationer, by observing that even though, the order terminating his service did not contain any stigma, the letters written immediately before actual termination of service clearly indicated that the action of the employer was founded on serious allegations of misconduct.
The general proposition of law laid down in that case reads thus :-  "As to in what circumstances an order of termination of a probationer can be said to be punitive or not depends upon whether certain allegations which are the cause of the termination are the motive or foundation.
If findings were arrived at in inquiry as to misconduct, behind the back of the officer or without a regular departmental enquiry, the simple order of termination is to be treated as `founded' on the allegations and will be bad.
But if the inquiry was not held, no findings were arrived at and the employer was not inclined to conduct an inquiry but, at the same time, he did not want to continue the employee against whom there were complaints, it would only be a case of motive and the order would not be bad.
Similar is the position if the employer did not want to inquire into the truth of the allegations because of delay in regular departmental proceedings or he was doubtful about securing adequate evidence.
In such a circumstance, the allegations would be a motive and not the foundation and the simple order of termination would be valid."
16.
In Chandra Prakash Shahi v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, 2000(2) SCT 946 (SC), their Lordships of the Supreme Court reiterated the rule that the Court can lift the veil to find out the reality, motive and foundation of an innocuously worded order and held that where the preliminary enquiry was held to find out the involvement of the employee in the incident of quarrel and not to find out his general suitability for further retention in service or his confirmation, the order terminating his service was liable to be treated as punitive.
Paragraphs 26 to 28 of that judgment, which contain the ratio, read as under :-  "26.
The whole case law is thus based on the peculiar facts of each individual case and it is wrong to say that decision have been swinging like a pendulum; right, the order is valid; left, the order is punitive.
It was urged before this Court, more than once including in Ram Chandra Trivedi's case (supra) that there was a conflict of decisions on the question of order being a simple termination order or a punitive order, but every time the Court rejected the contention and held that the apparent conflict was on account of different facts of different cases requiring the principles already laid down by this Court in various decisions to be applied to a different situation.
But the concept of "motive" and "foundation" was always kept in view.
27.
The important principles which are deducible on the concept of "motive" and "foundation" concerning a probationer, are that a probationer has no right to hold the post and his services can be terminated at any time during or at the end of the period of probation on account of general unsuitability for the post in question.
If for the determination of suitability of the probationer for the post in question or for his further retention in service or for confirmation, an enquiry is held and it is on the basis of that enquiry that a decision is taken to terminate his service, the order will not be punitive in nature.
But, if there are allegations of misconduct and an enquiry is held to find out the truth of that misconduct and an order terminating the service is passed on the basis of that enquiry, the order would be punitive in nature as the enquiry was held not for assessing the general suitability of the employee for the post in question, but to find out the truth of allegations of misconduct against that employee.
In this situation, the order would be founded on misconduct and it will not be a mere matter of "motive".
28.
"Motive" is the moving power which impels action for a definite result, or to put it differently, "motive" is that which incites or stimulates a person to do an act.
An order terminating the services of an employee is an act done by the employer.
What is that factor which impelled the employer to take this action ?
If it was the factor of general unsuitability of the employee for the post held by him, the action would be upheld in law.
If, however, there were allegations of serious misconduct against the employee and a preliminary enquiry is held behind his back to ascertain the truth of those allegations and a termination order is passed thereafter, the order, having regard to other circumstances, would be founded on the allegations of misconduct which were found to be true in preliminary enquiry."
17.
In Pavanendra Narayan Verma v. Sanjay Gandhi PGI of Medical Sciences and another, 2002(2) SCT 358 (SC) : 2002(1) SCC 520, the Supreme Court again referred to various judgments including Radhey Shyam v. UP State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd and another (supra); Dipti Parkash Banerjee v. Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and others (supra) and Chandra Parkash Shahi v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others (supra) and laid down the following proposition :-  "One of the judicially evolved tests to determine whether in substance an order of termination is punitive is to see whether prior to the termination there was a full-scale formal enquiry into allegations involving moral turpitude or misconduct which culminated in a finding of guilt.
If all three factors are present the termination has been held to be punitive irrespective of the form of the termination order.
Conversely if any one of the three factors is missing, the termination has been upheld.
Generally speaking when a probationer's appointment is terminated it means that the probationer is unfit for the job, whether by reason of misconduct or ineptitude, whatever the language used in the termination order may be.
Although strictly speaking, the stigma is implicit in the termination, a simple termination is not stigmatic.
A termination order which explicitly states what is implicit in every order of termination of a probationer's appointment, is also not stigmatic.
In order to amount to a stigma, the order must be in a language which imputes something over and above mere suitability for the job."
18.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court then noted the fact that the service of the appellant had been terminated because his work and conduct had not been found satisfactory and held that the action taken by the employer was not punitive.
19.
In Shailaja Shivajirao Patil v. President, Hon'ble Khasdar UGS Sanstha and others, 2002(10) SCC 394, termination of the appellant's service passed in the background of the warning given to her in writing about certain draw-backs in her work was held to be not punitive.
20.
In Mathew P Thomas v. Kerala State Civil Supply Corpn.
Ltd. and others, 2003(1) SCT 1051 (SC) : 2003(3) SCC 623, the Supreme Court noted that even though, termination of the appellant's service, who was on probation, was preceded by show-cause notice containing serious allegation of misconduct, but the same was not punitive because the order of termination was not founded on the allegation of misconduct.
21.
The principles which can be culled out from the aforementioned judgments are :-  (1) A person appointed on probation or on temporary, ad hoc and officiating basis does not have the right to hold the post.
(2) The employer can terminate the service of such an employee if his work, conduct and/or performance is not found satisfactory.
For this purpose, the employer can get a preliminary enquiry conducted into the work, conduct and performance of the employee and can also take into consideration other relevant material which may have bearing on these factors.
(3) Even if a case for regular departmental enquiry is made out against the probationer and/or temporary, ad hoc and officiating employee, but the employer does not want to prolong the matter, then it can terminate the service of the employee by an innocuous order without casting any stigma.
(4) The employer can, by opting to pass a simple order of termination of service of a person appointed on probation or on temporary, ad hoc and officiating basis in accordance with the terms of the appointment, avoid the consequences which may ensue by passing a punitive order.
(5) If the termination of the service of a probationer or a person appointed on temporary, ad hoc and officiating basis is preceded by an enquiry in which he is associated, evidence is received and a definite finding of the misconduct is recorded, then the order of termination, though innocuous, will be treated as punitive.
(6) If the employee challenges an innocuous order terminating his service on the ground that it is punitive or stigmatic, the Court is entitled to pierce the veil of innocuousness and then decide whether the allegation of misconduct was merely motive or the foundation of the action taken by the employer.
22.
In the above backdrop, I shall now consider whether the action taken by respondent No. 3 to dispense with the service of the petitioner is vitiated due to violation of the rules of natural justice.
The admitted facts of the case show that the petitioner's service was terminated on the allegation of remaining absent from duty without leave and consequential violation of the discipline of the police department.
It is also not in dispute that before passing the impugned order, respondent No. 3 neither held any enquiry nor he gave action-oriented notice and opportunity of hearing to the petitioner to defend himself against the allegation of absence from duty without leave.
To put it differently, the petitioner's service was terminated without complying with the basics of natural justice.
23.
In Civil Writ Petition No 17572 of 1997, a Division Bench of this Court considered the legality of an order substantially similar to the one impugned in this petition and quashed the same on the ground of violation of the rules of natural justice.
24.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P-8 is declared illegal and quashed entitling the petitioner to be reinstated.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to take him back in service immediately on presentation of certified copy of this order.
However, it is made clear that the competent authority shall be free to pass fresh order after holding enquiry and/or complying with the rules of natural justice.
The question of payment of back wages to the petitioner for the period between 28.6.1996 and the date of reinstatement would depend on the action which the competent authority may take after complying with the rules of natural justice.
The authority concerned is directed to pass an appropriate order within a period of next six months.
If after holding an enquiry and/or hearing the petitioner, the concerned authority comes to the conclusion that the petitioner had absented from duty and his service deserved to be terminated, then he shall not be entitled to back wages.
If, on the other hand, the competent authority comes to the conclusion that the petitioner's service was wrongly terminated, then he shall be entitled to full back wages.
Petition allowed.