GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against order dated 1551996 vide which the learned Single Judge allowed Civil Writ Petition No. 7453 of 1987 filed by respondent No. 1 - Vinod Kumar and directed the official respondents to treat him senior to the appellants in the cadre of Clerks and consider his case for promotion to the post of Assistant with effect from the date the appellants were promoted with a further direction that if vacancy in the cadre of Assistants is not available, then the junior out of the two shall stand reverted.
2.
The appellants were initially appointed as Clerks on ad hoc basis vide order dated 2761979 issued by Director of Panchayats, Haryana (respondent No. 3).
The tenure of their appointment was for six months or till the availability of the candidates selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board (for short, `the Board') whichever was earlier.
This condition was imposed because regular recruitment of Clerks in the Panchayat Department could be made only in accordance with the Haryana Panchayat (State Service Group `C') rules, 1979 (for short, `the 1979 Rules') and on the recommendations of the Board which had been constituted by the State Government vide notification No. 523-3GS-70-2068 dated 2811970.
3.
Although the appellants were appointed only for six months, they were allowed to continue in service as ad hoc Clerks because the candidates selected by the Board were not made available for regular appointment.
In 1981, they applied for regular recruitment as Clerks in response to the advertisement issued by the Board.
Respondent No. 1 also applied for the said post.
Respondent No. 1 was selected on the basis of merit, but on account of their poor performance, the appellants could not make to the select list.
The Board forwarded the name of respondent No. 1 to respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 2781982, but the letter issued the order of appointment only on 7121982.
4 In the meanwhile, Chief Secretary, Haryana sent communications to the Heads of Departments to supply details of ad hoc Clerks working in their departments as on 141982.
Subsequently, they were asked to furnish the number of ad hoc Clerks working up to 1591982.
After collecting the necessary data, the State Government took a policy decision to regularise the services of ad hoc Clerks who had completed two years' service as on 1591982.
In furtherance of that decision, the government issued notification No. GSR.6.Const./Art.309/83 dated 311983.
5.
As a result of implementation of the policy contained in notification dated 311983, the services of large number of ad hoc Clerks including the appellants were regularised w.e.f.
1591982.
In the tentative seniority list of Clerks of the Panchayat Department circulated vide letter dated 11121986, the appellants were shown senior to respondent No. 1.
He represented against the fixation of his seniority below the appellants by asserting that after having been rejected by the Board, they cannot be ranked senior to him.
Respondent No. 3 did not decide his representation.
Instead, he promoted the appellants to the posts of Assistants vide order dated 19101987.
6.
Respondent No. 1 challenged the promotion of the appellants in Civil Writ Petition No. 7453 of 1987 by contending that respondent No. 3 could not have promoted them ignoring the fact that he had been appointed on regular basis vide order dated 7121982, whereas their services were regularised vide order dated 2891983.
He pleaded that the appellants cannot be treated senior to him simply because their services were regularised w.e.f.
1591982.
He further pleaded that in terms of Rule 12 of the 1979 Rules, his seniority ought to have been fixed as per the merit assigned by the Board in the selection held in 1981-82 and the appellants, who were not selected, cannot be placed above him.
7.
The official respondents defended the placement of the appellants above respondent No. 1 by contending that the action taken by the department was in conformity with notification dated 311983.
According to them, the appellants were shown senior to respondent No. 1 because their services had been regularised w.e.f.
1591982, whereas he had joined service on 9121982.
8.
In their separate written statement, the appellants averred that by virtue of regularisation of their services w.e.f.
1591982, they had become entitled to be ranked senior to respondent No. 1 who was appointed vide order dated 7121982.
9.
On a consideration of the pleadings of the parties and arguments made before him, the learned Single Judge held that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 (appellants herein), who were rejected by the Board in 1982, could not have been ranked senior to the writ petitioner (respondent No. 1 herein) merely because their services were regularised w.e.f.
1591982.
He further held that the clause relating to seniority contained in notification dated 311983 was general in nature and the same could not override the provision contained in Rule 12 of the 1979 Rules which regulate seniority of the members of service (Group `C' posts) in the Panchayats Department.
The learned Single Judge also held that the rule of continuous length of service cannot be invoked to fix the seniority of ad hoc Clerks above the regularly selected candidate.
The relevant extracts of the order passed by the learned Single Judge are reproduced below :  "When the notification of January 4, 1983 is read along with these rules, it appears that the exclusion of the posts from the purview of the Board was effective from January 4, 1983.
It did not affect the seniority of the persons who had been appointed by direct recruitment and whose seniority stood determined by the operation of Rule 12.
It is only in those cases where either no statutory rules existed or no direct recruitment had been made through the Subordinate Services Selection Board that the provision of the notification dated January 4, 1983 regarding determination of seniority of the persons whose services had been regularised vis-a-vis others was to be applicable.
If the provisions of the notification are read down in this manner, these will not only help the meritorious candidates to remain senior to those who have been rejected but would also save the notification from a possible challenge on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Neither on a plain reading nor by any process of construction can the notification of January 4, 1983 supersede the pre-existing statutory rules governing the service.
No provision has been made in this notification which may even remotely suggest that is to have an overriding effect.
In the absence of such a provision, it cannot be said that the seniority of the persons appointed by regularisation vis-a-vis those who have been directly recruited shall be determined in accordance with clause (vi) and not according to the provisions of the statutory rules.
To illustrate, two persons A and B are selected by the Board in that order of merit.
A joins on September 16, 1982.
B joins on September 14, 1982.
In spite of the fact that A has joined two days later than B, he would remain senior because he is higher in the order of merit.
However, by operation of clause (vi) of the notification dated January 4, 1983, A would become junior to all the Clerks whose services have been regularised w.e.f.
September 15, 1982.
There would thus be a direct conflict between the statutory rules and the notification of January 4, 1983.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the inter se seniority of the person has to be determined under Clause (vi) of the notification dated January 4, 1983.
In fact, the seniority shall have to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the special rules which have been enacted in respect of the conditions of service of the persons working in the Panchayat Department.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it is held that the general provisions of the circular dated January 4, 1983 cannot supersede the statutory rules governing the members of the service.
The rules having been framed prior in time and the notification dated January 4, 1983 having not been given an overriding effect by either making an express proviso or by implication, it cannot supersede the statutory rules.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner and respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had competed for recruitment to the posts of Clerks.
In spite of the fact that the said respondents had considerable experience, the petitioner was found to be more meritorious and he was selected.
According to the provisions of Rule 12 as already noticed, the inter se seniority of the persons selected for direct recruitment has to be determined by the order of merit.
The person who is higher in order of merit has to be senior to the one who is below him.
It follows that those who are rejected or persons whose names are not included in the merit list cannot be senior to those who are selected.
Consequently, in view of the provisions of Rule 12, a rejected candidate cannot be senior to a person who has been selected by the Board and appointed in pursuance to the action.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The appointments on ad hoc basis are normally made to meet the exigencies of service.
Even in the present case, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were appointed on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the recommendees of SSS Board arrive whichever is earlier.
On advertisement of the posts, the petitioner as well as respondents Nos. 3 and 4 had competed.
While the petitioner was selected, the respondents 3 and 4 were rejected.
Yet their services have been regularised with effect from September 15, 1982.
In this situation, the regularisation of the services of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 with a retrospective effect is virtually in the nature of a concession.
Such persons who get regular appointment in spite of rejection in open competitive selection, cannot be treated as senior to those who have been found to be meritorious and have been selected.
If this is permitted, the merit would become wholly irrelevant.
Surely, such cannot be the situation in public services.
Such a course of the action would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It would be arbitrary, unfair and unjust."
10.
Shri RK Malik referred to clause (vi) of notification dated 311983 and argued that seniority of the appellants was correctly fixed above respondent No. 1 because their services were regularised w.e.f.
1591982, whereas he had joined service on 9121982.
Shri Malik emphasised that retrospective regularisation of the services of the appellants had the effect of making them members of service prior to respondent No. 1 and as such, they were rightly ranked senior to him and then promoted to the posts of Assistant.
In support of his arguments, Shri Malik relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Desoola Rama Rao and another v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, AIR 1988 SC 857 and of this Court in Daljit Singh Minhas and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1978(1) SLR 32; PK Satheesh and others v. State of Kerala and others, 1991(8) SLR 419 and Ram Niwas Verma and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 139 (P&H) : 1994(2) SLR 420.
11.
Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana supported Shri RK Malik and argued that the order of the learned Single Judge is liable to be set aside because the view taken by him is contrary to the law laid down in Ram Niwas Verma v. State of Haryana and others (supra).
He pointed out that the process of framing policy for regularisation of the services of ad hoc employees was initiated in early 1982, but it took nine months to the Government to take final decision and argued that the provision contained in clause (vi) of notification dated 311983 for fixation of seniority of ad hoc Clerks who were regularised w.e.f.
1591982 vis-a-vis the Clerks regularly appointed up to that date does not suffer from any legal or constitutional infirmity.
He further argued that the cut-off date specified in notification dated 311983 cannot be termed as arbitrary because all the ad hoc Clerks who had completed two years service on 1591982, were brought under the scheme of regularisation.
12.
Shri Arun Palli, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that clause (vi) of notification dated 311983 should be declared ultra vires to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and Rule 12 of 1979 Rules in so far as it seeks to make the ad hoc Clerks, like the appellants senior to respondent No. 1, who was appointed on the recommendations of the Board.
Shri Palli submitted that notification dated 311983 did not have the effect of taking the posts of Clerks out of the purview of the Board with retrospective effect and therefore, the cut-off date specified in clauses (i) and (vi) thereof should be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
13.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions.
It is not in dispute that recruitment to the posts of Clerks in the Panchayats Department is regulated by the 1979 Rules.
Rule 7 of the 1979 Rules provides that no person shall be appointed to the service unless he fulfils the qualifications prescribed in Appendix `B'.
Rule 9 lays down that recruitment to the service shall be made (i) by promotion or (ii) by direct recruitment or (iii) by transfer on deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
Matric with Hindi has been prescribed as the minimum qualification for direct recruitment.
Rule 12 lays down that seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the service.
First proviso to that rule lays down that where there are different cadres in the service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre.
Second proviso lays down that in the case of members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Board, shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
14.
A conjoint reading of the rules reproduced above makes it clear that even though Rule 9 does not speak of direct recruitment on the recommendations of the Board, no person can be appointed on the post of Clerk in the Panchayat Department by direct recruitment, otherwise than on the recommendations of the Board because seniority of such appointees is to be fixed keeping in view the order of merit determined by the Board.
15.
At this stage, we deem it proper to mention that just after 3 years and 3 months of its creation under the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966, the Government of the State of Haryana decided to constitute the Board for selection for making recruitment to non-gazetted Class-III posts.
In furtherance of that decision, notification dated 2811970 was issued.
The relevant extracts of that notification are reproduced below :  "GENERAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT GENERAL SERVICES NOTIFICATION The 28th January, 1970 No. 523-3GS-70/2068 - In exercise of the powers conferred by Article 209 of the Constitution of India and in modification of all other rules in this behalf, the Governor of Haryana hereby constitutes, with effect from the date of the publication of this notification, a Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The constitution of the Board, the terms and conditions of service of the members thereof and its functions shall be as follows : 1 to 5 x x x x x x  6.
Functions : All appointments to non-gazetted Class III posts under the Haryana Government, except appointments of officers and employees of the Punjab and Haryana High Court provided for in Article 229 of the Constitution of India, shall be made on the advice of the Board : Provided that the State Government shall be competent to exclude any such posts from the purview of the Board."
16.
A perusal of clause 6 of the above reproduced notification shows that w.e.f.
2811970, all appointments to non-gazetted Class III posts which include the posts of Clerks (except appointment of officers and employees of the Punjab and Haryana High Court) were to be made on the advice of the Board.
In other words, after 2811970, no appointment to non-gazetted Class III post could be made except on the advice of the Board.
17.
After the constitution of the Board, it was hoped that recruitment to all Class III posts would be made on the recommendations of the Board and the spoil system prevailing in the State of making appointments to public posts without considering the competing claims of eligible persons, which was in complete violation of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India would come to an end.
However, what actually happened was just to the contrary because various functionaries of the State Government, and public bodies devised novel methods and means to by-pass the Board and they continued to make appointment on ad hoc and daily wage basis and in order to confer legitimacy to such appointments, successive governments framed policies of regularisation of the services of ad hoc/daily wage/work charged employees.
One such policy was issued vide order/notification dated 111980.
The second one was issued vide notification dated 311983, the relevant portions of which are reproduced below :  "HARYANA GOVERNMENT GENERAL ADMINISTRATION GENERAL SERVICES Notification The 3rd January, 1983 No. G.S.R.
6.
Const./Art.309/83 - In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, read with proviso to clause 6 of notification No. 523-3GS-70/2068 dated the 28th January, 1970, the Government of Haryana hereby excludes from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, such class III posts of Clerks as have been held, for a minimum period of two years on the 15th September, 1982 by ad hoc Clerks who are to be regularised if they fulfil the following conditions :  (i) Only such ad hoc Clerks who have completed two years' service on the 15th September, 1982 and were in service on 15th September, 1982 may be regularised against the posts/vacancies of Clerks.
The recommendees of the Subordinate Services Selection Board should be absorbed against the remaining vacancies.
Those recommendees of the Board who cannot be absorbed, their names be returned to the Board to enable them to recommend their names to other departments for appointment against clear vacancies; (ii) against the reserved posts/vacancies, only such ad hoc clerks be regularised who belong to the category for which the posts stand reserved; (iii) only such ad hoc Clerks as have been recruited through the Employment Exchange or directly by the appointing authority after obtaining non- availability certificate from the Employment Exchange should be made regular; (vi) the work and conduct of the ad hoc Clerks proposed to be regularised should be of an over-all good category and no disciplinary proceeding is pending against them; and (v) only those ad hoc Clerks should be considered for regularisation who possessed the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of their appointment on ad hoc basis.
(vi) The seniority of the ad hoc Clerks so regularised may, vis-a- vis the Clerks appointed on regular basis, be determined with effect from 15th September, 1982.
The inter se seniority of such ad hoc Clerks shall be determined in accordance with the date of their joining on the post on ad hoc basis.
If the date of joining the post on ad hoc basis by such Clerks was the same, then an older member shall rank senior."
18.
By virtue of the aforementioned notification, Class-III posts of Clerks held by ad hoc appointees for a minimum period of 2 years as on 1591982 were taken out of the purview of the Board with effect from 311983.
This is crystal clear from the expression "Governor of Haryana excludes from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board" used in the opening paragraph of notification dated 311983.
Therefore, the earliest date with reference to which the services of such ad hoc Clerks could be regularised was 311983.
Clause (i) of the notification speaks of regularisation of the services of ad hoc Clerks who had completed two years service on 1591982 and were in service on that date, but does not specify the date from which the services of such Clerks were to be regularised.
However, while implementing the policy contained in notification dated 311983, the departmental authorities including respondent No. 3 regularised the services of ad hoc Clerks w.e.f.
1591982 under a mistaken impression that the decision of the government to take the posts of Clerks out of the purview of the Board was retroactive and was effective from 1591982.
This appears to have been done because clause (vi) of the notification provides for determination of seniority of ad hoc Clerks vis-a-vis the Clerks appointed on regular basis w.e.f.
1591982.
19.
In our opinion, the services of ad hoc Clerks, who had completed two years service on 1591982 could not have been regularised from a date earlier than 311983 because till then the posts remained within the purview of the Board and no regular appointment could have been made otherwise than on the recommendations of the Board.
20.
As a logical corollary to the above conclusion, we hold that seniority of ad hoc Clerks, who were regularised in terms of notification dated 311983, could not have been fixed above the Clerks appointed on regular basis upto 311983 and clause (vi) of the notification which provides for fixation of seniority of Clerks w.e.f.
1591982, is liable to be treated ultra vires to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and Rule 12 of the 1979 Rules.
21.
We are further of the view that the appellants, who had competed for recruitment to the posts of Clerks along with respondent No. 1 but had not been selected, cannot be ranked senior to him because that would amount to total negation of the merit which constitutes the criteria for determination of seniority of the persons appointed on the recommendations of the Board.
22.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by directing that seniority of respondent No. 1 who was regularly appointed on the recommendations of the Board shall be fixed above the appellants, whose services were regularised in terms of notification dated 311983.
23.
We may now advert to the judgments on which reliance has been placed by Shri RK Malik.
In Daljit Singh Minhas and others v. The State of Punjab and others (supra), a Full Bench of five Judges of this Court held that the State either by framing rules to this effect and in the absence of the rules, by executive instructions can exclude direct appointment to a post altogether and confine it to promotion from among the existing employees.
This judgment has no bearing on the issue raised before us because the Full Bench was not called upon to consider or interpret the policy of regularisation framed by the government.
24.
In Ram Niwas Verma v. State of Haryana and others (supra), a learned Single Judge considered the issue relating to inter se seniority of the ad hoc Clerks, who were regularised in terms of notification dated 311983 vis-a-vis those appointed on regular basis.
The facts of that case show that the petitioners were appointed as Clerks in the Haryana Civil Secretariat on the recommendations of the Board in August, 1982.
The services of respondent Nos. 2 to 60, who had been appointed as Clerks on purely ad hoc basis, were regularised w.e.f.
1591982 in terms of notification dated 311983.
After regularisation of their services, respondent Nos. 2 to 60 made efforts and succeeded in being ranked senior to the petitioners.
The petitioners challenged the decision of the government to fix the seniority of the private respondents above them on the ground of violation of Rule 9 of the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1952, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The learned Single Judge referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Desoola Rama Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh (supra) and held that fixation of seniority of the private respondents did not suffer from any legal infirmity.
With respect, we are unable to agree with the view expressed by the learned Single Judge in Ram Niwas Verma v. State of Haryana (supra) because while holding that respondent Nos. 2 to 60, whose services were regularised w.e.f.
1591982, were rightly ranked senior to the writ petitioners who had been appointed by direct recruitment on the recommendations of the Board, he overlooked the fact that the posts against which the private respondents had been regularised were taken out of the purview of the Board only w.e.f.
311983 and till that date, no appointment could be made against those posts except on the recommendations of the Board.
25.
In Desoola Rama Rao and another v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others (supra), the Supreme Court held that as a consequence of retrospective regularisation of their services, seniority of the respondents had to be fixed from the date of regularisation.
The facts of that case were that the appellants had been directly recruited as Assistant Engineers on 29.4.l966.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were temporarily appointed as Assistant Engineers on 14.8.1959 and 19.5.1960 respectively.
Their services were regularised in 1967 with retrospective effect from 1951961 in terms of Rule 23(a) of the Andhra Pradesh State Subordinate Service Rules, 1962.
The appellants did not challenge the vires of the Rules, but prayed that the order passed by the government for fixing the seniority of the non-official respondents should be quashed.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that as a consequence of retrospective regularisation of their services, the respondents were rightly ranked senior to the appellants.
While rejecting the claim of the appellants, the Supreme Court observed as under :  "In the instant case, the date from which regularisation has been directed to take effect is not anterior to their appointment as Assistant Engineers.
That being the position, regularisation is not vitiated on account of arbitrariness."
26.
In our opinion, the above noted proposition cannot be applied to the present case because in the writ petition, respondent No. 1 had not only questioned the fixation of seniority of the appellants above him, but had also challenged the validity of the cut-off date, i.e., 1591982 specified in notification dated 311983.
27.
In K Satheesh and others v. State of Kerala and others (supra), the learned Single Judge of Kerala High Court dealt with the issue relating to inter se seniority between the direct recruits and promotees and held that a direct recruit appointed on the advice of the Public Service Commission cannot be ranked senior to a promotee by being given the benefit of ad hoc promotion.
Therefore, that judgment is not, at all, relevant for deciding the issue raised in this appeal.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed.
However, it is made clear that if vacancies in the cadre of Assistant had become available after 19101987 and the appellants are found entitled to promotion against those vacancies, then they may be adjusted against such vacancies.
Appeal dismissed.