GS Singhvi, J - By this order, we are disposing of two Letters Patent Appeals filed against order dated 6111997 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983-Kamal Singh Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others and C.W.P.
No. 7778 of 2001, filed by Mange Ram Patlan for quashing order dated 1892000 passed by Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Labour and Employment Department for promotion of Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer and Deputy Labour Commissioner w.e.f.
2711983 and 2911993, respectively.
2.
For deciding the issues arising in the appeals and the writ petition, we have culled out the facts from the pleadings of the parties and the record produced by the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General.
3.
Shri ML Malik, father of Shri Anupam Malik (appellant in L.P.A. No. 666 of 1997), who was then serving as Deputy Labour Commissioner, died on 29.8.1982.
His wife - Smt. Kamla Malik submitted applications to the Labour Commissioner and the Chief Minister of Haryana with the request that her son - Anupam Malik, who was a Science Graduate, may be appointed against a gazetted post on compassionate ground.
While processing the applications, the Administrative Department pointed out that as per the extent policy of ex- gratia, appointment on compassionate ground could be made only on a Class-III or Class-IV post and if it was considered desirable to appoint Shri Anupam Malik on a Class-II post, then decision in that regard will have to be taken by the Cabinet.
It was also pointed out that Shri Anupam Malik does not possess the qualifications prescribed under Punjab Labour Service (Class-I and Class-II) Rules, 1955 (for short, `the Rules') and to facilitate his appointment, the Government will have to relax the same.
Thereafter, the matter was considered by the Council of Ministers in its meeting held on 16121982 and the following decision was taken :-  "It was decided to appoint Shri Anupam Malik son of late Shri ML Malik (formerly Deputy Labour Commissioner) who died in an accident while in service, on the post of Labour Welfare Officer by making relaxation in educational qualification prescribed for the post.
It was further decided that he should be kept on probation for period of two years during which he shall pass the degree or diploma in social work or labour welfare from any recognised University or institution.
The Administrative Department should seek the approval of the Public Service Commission."
(Underlining is ours).
4.
After the decision of the Council of Ministers, the Administrative Department prepared a note that there was a discrepancy in the original proposal and the final decision, in-as-much as, the department had throughout recommended the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik as Labour Officer and not as Labour Welfare Officer.
Finally, it was decided that he may be appointed as Labour Officer with a condition that he should pass Diploma in Social Welfare.
The Minister Incharge approved the note of the Administrative Department.
The then Chief Minister also approved the proposal and directed that the letter of appointment be issued to Shri Anupam Malik and the case be sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short, `the Commission').
However, when memo dated 2711983 was issued by the Commissioner and Secretary to the Government, Haryana, Labour and Employment Departments giving offer of appointment to Shri Anupam Malik, the nomenclature of the post was mentioned as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
For the sake of reference, the opening paragraph and paragraphs 4 and 7 of memo dated 2711983 are reproduced below :-  "The Governor of Haryana is pleased to offer you appointment as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer in the scale of Rs. 800-30-890/940- 1100-50- 1600 in the Labour Department, Haryana subject to the pending approval of Haryana Public Service Commission.
You will be on probation for a period of two years from the date of your appointment which period can be extended if necessary up to 3 years.
During the probation period you will undergo training as Labour and Shop Inspector for six months at Ambala.
After that you will be under training as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer with Labour Commissioner at headquarter Chandigarh.
During the probation period your services are liable to be terminated without notice if the post is abolished or if your work and conduct is found unsatisfactory.
At the end of your probation period you will prepare a RESUME regarding -  (i) The conditions under which various Acts/Rules, by the Central and State Governments were enacted.
(ii) Objectives and purposes of the various provisions of the Acts/Rules.
(iii) Shortcomings and practical difficulties faced by the employers and employees and also the administrative difficulties experienced by the Labour Department in the implementation of the various provisions of the Rules.
During the period of your probation as Labour Officer-cum- Conciliation Officer, you will have to pass Diploma in Social Work or Labour Welfare of any recognised University or Institution.
Thereafter, you may be considered for permanent absorption in Haryana Labour Service-II on the availability of vacancies of permanent posts in the cadre.
The service put in against the temporary post might be counted towards the period of probation, but the completion of two years' temporary service will not in itself entitle you to confirmation unless the post is substantively vacant.
7.
Your seniority will be determined according to your position in the merit list sent by the Public Service Commission and the reservation to be made for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes, Ex-Servicemen and Phy.
Handicapped candidates."
5.
Within twenty days of the issuance of memo dated 2711983, a proposal was mooted that the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer against which Shri Anupam Malik was appointed be taken out of the purview of the Commission.
The Chief Secretary, Haryana did not approve this and vide note dated 2751983, he advised that the approval of the Commission be obtained first and if it does not agree with the Administrative Department, then proposal for taking the post out of its purview be sent along with all the facts.
On being approached by the Government to approve the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, the Commission, in the first instance asked for certificates relating to his academic qualifications.
Thereafter, it sought clarification from the Government whether the requirement of five years' experience laid down in the Rules has been relaxed.
It was also pointed out that as per the extent policy of ex gratia, compassionate appointments can be made only on Class-III and Class-IV posts.
6.
While the matter was under correspondence between the State Government and the Commission, Shri Anupam Malik passed Post Graduate Diploma in Personnel Management and Industrial Relations from DAV College of Management, Communication and Educational Administration, Chandigarh.
Thereafter, the Government requested the Commission to review its decision in the matter of approval of appointment of Shri Anupam Malik, but the latter declined to give approval on the ground that as per the ex gratia policy, Shri Anupam Malik could not have been appointed on Class-II post.
This was conveyed to the State Government in letter dated 7101985 and was reiterated vide letter dated 1291986.
7.
Having failed to persuade the Commission to approve the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, the Administrative Department suggested that the post held by him may be taken out of its purview.
Thereupon, the matter was considered in the meeting of the Council of Ministers held on 2841987 and the proposal of the Administrative Department was approved.
This decision was formalised by sending letter dated 2051987 to the Commission, the relevant extract of which is reproduced below :-  "The Government has now decided to take out of the purview of the Haryana Public Service Commission the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer against which Sh. Anupam Malik has been appointed.
In view of this decision, the condition of approval of Haryana Public Service Commission imposed in the appointment letter of Sh. Anupam Malik is deemed to have been waived off."
8.
In the meanwhile, Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav, Ramanand Khola and Azad Singh, who had joined service as Labour Inspectors on 2371986, 7.6.1976 and 4.12.1977 respectively, and were promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers after 2711983, filed C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983 questioning the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik on the following grounds :-  (a) The policy of ex gratia framed by the State Government envisaged appointments on compassionate ground only on Class-III and Class-IV posts and as such, he could not have been appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer which is Class-II post.
(b) He was not eligible to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer because he did not possess the prescribed qualifications.
(c) The State Government did not have the power to relax the prescribed qualifications for one person.
(d) The post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer was within the purview of the Commission and the Government could not have appointed him without its recommendation.
9.
The Government of Haryana and Shri Anupam Malik contested the writ petition by filing separate written statements.
The stand taken by the State Government was that Anupam Malik had been appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer keeping in view the meritorious service rendered by his father-late Shri ML Malik and the grave hardship suffered by the family on account of his sudden demise.
It was pleaded that under Rule 14, the State Government had the power to relax the prescribed qualifications and he was appointed by relaxing the prescribed qualifications.
It was further pleaded that the approval of the Commission was not sine qua non for making appointment on compassionate ground.
10.
In his written statement, Shri Anupam Malik pleaded that the Council of Ministers had the power to make a deviation from the policy of compassionate appointment and also to relax the prescribed qualifications to facilitate his appointment as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
11.
The learned Single Judge, after examining the rival pleadings and contentions and making a reference to the Rules, held that Shri Anupam Malik was not eligible to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer and the State Government was not competent to relax the requirement of experience for one person.
However, the learned Single Judge did not quash the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik by observing that he had continued in service for sufficiently long time.
At the same time, he directed that Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh be promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers with effect from 2711983 against the available vacancies of promotion quota.
12.
Shri Anupam Malik has challenged the order of the learned Single Judge in L.P.A. No. 666 of 1997 by contending that the direction given by him for promotion of Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh is legally untenable, in-as-much as, it would result in supersession of two senior Labour Inspectors, namely, Mange Ram Patlan and Suraj Bhan and that his seniority cannot be disturbed by retrospective promotion of junior persons.
Another plea taken by him is that the posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer were not available in the promotion quota and as such, Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh cannot be promoted w.e.f.
2711983.
13.
Shri Ramanand Khola, who was one of the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983, has filed L.P.A. No. 345 of 1997 reiterating challenge to the appointment of Anupam Malik on the ground that as per the policy of ex gratia, he could not have been appointed on a Class-II post and that he was not qualified for appointment as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
He has also filed CM Nos. 853 and 854 of 1998 for condonation of 165 days delay in re- filing and 77 days delay in filing of the appeal.
14.
During the pendency of the above-mentioned appeals, the State Government issued order dated 1432000 for promotion of Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1600 w.e.f.
2711983 and as Deputy Labour Commissioners in the pay scale of Rs. 900-1700 w.e.f 2911993.
The same was challenged by Mange Ram Patlan, who was senior to Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav, Azad Singh and Ramanand Khola in the cadre of Labour Inspectors by filing a writ petition which was registered as C.W.P.
No. 4449 of 2000.
He pleaded that the promotion of the persons junior to him was violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and the Rules.
He further pleaded that the State Government had misinterpreted the direction given by the learned Single Judge and wrongly construed it as a mandate for promotion of Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Shri Azad Singh ignoring the claim of seniors.
According to him, the State Government was duty-bound to consider the cases of all eligible persons in accordance with the criteria of seniority-cum-merit and its failure to do so had the effect of vitiating order dated 1432000.
15.
The writ petition filed by Mange Ram Patlan was allowed by the Division Bench and order dated 1432000 was quashed with a direction to the State Government to undertake fresh exercise for making promotions to the posts to Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers and Deputy Labour Commissioners.
16.
In compliance of the direction given by the Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 4449 of 2000, the State Government reviewed the matter and passed order dated 1892000 (Annexure P3 in C.W.P.
No. 7778 of 2001) vide which Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh were again promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers w.e.f.
2711983 on the ground that as on that date, they were the senior-most eligible Labour Inspectors.
The State Government also promoted them as Deputy Labour Commissioners w.e.f.
2911993.
17.
Feeling aggrieved by his non-promotion to the posts of Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer and Deputy Labour Commissioner with retrospective effect, Mange Ram Patlan filed C.W.P.
No. 7778 of 2001.
He has not only reiterated the grounds taken in the earlier petition for challenging the promotion of Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh, but has also questioned the legality of the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik (respondent No. 3 in the writ petition) as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer on the ground that the decision of the Government is contrary to the policy of ex gratia and also on the ground that he was not qualified to be appointed on that post.
18.
In the written statement filed on their behalf, the official respondents have taken up the stand which demolishes the substratum of orders dated 1432000 and 1892000 vide which Sarv Shri Kamal Singh and Azad Singh were promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers and Deputy Labour Commissioners.
According to them, promotion quota posts were available on 2711983, but somehow this fact could not be brought to the notice of the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983.
This is clearly evident from the extracts of paragraph 1 of the preliminary objections and paragraph 16(ii) of the written statement, which are reproduced below :-  "1.
...................
It is correct that there was no promotion quota post available on 2711983 and on that day the two vacant posts were of direct quota.
Respondent No. 3 (Sh. Anupam Malik) was appointed on 2711983 against one of these two direct quota posts.
However, this fact of non- availability of two promotion quota posts as on 2711983 somehow could not be brought to the notice of this Hon'ble High Court in the said C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983.
But, this issue of availability or non-availability of the two promotion quota posts as on 2711983 does not merit examination in the present case because the Division Bench in order dated 2842000 (P/2) has specifically left this issue for being decided by the LPA Bench in said L.P.A. No. 666 of 1997.
16(ii) ...........
Although it is correct that on that day i.e. 2711983 there was no post for promotion quota.
It is wrong that a new post was created for making appointment of Respondent No. 3 in the direct recruitment quota.
Otherwise also, so long as order dated 7.11.1994 (P/4) of this Hon'ble Court is in force the petitioner cannot claim seniority over Respondent Nos. 3 to 5."
19.
In his written statement, Shri Anupam Malik has questioned the locus standi of Mange Ram Patlan by asserting that at this belated stage, he cannot challenge the appointment made on compassionate ground in January, 1983.
He has also relied on order dated 7.11.1997 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983 and pleaded that his appointment may not be nullified on the basis of challenge made in the year 2001.
20.
Before dealing with the issues arising in the appeals and the writ petition, we consider it proper to mention that Shri Kamal Singh Yadav, who has been impleaded as respondent therein, had appeared in person on 1492004 and made a statement that he is not interested in contesting these cases.
21.
The first question which calls for determination is whether in the face of the existing policy of ex gratia which contemplated appointment on compassionate ground only on Class-III and Class-IV posts, the State Government could appoint Shri Anupam Malik as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers which is a Class-II post.
22.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate appearing for Shri Anupam Malik argued that the Court should not entertain the challenge to his appointment at this belated stage on the ground of violation of the policy of ex gratia, more-so because no such plea was taken in C.W.P.
No. 1449 of 1983 and by taking cognizance of the fact that he had continued in service for a period of almost 14 years, the learned Single Judge did not quash his appointment.
The learned counsel then referred to the policy of ex gratia circulated vide letter No. 9054-4GS-70/32230 dated 22121970 (a copy of English translation of that policy was produced by Shri Patwalia during the course of hearing) and argued that the State Government did not commit any illegality by appointing Shri Anupam Malik on a Class-II post because there was no restriction on such appointment.
23.
Sarv Shri Deepak Sibal and Sanjeev Manrai argued that the initial appointment of Shri Anupam Malik should be declared as nullity because the extent policy of ex gratia did not provide for appointment on compassionate ground on Class-II posts.
They referred to the policy of ex gratia circulated vide letter Nos. 3442-3GS-II-77/19169 dated 13.7.1971 and 16/11/85-3GSII dated 871985 vide which appointments on compassionate grounds were restricted on Class-III and Class-IV posts and argued that the earlier policy will be deemed to have been superseded and the same cannot be relied upon for defending the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik.
They further argued that without amending the policy of ex gratia, the State Government could not ordain the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik on a Class-II post and that too without consulting the Commission as per the requirement of Article 320(3) of the Constitution of India.
24.
We have given serious thought to the respective submissions/arguments.
We agree with Shri Deepak Sibal and Shri Sanjeev Manrai that as per the extent policy of ex gratia Shri Anupam Malik could not have been appointed on compassionate ground on a Class-II post.
The policy circulated vide letter dated 22101970 will be deemed to have been superseded with the issuance of fresh policy vide letter dated 13.7.1971.
Therefore, Shri Anupam Malik cannot take shelter of that policy to justify his appointment on a Class-II post.
We are also inclined to agree with Shri Sibal and Shri Manrai that without amending the policy circulated vide letter date dated 13.7.1971, the State Government could not have sanctioned the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik on the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
However, keeping in view the fact that as on today, a period of 21 years has elapsed, we do not consider it proper to disturb his appointment or direct the Government to retrospectively appoint him on a Class-III post.
25.
The next question which merits consideration is whether Shri Anupam Malik was eligible to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Shri PS Patwalia argued that the appointment of his client cannot be dubbed as illegal on the ground that he did not possess the prescribed qualifications because the State Government had relaxed the same.
He submitted that even though, Rule 14 provides for relaxation of the provisions of the Rules with respect to any class or category of persons, the State Government could legitimately exercise that power even in respect of one person and no illegality was committed by relaxing the educational qualifications and experience to facilitate the appointment of his client.
In support of this argument, Shri Patwalia relied on the decisions of the Supreme Court in JC Yadav v. State of Haryana, AIR 1990 SC 857 and Sandeep Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1997(2) SCT 16 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1194.
26.
Shri Deepak Sibal argued that the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik should be treated as vitiated due to violation of the mandatory provisions contained in Rule 4.
He submitted that the power vested in the State Government under Rule 14 of the Rules could not have been used to relax the requirement of academic qualifications and experience in the case of Shri Anupam Malik because that rule postulates relaxation of any of the provisions of the Rules with respect to any class or category of persons and not in an individual case.
27.
For deciding whether or not Shri Anupam Malik was qualified to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer and whether the Government could relax the prescribed academic qualifications and experience, it will be useful to notice Rules 4(1) and 14 of the Rules.
The same read as under :-  "4.
Educational & Technical Qualifications.
(1) No person shall be appointed to the service unless he possesses the educational and other qualifications mentioned above.
Name of the post to which the person is to be appointed Minimum Educational Qualifications Other qualifications 1. xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 2. xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 3.
Labour Officer or Conciliation Officer.
Graduate of a recognised University preferably in one of the Social Sciences such as Economics, Commerce, Sociology or Law (a) Five years experiencethe working of Labour laws as Labour Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector.
(b) Diploma in Social Welfare of any recognised University or Institution.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 14.
Power of relaxation.
- Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
A combined reading of the rules reproduced above shows that as in 1983, no person could be appointed as Labour Officer or Conciliation Officer unless he possessed the educational qualification i.e. graduate in one of the social sciences, such as Economics, Commerce, Sociology or Law and Diploma in Social Welfare from any recognized University or Institution and had 5 years experience of the working of Labour Laws as Labour Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector.
However, in exercise of the power vested in it under Rule 14, the Government could, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, relax the requirement of educational qualifications and experience with respect to any class or category of persons.
28.
Reverting to the facts of this case, we find that at the time of submission of applications by Smt. Kamla Malik widow of late Shri ML Malik and at the time of consideration by the State Government, Shri Anupam Malik did not possess either of the prescribed qualifications.
He was a Graduate in Science and not in Economics or Commerce or Sociology or Law.
He did not have a single day's experience of the working of Labour Laws as Labour Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector.
Therefore, he was clearly ineligible to be appointed as Labour Inspector or Conciliation Officer or Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
However, by exercising its power under Rule 14 of the Rules, the Government relaxed the requirement of educational qualifications and thereby facilitated his appointment as Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer.
Of course, it was subject to the conditions that he should pass Diploma in Social Welfare and approval of the Commission should be obtained.
Later on, in the wake of the objection raised by the Commission, the State Government also relaxed the requirement of experience.
Rule 14 provides that the Government can relax any of the provisions of the Rules with respect of any class or category of persons if in its opinion it is necessary or expedient to do so.
The expression "any class or category of persons" has not been defined in the Rules, but if it is considered in contradiction to the expression "any particular case" used in similar rule contained in other sets of rules framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, it becomes clear that under Rule 14, the Government does not have the power to relax the provisions of the Rules which include Rule 4 in the case of one person.
However, we refrain from finally adjudicating upon this issue because after his appointment, Shri Anupam Malik passed Diploma in Personnel Management and Industrial Relations which was treated by the Government as equivalent to Diploma in Social Welfare and as of today, he has gained more than 21 years of experience on the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer and Deputy Labour Commissioner.
29.
This leaves us with the consideration of the following two issues :-  (1) Whether Shri Anupam Malik could be deemed to have been regularly appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer w.e.f.
2711983 or his appointment should be deemed to have been regularised from the date the post of Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer was taken out of the purview of the Commission.
(2) Whether Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh could be promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers w.e.f.
2711983 and then as Deputy Labour Commissioners.
30.
For deciding the first of the aforementioned two issues, it will be useful to briefly recapitulate the facts.
These are :-  (a) Even though, the existing policy of ex gratia framed by the State Government envisaged appointments on compassionate ground only on Class-III and Class-IV posts and the said policy had not been amended/modified to facilitate the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik on a Class-II post, the Council of Ministers decided to appoint him as Labour Officer by relaxing the requirement of academic qualifications prescribed under the Rules.
Later on, the requirement of experience was also relaxed.
(b) The Commission to which the case of Anupam Malik was referred in terms of the decision of the Council of Ministers and as per requirement of Article 320(3) of the Constitution of India read with Haryana Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1973 did not approve his appointment by observing that he could not have been appointed on compassionate ground on a Class-II post.
However, in its meeting held on 2841987, the Council of Ministers approved the proposal of the Administrative Department to take the post held by Shri Anupam Malik out of the purview of the Commission and the Government's decision was conveyed to the Commission vide letter dated 2051987.
A reading of letter dated 2051987, which was sent by the Government to the Commission, the relevant extracts of which have been reproduced in the earlier part of this order, makes it clear that the decision to take the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer held by Shri Anupam Malik out of the purview of the Commission was prospective.
The use of the expression "the Government has now decided" leaves no room for any doubt in this regard.
Therefore, he will be deemed to have been regularly appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer w.e.f.
2051987.
31.
As a corollary to the above conclusion, it must be held that Shri Anupam Malik cannot be assigned seniority in the cadre of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers above those who had already been appointed on that post by direct recrutment, promotion, transfer or deputation.
32.
In Ram Sarup v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1978 SC 1536, a somewhat similar issue was considered by the Supreme Court.
The facts of that case show that the appellant was appointed as Statistical Officer on 2021961.
He was confirmed on that post on 15101966.
After four months, he was appointed to the post of Chief Inspector of Shops.
With effect from 111968, he was appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer by way of transfer in the wake of the decision taken by the Government to treat the post of Statistical Officer and Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer as inter- changeable.
After 9 years and almost 4 months, he was reverted to the post of Statistical Officer on the ground that he was not qualified to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, in-as-much, he did not possess one of the qualifications prescribed under Rule 4(1), namely, five years experience of the working of labour laws as Labour Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector.
The appellant challenged the order of reversion by filing a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed by the Single Bench.
The appeal filed by him was also dismissed by the Division Bench.
The Supreme Court noted that even though, the appellant possessed the prescribed academic qualifications, he did not have the requisite experience and, therefore, he was not eligible to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
However, their Lordships treated the appointment of the appellant to be irregular and held that he would be deemed to have become regular on that post on the date of completion of five years experience.
This is quite evident from the extracts of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the judgment, which are reproduced below :-  "2.
It is clear on a plain reading of sub-clause (1) of Rule 4 of the Punjab Labour Service (Class I & II) Rules, 1955 that no person can be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer unless he possesses the education and other qualifications mentioned in that clause.
The minimum education and other qualifications required by a candidate in order to be eligible to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer are that, in the first instance, he must be a graduate of a recognised university preferably in one of the social sciences such as Economics, Commerce, Sociology or Law; secondly he must have five years' experience of the working of Labour Laws as Labour Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector and lastly, he must hold a diploma in Social Welfare of a recognised university or institution.
The appellant was undoubtedly a graduate of a recognised university in Economics and he also held diploma in Social Welfare of a recognised university but admittedly he did not have five years' experience in the field of Labour Laws as Labour Inspector or Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector.
He was a Statistical Officer for about six years and thereafter for a period of about ten months he held the post of Chief Inspector of Shops.
His experience of the working of Labour Laws as Chief Inspector of Shops which is a post higher than the Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops was, therefore, limited only to a period of about ten months and he did not satisfy the requirement of five years experience.
He was, in the circumstances, ineligible to be appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer under Rule 4 clause (1).
..........................
Clause (2) of Rule 4 does not seek to qualify sub-clause (1), or to restrict its ambit and operation.
What it does is merely to deal with specific cases of recruitment of promotion and to confer power on the Government to relax the requirement of qualifications in case of promotion, where the official to be promoted is of outstanding merit.
Clause (1) of Rule 4 is absolute in its terms and does not permit appointment of any person as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer unless he possesses the educational and other qualifications set out in that clause, regardless of whether the appointment is to be made by promotion or by direct recruitment or by transfer.
The appellant could not, therefore, be legitimately appointed to the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer unless, amongst other things, he possessed five years' experience in the working of Labour Laws as Labour Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector, which he admittedly did not.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 3.
The question then arises as to what was the effect of breach of Clause (1) of Rule 4 of the Rules.
Did it have the effect of rendering the appointment wholly void so as to be completely ineffective or merely irregular, so that it could be regularised as and when the appellant acquired the necessary qualifications to hold the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
We are of the view that the appointment of the appellant was irregular since he did not possess one of the three requisite qualifications but as soon as he acquired the necessary qualification of five years' experience of the working of Labour Laws in any one of the three capacities mentioned in Clause (1) of Rule 4 or in any higher capacity, his appointment must be regarded as having been regularised.
The appellant worked as Labour- cum-Conciliation Officer from 1st Jan, 1968 and that being a post higher than that of Labour Inspector or Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector, the experience gained by him in the working of Labour Laws in the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer must be regarded as sufficient to constitute fulfilment of the requirement of five years' experience provided in Clause (1) of Rule 4.
The appointment of the appellant to the post of Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer, therefore, became regular from the date when he completed five years after taking into account the period of about ten months during which he worked as Chief Inspector of Shops.
..................." By applying the ratio of the above noted judgment to the facts of this case, we hold that the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik will be deemed to have become regular w.e.f.
2051987 i.e. the date on which the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer held by him was taken out of the purview of the Commission and he is entitled to be assigned seniority below those, who had already been regularly appointed on that post.
33.
The decision of the last issue hinges upon our accepting or rejecting the averments contained in the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents to C.W.P.
No. 7778 of 2001.
A reading of order dated 2842000 passed in C.W.P.
No. 4449 of 2000-Mange Ram Patlan v. State of Haryana and others shows that while quashing order dated 1432000 vide which Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh were retrospectively promoted as Labour-cum- Conciliation Officers and Deputy Labour Commissioners, the Division Bench had sounded a note of caution in the following words :-  "As a matter of abundant caution we may observe that in case the LPA Bench holds that Mr. Malik's appointment as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer cannot be sustained and the learned Single Judge's judgment that despite that he should continue is set aside then this exercise, which will be done by the official respondents, would automatically be rendered nugatory, because the whole exercise is on the basis that Mr. Malik is to continue in service w.e.f.
2711983.
Further it may also be observed that if the LPA Bench holds that in fact on January 27, 1983 there were no posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer available in promotional quota, even then the exercise which is to be done by the respondents by virtue of these directions would automatically become nugatory."
34.
On a scrutiny of record, the State Government found that the posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers were not available in the promotion quota on 2711983.
This has been reflected in paragraph 1 of the preliminary objections and paragraph 16(ii) of the written statement filed in C.W.P.
No. 7778 of 2001 and reiterated in affidavit dated 1792004 filed by Shri Prem Prashant, Financial Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government, Haryana, Labour and Employment Departments in compliance of the direction given by the Court on 1692004.
Paragraph 2 of his affidavit reads as under :-  "The cadre of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers consisted of 12 posts as on 2711983.
As per Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955, applicable on that date, vide Rule 5(C), 66-2/3% posts were in the promotion quota while 33-1/3% posts were in the direct quota.
As such, on the said date, out of 12 posts, 8 posts fell in the promotion quota while 4 posts fell in the direct quota.
On the said date, 8 promotees and 2 direct appointees were occupying the posts.
As such, 2 posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers in the direct quota were vacant."
35.
Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh have not filed any counter to the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents.
Not only this, in the course of hearing, Shri J.S.
Maanipur, counsel representing Shri Azad Singh could not refer to any document or other evidence to show that promotion quota posts were available on 2711983.
Therefore, we do not find any valid ground or justification to ignore the assertion of the official respondents that promotion quota posts were not available on 2711983 in the cadre of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers and Sarv Shri Kamal Singh and Azad Singh were not entitled to be promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers w.e.f.
2711983.
36.
Before concluding, we deem it proper to observe that one of those impleaded as respondents in L.P.A. No. 345 of 1998 has contested the prayer made by Shri Ramanand Khola for condonation of delay.
In that view of the matter, we consider it just and proper to condone the delay in filing and re- filing of the said appeal.
37.
In the result, the appeals and the writ petitions are disposed of in the following terms :-  (1) The challenge of Sarv Shri Mange Ram Patlan and Ramanand Khola to the appointment of Shri Anupam Malik as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer is negatived.
However, it is declared that he will be deemed to have been regularly appointed as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer w.e.f.
2051987 i.e. the date on which the post held by him was taken out of the purview of the Commission and accordingly, he shall be assigned seniority in the cadre of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers.
(2) Order dated 1892000 vide which Sarv Shri Kamal Singh Yadav and Azad Singh were promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers w.e.f.
2711983 and as Deputy Labour Commissioners w.e.f.
2911993 is declared illegal and quashed.
(3) The State Government is directed to reconsider the cases of eligible persons for promotion to the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers on regular basis from the date of availability of vacancies in the promotion quota.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed within three months from the date of receipt/submission of a certificate copy of this order.
(4) Within next one month, inter-se seniority of Labour-cum- Conciliation Officers shall be prepared afresh.
(5) Within next two months, the cases of eligible persons shall be considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner and those found suitable, shall be given retrospective promotion with all consequential benefits.
Order accordingly.