SS Saron, J - This judgment will dispose of the above-mentioned six writ petitions, five of which have been filed by the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala (hereinafter to be referred to as the petitioner- Corporation for short).
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6552 of 1988 and Civil Writ Petition No. 9852 of 1988, the award of Labour Court, Patiala and in CWP Nos. 10140 of 1988, CWP No. 10141 of 1988, 8632 of 1988 and CWP No. 4010 of 1988, the award of Labour Court, Bathinda has been assailed and the awards of both the Labour Courts are somewhat similar in nature.
In the petitions filed by the petitioner-Corporation except CWP No. 9852 of 1988, the Labour Court has set aside the termination of respondent No. 2 on the ground of violation of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act (Act for short).
In CWP No. 9852, the termination of respondent No. 2 workman has been set aside for violation of Section 25-H of the Act and CWP No. 4010 of 1988 has been filed by Chaman Lal workman assailing the award of the Labour Court to the extent that the back wages have been declined.
CWP No. 6552 of 1988  2.
In this writ petition, the case of the petitioner-Corporation is that respondent No. 2 Himmat Singh was appointed as a labourer on daily wages with effect from 27.5.1983.
He was given wages for those days he actually worked.
He was not paid any wages for the holidays or when he remained on leave.
His services were discontinued with effect from 231984 when the work was over.
On this the workman raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court (respondent No. 1).
The latter vide its award dated 1881987 (Annexure P-3) held the termination of the workman to be illegal and he was re-instated in service with full back wages.
CWP No. 10140 of 1988  3.
The case of the petitioner-Corporation is that respondent No. 2 Gurmail Chand Cleaner was appointed as labourer on daily wages.
He was paid wages at the rate of Rs. 1365 per day for those days he actually worked.
He was allowed to work with breaks.
As and when he was required he worked and at times there were breaks in his service when no work was available.
It is contended that the contract of employment of respondent No. 2 was renewed from time to time till 831984 after which it was not renewed and his services were discontinued.
The workman raised an industrial dispute and on reference made by him, the Labour Court vide its award dated 27101987 published on 4121987 (Annexure P-4) set aside the order of termination and ordered re- instatement of the workman with continuity of service and full back wages.
CWP No. 10141 of 1988  4.
The case of the petitioner-Corporation in this writ petition is that respondent No. 2 Sham Lal was appointed as a Sweeper on daily wages at the rate of Rs. 12 per day.
His employment was during the period when construction work of Bus Stand, Bathinda, was in progress.
The contract of the workman was renewed from time to time till 161982 when the construction work of the bus stand was completed.
Thereafter his contract of service was not extended and his services were dispensed with on 161982.
The workman raised an industrial dispute which was referred to Labour Court (respondent No. 1).
The Labour Court vide its award dated 5101987 published on 13111987 (Annexure P-3) held the workman entitled to re-instatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
CWP No. 9852 of 1988  5.
The case of the petitioner-Corporation in this case that respondent No. 2 Mor Singh was appointed as Carpenter on daily wages at the rate of Rs. 19/- per day for fixed period of 89 days and after completion of the said period, he was again appointed for the same period of 89 days basis on daily wages basis.
After the said period was over, his contract of employment was not renewed and the services were discontinued with effect from 22.5.1984.
The workman raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 12111987 published on 2621988 (Annexure P-1) held the workman entitled to be re-instated with continuity of service but without back wages.
CWP Nos. 8632 and 4010 of 1988  6.
The case of the petitioner-Corporation in its Civil Writ Petition No. 8632 of 1988 is that Chaman Lal respondent No. 2 was appointed as Sweeper on daily wage basis.
He was paid wages only for those days when he actually worked.
He was allowed to work as and when he was required for work, and sometimes there were breaks in his service when no work was available.
The contract of employment of the workman was renewed from time to time till 161982 after which it was not renewed and his services were discontinued.
Respondent No. 2 raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 2731987 (Annexure P-1) held the termination of the workman to be in violation of Section 25-F of the Act, and directed reinstatement of the workman with effect from 161982 with continuity of service, however, without back wages.
7.
The workman, Chaman Lal has filed CWP No. 4010 of 1988 assailing the said award dated 2781987 to the extent it denied the back wages to him.
CWP No. 6552 of 1988  8.
All the writ petitions were admitted.
In the order dated 481988 passed in CWP No. 6552 of 1988 at the time of admission the contention that has been recorded is that Section 2(oo) [(sic) Section 2(oo)(bb)] of the Act came into force in August, 1984 whereas the services of the petitioner were terminated earlier and it had no retrospective effect.
9.
The primary contention that has been raised on behalf of the petitioner- Corporation is that the learned Labour Court erred in holding that it was incumbent upon the petitioner-Corporation to give retrenchment compensation to the workman before terminating their services.
It is contended that the disengagement of the service of the workmen was not a retrenchment because they were given payment only for those days when they were required to work and as such it only amounted to non-renewal of contract of employment which is not a retrenchment in view of the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act.
It is stated that the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act were retrospective in operation and even though the same had been inserted by Act No. 49 of 1984 with effect from 16.8.1984, yet they would be applicable in respect of the workmen whose termination were prior to that date.
It is submitted that sub-clause (bb) has been inserted to explain the definition of retrenchment as envisaged under Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Sub- clause (bb) does not include the termination of service as a result of non-renewal of the contract of employment on its expiry.
It is stated that the statute thus being explanatory from the language itself is to operate retrospectively by necessary implication and is, therefore, applicable in the present case.
The matters were admitted primarily to consider whether the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act would operate retrospectively or not.
10.
Shri Virender Pal Singh, Advocate learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-Corporation in CWP Nos. 6552 of 1988, 8632 of 1987, 10140 and 10141 of 1988 submits that in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in case of Hans Raj v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala, 1996(4) SCT 697 (P&H) : 1996(5) SLR 819, the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act are not retrospective in operation.
However, even though their contention with regard to disengagement of the service of the workmen would be retrenchment in view of the observations in Hans Raj's case (supra), yet the workmen being on daily wages are not entitled to the benefit of Section 25-F of the Act keeping in view the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi v. State of Bihar and others, 1997(4) SCC 391.
It is contended that since the workmen had been employed on daily wage basis, their services came to an end on each day and thereafter no work was available as such they were discontinued from service which cannot be construed as retrenchment under the Act.
11.
Sh. KS Sidhu and Sh. HS Sidhu, Advocates appearing for the petitioner-Corporation in CWP No. 9852 of 1988 have also contended that Mor Singh respondent No. 2-workman was appointed on daily wage basis and therefore in view of his disengagement from service, he is not entitled to the benefit of Section 25-H of the Act.
12.
In response, She.
Vikas Singh, Advocate learned counsel appearing for the workmen contended that under the Act whenever there is disengagement or termination of services in respect of a workmen, it could amount to retrenchment except in those cases which find mention in Clauses (a), (b), (bb) and (c) to Section 2(oo) of the Act.
He has emphasised that in terms of definition contained in Section 2(oo), therein `retrenchment' means termination by the employer of the services of workman for any reason whatsoever.
13.
In view of the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners, the primary contention of the petitioner-Corporation that the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) are retrospective in operation is without any merit.
A Division Bench of this Court in Hans Raj's case (supra) after referring to the judgments of the Hon'ble Bombay, Gujarat and Rajasthan High Courts, held that clause (bb) which has been inserted by Amending Act No. 49 of 1984 cannot be treated as retrospective so as to validate the termination of services of a workman which was otherwise illegal and void due to violation of Section 25-F or other provisions of the Act.
14.
In order to appreciate the other contentions of the parties, the provisions of Section 2(oo) of the Act may be noticed which read as under :-  "(oo) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or (bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- health."
15.
The question, therefore, that arises for consideration in the facts and circumstances of these cases is whether respondent No. 2 in the respective petitions, except CWP No. 4010 of 1988, who are admittedly workmen in an industrial establishment, can be denied the benefits of the industrial legislation on the ground that they were employed on daily wages and that the disengagement of their services were not retrenchment.
16.
As already noticed above, Section 2(oo) of the Act defines retrenchment to mean the termination by the employer of the services of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action besides does not include the conditions contained in clauses (a) to (c) to Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Clause (bb) to Section 2(oo) is concededly inapplicable in the case in hand, in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Hans Raj's case (supra).
The sheet anchor of the petitioner-Corporation is the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi's case (supra).
The observations contained therein are to the effect that every department of the Government cannot be treated to be an "industry" and that when the appointments are regulated by statutory rules, the concept of `industry' to that extent stands excluded.
The petitioners therein were not appointed to the posts in accordance with the rules but were engaged on the basis of need of the work.
They were temporary employees working on daily wages.
It was held that their disengagement from service could not be construed to be a retrenchment under the Act and that the concept of retrenchment could not be stretched to such an extent as to cover the said employees.
It was held that since the petitioners were only daily wage employees and had no right to the post, their disengagement was not arbitrary.
It is, however, appropriate to note that the employees in the said case were appointed as Assistant, Driver and Peons on different dates in the Co- operative Training Institute, Deoghar by its Principal and it was in this context observed that every department of the government cannot be treated to be "industry".
Besides, when the appointments are regulated by statutory rules, the concept of "industry" to that extent stands excluded.
However, in the case in hand, the petitioner-Corporation is admittedly an `industry' and respondent No. 2 in the respective petitions, except CWP No. 4010 of 1988 where the workman is the petitioner, are workmen within the definition given in the Act.
A Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court, in the case titled Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh, 1990(3) SCC 682 while interpreting the provisions of Section 2(oo) of the Act, held that "retrenchment" means termination of service of a workman by the employer for any reason whatsoever except those expressly excluded in the Section i.e.
Section 2(oo).
It was held that the definition of "retrenchment" in Section 2(oo) means termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, and those expressly excluded by the definition.
This, it was held, is in the wider literal interpretation as a distinguished from narrow, natural and contextual interpretation of the word to mean termination by the employer of the service of a workman as surplus labour for any reason whatsoever.
After considering the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundara Money, 1976(1) SCC 822, Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. AD Diverkar, AIR 1957 SC 121 and several other decisions, the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd (supra), has set at rest the controversy regarding the scope of the term "retrenchment" which for short is that retrenchment would mean the termination by the employer of the services of a workman for any reason whatsoever except the exceptions contained in Section 2(oo) of the Act.
In DK Yadav v. JMA Industries Ltd, 1993(3) SCT 537 (SC) : 1993(3) SCC 259, the workman was willfully absent from duty without leave or prior information.
The Hon'ble Apex Court reiterated the judgment in Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd (supra) and held that the definition of "retrenchment" in Section 2(oo) is comprehensive one which intended to cover any action of the management to put an end to employment of an employee for any reason whatsoever.
17.
In Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Prem Chand Gupta, 2000(10) SCC 115, the workman therein was initially appointed for one year from 551964 on temporary post of Sectional Officer (Civil).
He continued in service after the expiry of that year.
His initial appointment order mentioned that he could be considered for confirmation after one year of satisfactory service.
The workman was not confirmed, however, the Municipal Corporation therein continued him in service and on 1101964 after giving a short break re- appointed him against a vacant post caused by termination of service of another employee.
Thus from 1101964 the workmen even though in temporary service continued to work on a vacant permanent post upto 2941966 when he was visited with the impugned termination order by which time he had, however, completed not less than 240 days of continuous service for one calendar year immediately preceding 2941966 i.e. from 141965 to 2941966.
Consequently, Section 25-F of the Act, it was observed, got squarely attracted in his case.
The requirements of which were not complied with by the Municipal Corporation therein.
However, the Labour Court found that Section 25-F would not apply for the reason that the workman's services were not terminated because of his being an excess staff.
It was held that this reasoning no longer held the field in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money (supra), wherein it was held that it was clearly laid down therein that in Section 2(oo) the word "termination" for any reason whatsoever was the key word.
Whatever the reason, every termination spelt retrenchment, and that the said decision was approved by the Constitution Bench in Punjab Land Development Reclamation Corporation v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh (supra).
Besides, a reference was also made to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Birla VXL Ltd v. State of Punjab, 1999(1) SCT 263 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 632 and it was held that the said case related to automatic termination of employment in the light of stipulation contained in the appointment itself and that such termination could not be treated as retrenchment in the light of the excepted category indicated by clause (bb) inserted to Section 2(oo) the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act No. 49 of 1984, which came into force w.e.f.
1881984.
Consequently it was observed that it has to be kept in view that the respondent-workman's termination therein was prior to 1984 amendment to Section 25-F [(sic) Section 2(oo)(bb)] and hence it was squarely governed by the decision in the case of State Bank of India v. N Sundra Money (supra).
18.
Therefore, in view of the above, it is evident that termination, in any manner, except for the exception Clauses in Section 2(oo), would be retrenchment and the ratio of the judgment in Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi (supra) is confined in the circumstances to its own facts.
Besides, where the workman's services were terminated prior to the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act No. 49 of 1984, which was brought into force w.e.f.
1881984 are governed by the law laid down in N Sundara Money (supra).
19.
The further question, however, that requires to be considered is whether a daily wage employee who is given day to day payment can be said to be covered by the definition of "retrenchment".
In State of UP and another v. Rajendra Singh Butola and another, 2000(9) SCC 501, the workman was working as a daily wage cleaner on a motor truck belonging to the Irrigation Department of the State.
The truck became out of order and no new truck was purchased and as a result, because the exigencies of the work had come to an end, the services of the workman were dispensed with.
He raised an industrial dispute which was adjudicated upon by the Labour Court.
It was found that when the service of the workman was terminated, retrenchment procedure as per Section 6-N of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, was not followed.
As a result, an award was passed setting aside the order of termination and directing his reinstatement with full back wages and Rs. 500/- as costs which was confirmed by the High Court in a writ petition moved by the appellant State of UP Therein in the appeal, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "In the light of the concurrent finding of facts reached by the trial Court as well as by the High Court, it becomes clear that though the appellants contended that the workman was a daily-wager and therefore, the provision of Section 6-N of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, did not apply, there is no escape from the conclusion that the workman had worked for four years as clearly established and if he was to be terminated due to any exigencies of service, the procedure for retrenchment was required to be followed.
As the condition precedent to such retrenchment was not complied with, the order of reinstatement granted by the Labour Court could not be found fault with."
20.
Besides, in HD Singh v. Reserve Bank of India, AIR 1986 SC 132, the workman was working as tika Mazdoor (a person who helps the Examiners of coins/notes) with the Reserve Bank of India.
He was so selected on daily wages of Rs. 3/- as per appointment letter dated 3041974 and was given work on the days when work was available.
At the time he was selected for employment, he was not a matriculate and he passed the matriculation examination in 1975.
At the time he was selected he was not told that his name would be struck off the list of Tikka Mazdoors if he passed the matriculation examination.
On 2371976 he received a letter from the Bank asking him to state within a week as to what his educational qualification was.
He was informed that his name would be struck off since he had concealed his educational qualifications and that his services would be terminated without any notice and compensation from the bank.
In fact a confidential circular had been issued by the bank on 2761976 to the effect that matriculates would not be retained in this list.
The workman sent a reply stating that he was not matriculate in 1974 when he was selected and that he passed the examination only in 1975.
However, the workman was not given any work after July 1976 and there was no written order terminating his services.
The workman had been given work only for four days in 1974, for 154 in 1975 and 105 days in 1976.
The matter came to be referred to the Labour Commissioner for conciliation, which proved to be futile.
Thereupon, the Central Government by a notification dated 19.9.1979 referred the dispute to the Industrial Tribunal New Delhi as to whether the action of the management of Reserve Bank of India in striking off the name of the workman from the list of approved Tikka Mazdoors from July 1976 was justified and legal and if not to what relief the workman was entitled.
The Tribunal, however, held that the action of Reserve Bank of India in not giving regular appointment to the workman was legal and proper and his name could be struck off from the list of approved Tikka Mazdoors.
Against the said award, the workman went to the Hon'ble Supreme Court by Special Leave Petition.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the workman was not told that he would be struck off the rolls if he passed the matriculation.
He was not given any order in writing either refusing work or informing him that his name would be struck off the rolls.
It was held that striking off the name of the workman from the rolls by the employer amounts to "termination of service" and such termination is "retrenchment" within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act and effected in violation of the mandatory provisions contained in Section 25-F is invalid.
It was also held that in view of the judgment in State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundara Money (supra) the words "for any reason whatsoever" occurring in Section 2(oo) were wide and almost admitting no exception.
The Court directed the Bank to enlist the workman as a regular employee as Tikka Mazdoor to re- instate him and pay him his back wages upto date.
In case titled State of Haryana v. Jai Kishan and another, 2000(2) SCT 876 (P&H) : 2000(3) RSJ 42 respondent No. 1 was engaged as a daily wage employee under the Sub Divisional Officer, Sudkain Sub Division (I.B.)
Narwana in July 1989 and his services were discontinued at the end of August 1993.
The Labour Court held the termination of respondent No. 1 therein as illegal and ordered his reinstatement.
One of the questions considered by a Division Bench of this Court was that respondent No. 1 was a daily wage employee, therefore, whether the provisions of Section 2(oo) and 25-F of the Act were attracted or not attracted in his case.
After considering the definition of workman as contained in Section 2(s) of the Act, it was opined that where a person falls within the definition of workman, the Court has to keep in mind the following factors :-  "(i) Whether the person concerned is employed in an industry; (ii) Whether he is employed to do manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work; and (iii) Whether such employment is for hire and reward.
If these factors are found present in given case, the employee concerned will fall within the definition of workman even though the terms of employment may not have been reduced in writing and irrespective of the fact that such person may have been dismissed, charged or retrenched from service.
But, a person who is subject to Air Force Act, 1950, the Army Act 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957 or who is employed in the police service or as an officer or employee of a prison or who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity or who is employed in a supervisory capacity and draws wages exceeding Rs. 1,600/- per mensem is excluded from the definition of industry.
The definition of industry does not make any reference to the nature of employment and the conditions of service.
Therefore, the source of employment or entry in the service, the mode of payment of wages and the length of the period of employment do not have any bearing on the determination of the issue whether or not a person falls within the definition of workman.
In other words, a person will fall within the definition of industry even though he may be daily wager or may be receiving consolidated salary.
In L Robert D'Souza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railway, AIR 1982 SC 854, the Apex Court held that a person engaged for doing casual work is also governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that respondent No. 1 falls within the definition of workman under Section 2(s) of the Act and respondent No. 2 did not commit any error in entertaining the reference made by the State Government."
21.
In Rattan Singh v. Union of India and another, 1998 SCC (L&S) 170 the appellant was employed as workman/head workman in Telephone Department on daily wage basis.
He had worked during the period from 23.10.1972 till 1081976 and thereafter his services were discontinued.
He filed a suit for declaration that order terminating his services was null and void.
His case was transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal which had been constituted.
The Tribunal held that no appointment order was issued to him and he also admitted that he was a daily rated casual worker and in view of the said submission, it could be safely concluded that he was simply daily rated worker.
It was contended on his behalf before the Hon'ble Supreme Court that being a daily rated worker it does not mean that he was not entitled to the protection of Section 25-F of the Act since he worked continuously with the Telephone Department for more than 240 days in a year.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court found merit in the submission and it was held that the workman was entitled to the protection of Section 25-F of the Act and the said protection could not be denied to him on the ground that he was a daily rated worker.
22.
It may also be noted that the petitioner-Corporation has not placed any material on record to show that the nature of job of the workmen was for a specific period and that it was not of a permanent nature or was not likely to continue.
As has already been noticed that respondent No. 2 in the respective petitions, except in CWP No. 4010 of 1988, were workmen in an industrial establishment, therefore, despite their employment on daily wages after their disengagement from service would in view of the above legal position amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Therefore, the order disengaging their service which amounted to retrenchment warranted that the provisions of Section 25-f of the Act are complied with which admittedly have not been complied with.
It is not the case of the management that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were complied with while terminating the service of the workmen and in these circumstances, the termination of their respective service is not liable to be upheld but is rather liable to be set aside.
23.
In the circumstances, the orders passed by the learned Labour Court which are impugned in the present writ petitions are legal and valid in view of the fact that it has been established as a matter of fact that the workmen in CWP No. 6552 of 1988, CWP No. 10140 of 1988, 10141 of 1988 and CWP No. 8632 of 1987 had put in more than 240 days service with the petitioner-Corporation and it was admitted that no retrenchment compensation was paid to them.
In the cases filed by the petitioner-Corporation, the workman-respondent No. 2 had worked for sufficiently long time.
As has been noticed above, Himmat Singh (Respondent No. 2) in CWP No. 6552 of 1988 had worked from 27.5.1983 till 231984.
Gurmail Chand (respondent No. 2) in CWP No. 10140 of 1988 had put in about two and half years of service with the petitioner-Corporation as Cleaner.
Sham Lal (respondent No. 2) in CWP No. 10141 of 1988 had put in two years of service with the petitioner-Corporation as Sweeper.
Chaman Lal (respondent No. 2) in CWP No. 8632 of 1987 and the petitioner in CWP No. 4010 of 1988 was also a Sweeper with the petitioner-Corporation for two years.
Therefore, all of them had worked for sufficiently long time and it has been held as a matter of fact by the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 1) that there was violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
Insofar as Mor Singh (respondent No. 2) in CWP No. 9852 of 1988 is concerned, the Labour Court found that there was a violation of Section 25-H of the Act.
He had put in six months service under the petitioner-Corporation as Carpenter.
However, after the termination of his services, some other employees were appointed without giving him an opportunity to join the service.
This was held by the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 1) to be in clear violation of the provisions of Section 25-H of the Act.
The contention of the petitioner- Corporation that since he was engaged on daily wage basis for a fixed period of 89 days and, therefore, his termination would not amount to retrenchment, is also without any merit.
The provisions of Section 2(oo)(b) are not attracted in his case as he was relieved from his duty on 22.5.1984 and clause (bb) was added to Section 2(oo) later w.e.f.
1881984 and the same as already noticed above is not retrospective.
Therefore, all the cases filed by the petitioner-Corporation call for no interference.
24.
The question that remains to be considered is the right of Chaman Lal petitioner in CWP No. 4010 of 1988 for back wages which was declined by the learned Labour Court on the ground that when he appeared in the witness box he did not depose that he remained unemployed since the day of his termination and, therefore, he was held to be not entitled to back wages.
In Prem Singh v. Presiding Officer, 1991(1) SCT 552 (P&H) : 1991(1) RSJ 286 the workman was a conductor in the Haryana Roadways.
An industrial dispute having been raised, the Industrial Tribunal, Ambala, vide its award held that he was entitled to re-instatement and continuity of service.
However, back wages for the period of unemployment were denied to him as he did not state on oath that he had been unemployed during the period in issue.
The petition was for modification of the award to the extent that back wages had been denied.
This Court after referring to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in M/s. Hindustan Tin Pvt Ltd v. Employees of Hindustan Tin Pvt Ltd, AIR 1979 SC 75 and also a Full Bench decision of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1980 Labour and Industrial Cases 123 held that once re-instatement is ordered by the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court and termination of service set aside, relief of grant of back wages to the workman would follow automatically.
Besides, it was held that the management had not taken any plea nor had led any evidence on the point as to whether the workman was gainfully employed during the period of his enforced idleness.
The burden of pleading and establishing the aforesaid fact was on the management and in the absence of such plea or evidence, it was held that the workman could not be deprived of back wages.
Therefore, because the workman did not state that he remained idle during the period of his enforced idleness, would not disentitle him for the back wages.
Besides, a Division Bench of this Court in Ajay Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. v. Ganga Ram, CWP No. 15275 of 1997, decided on 9101997 held that after termination of service if a workman does some job to earn something in order to keep his body and soul together and save other members of his family from starvation, that by itself cannot be taken as a proof of gainful employment.
Keeping the above principles in view and the fact that the management has not led any evidence to prove that the workman was gainfully employed, therefore, once the termination is held to be illegal, it would entail grant of full back wages from the date of demand in the facts and circumstances of the present case to petitioner Chaman Lal.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petitions filed by the petitioner- Corporation fail and are dismissed and that of Chaman Lal petitionr is allowed holding that he is entitled to full back wages from the date of demand notice.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.