GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing order 10-11-1986 (Annexure P12) issued by Chief Secretary to Government Punjab retiring him from service, under Rule 3(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules.
1975 (for short, the Rules) just four months before his retirement on superannuation.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the ground of arbitrary exercise of power by the State Government and mala fides.
He has averred that his service record has throughout been good and there was no material available with the State Government which could justify formation of an opinion that he was not fit to be retained in service up to the date of superannuation.
He has further averred that his record was considered by the committee constituted by the State Government to consider the cases of the members of PCS cadre for their retention in service and he was allowed to continue in service, but all of a sudden, respondent No. 2-S Surjit Singh Barnala, the then Chief Minister ordered his premature retirement due to extraneous reasons.
He has also pleaded that after having allowed him to cross efficiency bar at Rs. 1700/- in the pay scale of Rs. 940-1850 vide order dated 29-4-1986 (Annexure P14), the State Government was not justified in retiring him just before superannuation.
He has placed on record letters Annexures P.1 to P10 vide (Which) various functionaries of the State Government including the then Governor had appreciated his work in different fields.
The petitioner has levelled allegations of mala fides against respondent No. 2 by asserting that he had ordered his premature retirement due to the personal ill-will.
In paragraphs 10 to 12 of the writ petition, he has averred as under :  "10 That during his tenure in service and particularly, since the advent of present Akali rule, there have been many occasions when the petitioner could not accommodate the persons in authority in favouring them.
One such occasion is the annoyance of one Jathedar Jagtar Singh of Guru Harsahai whose grand daughter was sought to be appointed as stenographer at the behest of the present Chief Minister, Punjab, S Surjit Singh Barnala.
In his case, the petitioner had objected to appointment on the ground that appointments on priority basis were confined only to members of family killed in terrorists action or riots in Delhi and other places, which condition was not fulfilled by the daughter of Jathedar Jagtar Singh.
The said Jathedar has prevailed upon the Chief Minister for prematurely retiring the petitioner.
The direction of the Chief Minister to the following effect is available on the application of Tejinder Kaur, daughter of Jathedar Jagtar Singh in the office of Deputy Commissioner (Joint Development Commissioner, IRD Branch, Punjab) : "Adjust on some job even on ad hoc basis."
Sd/-  Surjit Singh Barnala  Chief Minister  20-2-86"  11.
That in the month of October, 1986, a murder took place in the petitioner's village Kamalke, Tehsil Zira District Ferozepur and the opponents of the petitioner in the village are staunch followers of Akali Dal party.
They have prejudiced the mind of the Chief Minister, Punjab by trying to link the petitioner with the murder.
The Chief Minister has accordingly shown his displeasure by passing illegal order of premature retirement, as at Annexure P12, 12.
That the petitioner represented against the order of premature retirement to Chief Minister.
Punjab.
No decision as to the fate of representation has been conveyed so far.
The petitioner met Chief Minister personally when he strongly condemned petitioner's conduct alleging that the petitioner was non- cooperative with him and opposed to the interests of Akali Dal party.
Copy of representation dated 18th November, 86 is at Annexure P13.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been admitted that the petitioner would have superannuated on 31-3-1987 but, at the same time, it has also been averred that the order of his premature retirement was passed on the recommendations of the Screening Committee.
In para 14 of the written statement, it has been averred that the Screening Committee which met in 1985 did not recommend the petitioner's retention in service but final decision was deferred because of pendency of vigilance inquiries which had been stayed by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 454 of 1985.
A statement containing summary of the adverse remarks recorded in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner for different years between 1960 and 1981-82 and punishments has been enclosed as Annexure R1, the relevant extract of which is reproduced below :  S. No. Year Adverse Remarks 1 1960-61 There is further scope for improvement of this officer's (criminal) Judicial work.
(Adverse remarks conveyed vide letter No. 128-ASI-62/2218 dated 19-1-62).
2.
1962-63 He lacks maturity both in his judgment and behaviour (There were also some general complaints about his integrity though nothing definite could be established).
He was not free from outside influence and to some extent lacks judicial approach.
He appears to be vindictive and lacks experience.
(Adverse remarks except ( ) conveyed vide letter No. 8936-AIS-63/dated November, 1962.
3.
1963-64 But cannot put his heart to do the work entrusted to him, non-sectarian, honesty not certified, has developed lewd bad habits.
(Adverse conveyed vide letter No. 11119-ASI-64/41825 dated 28-12-64).
4.
1964-65 There have been several complaints.
But none in writing.
He, however, has to be careful about his reputation.
(Adverse conveyed vide letter No. 2214-ASI-66/7207 dated 24/25 March 1966.
5.
1965-66 Reputation for honesty doubtful.
(Adverse remarks conveyed DO letter No. 9276/ASI-66/3-9-1966)</< TD>  6.
1966-67 One increment with cumulative was withhold.
(Vide letter No. 5994-3Siii(21)69/28720 dated 13-11-1969 7.
1970-71 The officer withhold at the first EB in the time scale of Rs. 590/- for a period of two years with cumulative effect from 8-11-1968.
(vide letter No. 4097-SI(2)-72/17119 dated 17-7-1972).
8.
1972-73 The performance of Shri Dalip Singh during the year has been of average type.
He did not deal with the work coming to him in a more or less satisfactory manner but did not display any commendable initiative or enthusiasm.
Disposal of the complaints by him, particularly those involving spot enquiry, was not always prompt.
(Adverse remarks conveyed vide DO No. 5068-SI(2)-73 dated 25-7-1973).
9 1979-80 But did not show enough enthusiasm for the job.
As a result of this attitude, I found him blank and listless in the departmental meetins held for reviewing programme and policies of Municipal committee falling in various regions.
(Adverse remarks conveyed vide DO No. 5-12-79-IAS(5)/15843 dated 8-12- 1981).
10 1981-82 He was advised to exert to check the delay in his office and also to exercise more effective supervision over the Municipal Committees in his region.
(Adverse remarks conveyed vide DO No. 5/12/791AS(5) dated 1-10-1982)."
4.
In a separate written statement, respondent No. 2 has denied the allegations of mala fides by making the following assertions :  "Para 10 : The averments contained in this para are denied being incorrect.
The applications from various persons for employment are received in routine in the office of the answering respondent and the same are sent to the concerned authorities with endorsements.
These endorsements are not by way of orders and it is for the appropriate authority to consider such applications on merits according to rules.
The allegation that Jathedar Jagtar Singh has prevailed upon the answering respondent for prematurely retiring the petitioner are wholly incorrect and without any substance.
The impugned order was passed in the public interest and according to rules without any extraneous considerations whatsoever.
Para 11 : That the first part of this para is not admitted for want of knowledge but the second part is denied being incorrect.
The answering respondent was not prejudiced by any of the residents of village Kumalke who were allegedly linking the petitioner with a murder in the village and hence the question of the answering respondent having shown his displeasure on that account did not arise.
The impugned order was passed in the public interest, on merits and without any malice involved therein.
Para 15(ii) : That the allegations mentioned in this sub-para against the answering respondent are denied.
The impugned order of prematurely retiring the petitioner was passed on merits, in the public interest without any extraneous influence or consideration the question of the impugned order having been passed at the behest of Jathedar Jagtar Singh or any villager of Kumalke, Tehsil Zira, District Ferozepur, or on their provocation simply did not arise.
These allegations are wholly misconceived and without any basis.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the pleadings.
I have also gone through the ACR dossier of the petitioner and file relating to his premature retirement which were produced by the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab.
6.
Rule 3(1) of the Rules under which the appropriate authority can retire an employee on completion of 25 years qualifying service or attaining 50 years of age reads as under :  "3(1)(a) Premature Retirement : The appropriate authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in public interest do so.
Have the absolute right by giving an employee prior notice in writing, to retire that employee on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified in the notice.
(b) The period of such notice shall not be less than three months : Provided that when at least three months notice is not given or notice for a period less than three months is given, the employee shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay and allowances, at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before the date of retirement, for a period of three months or, as the case may be, for a period by which such notice falls short of three months."
7.
The expression "public interest" has not been defined in the Rules but the guidelines issued by the Government of Punjab vide circular letter No. 16/42/78-2pp/7300 dated 22-6-1981 gave an idea of the purpose for which the said expression has been used.
For the sake of reference, the relevant portion of that circular is reproduced below :  "I am directed to invite your attention to Punjab Government circular letter No. 6530-2SII-75/38581, dated the 26th September, 1975 relating to the weeding out of corrupt, dishonest or inefficient officers/officials from service under the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement), Rules, 1975 and to say that Goverment have reviewed the matter in the light of the revised policy of the Government of India and other Administrative requirements, Government have decided to lay down the following additional guidelines in the matter :- (i) Although the entire service record of an employee has to be considered, premature retirement should not be ordered if during the last 5 years the work and conduct of the employee had been good or better than that.
(ii) Ordinarily no retirement should be ordered within a period of one year preceding the date of superannuation of the Government employee.
(iii) If an adverse entry relating to integrity exist in the confidential reports during the 10 years preceding the review, or if after its recording there has been no change in the class, status or the post of the officer, that single entry should be considered sufficient for ordering premature retirement.
(iv) If the adverse report on integrity relates to the distant past or is more than 10 years old, the subsequent record of the employee should be scrutinised carefully, if the subsequent reports vouch-safe the integrity of the employee in unambiguous terms.
The inference is that he has improved his conduct and it should not be necessary to order his premature retirement.
A similar view can be taken if an employee has been promoted after the recording of the adverse remarks.
8.
A careful reading of the policy instructions/guidelines issued by the State Government shows that though the entire service record of an employee has to be considered greater emphasis is required to be placed on the record of last 5 years and ordinarily no retirement is to be effected within a period of one year preceding the date of superannuation.
Even in the cases of employees having doubtful integrity the power of compulsory retirement is to be exercised with great caution if in last 10 years, his integrity is not questioned.
9 At this stage, it will be apposite to notice some of the judicial precedents in which the issue of premature/compulsory retirement of the employees has been considered by the Supreme Court.
10 In Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada, 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : (1992)2 SCC 299, the Supreme Court referred to various judicial precedent on the subject of compulsory retirement and culled out the following propositions :  "(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehavior.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the Government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a Government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this court would not examine the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide, or (b) that it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be perverse order.
(iv) The Government (or the Review Committee as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential record/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks, lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it, uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference."
11.
In State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M Patel, 2001(2) SCT 339 (SC) : AIR 2001 SC 1109, a two Judges Bench of the Supreme Court reviewed the case law on the subject and laid down the following principles :  (1) Whenever the services of a public servant are no longer useful to the general administration, he can be compulsorily retired for the sake of public interest.
(2) Ordinarily, the order of compulsory retirement is not to be treated as a punishment coming under Article 311 of the Constitution (3) For better administration, it is necessary to chop off dead wood, but the order of compulsory retirement can be passed after having due regard to the entire service record of the officer.
(4) Any adverse entries made in the confidential record shall be taken note of and be given due weight in passing such order.
(5) Even uncommunicated entries in the confidential record can also be taken into consideration.
(6) The order of compulsory retirement shall not be passed as a short cut to avoid departmental enquiry when such course is more desirable.
(7) If the officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the confidential record, that is a fact in favour of the officer.
(8) Compulsory retirement shall not be imposed as a punitive measure."
12.
In State of UP v. Vijay Kumar Jain, 2002(2) SCT 408 (SC) : (2002)3 SCC 641, the Supreme Court considered the ambit and scope of the employer's right to retire an employee and observed as under :  If the conduct of a government employee becomes unbecoming to the public interest or obstructs the efficiency in public services, the Governments has under FR 56(C) read with Explanation (2) an absolute right to compulsorily retire such an employee in public interest.
The Government right to compulsorily retire an employee is a method to ensure efficiency in public service and while doing so the Government is entitled under Fundamental Rule 56 to take into account the entire service record, character roll or confidential report with emphasis on the later entries in the character roll of an employee.
In fact, entire service record, character roll or confidential report furnishing the materials to find out whether a government servant has outlived his utility in service.
It is on consideration of totality of the materials with emphasis on the later entries in the character roll that the Government is expected to form its opinion whether an employee is to be compulsorily retired or not."
13.
In Bishwanath Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar, 2001(1) SCT 328 (SC) : 2001(2) SCC 305, a three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court highlighted the distinction between compulsory retirement by way of punishment and compulsory retirement in public interest in the following words :-  "Compulsory retirement in service jurisprudence has two meanings.
Under the various disciplinary rules, compulsory retirement is one of the penalties inflicted on a delinquent government servant consequent upon a finding of guilt recorded in disciplinary proceedings, such penalty involves stigma and cannot be inflicted except by following procedure prescribed by the relevant rules or consistently with the principles of natural justice if the field for inflicting such penalty be not occupied by any rules.
Such compulsory retirement in the case of a government servant must also withstand the scrutiny of Article 311 of the Constitution Then there are service rules such as Fundamental Rule 56(j) of the Fundamental Rules, which confer on the Government or the appropriate authority, an absolute (but not arbitrary) right to retire a government servant on his attaining a particular age or on his completing a certain number of years of service on formation of an opinion that in public interest it was necessary to compulsorily retire him.
In that case, it is neither a punishment nor a penalty with loss of retiral benefits.
Compulsory retirement in public interest under service rules is like premature retirement.
It does not cast any stigma.
The government servant shall be entitled to the pension actually earned and other retiral benefits.
So long as the opinion forming basis of the order for compulsory retirement in public interest is formed bona fide, the opinion cannot be ordinarily interfered with by a judicial forum.
Such an order may be subjected to judicial review on very limited grounds such as the order being mala fide based on no material or on collateral grounds or having been passed by an authority not competent to do so.
The object of such compulsory retirement is to weed out the worthless who have lost their utility for the administration."
(Underlining is mine) 14.
In State of Gujarat v. Surya Kant Chunilal Shah, 1999(1) SCT 208 (SC) : (1999)1 SCC 529, the Supreme Court upheld the order of Gujarat High Court quashing the order of premature retirement of the respondent and observed :  "Public interest in relation to public administration means that only honest and efficient persons are to be retained in service while services of dishonest or corrupt or those who are almost dead wood are to be dispensed with.
In order to find out whether any government servant has outlived his utility and is to be compulsorily retired in public interest for maintaining an efficient administration an objective view of overall performance of that government servant has to be taken.
Performance of a government servant is reflected in annual character roll entries and, therefore, one of the methods of discerning efficiency, honesty or integrity of a government servant is to look to his character roll entries for the whole tenure from inception to the date on which decision for his compulsory retirement is taken.
If character roll is studded with adverse entries or overall categorization of employee is poor and there is material also to cast doubts upon his integrity, such government servant cannot be said to be efficient.
Efficiency is a bundle of sticks of personal assets, thickest of which is the stick of integrity.
If this is missing, whole bundle would disperse.
A government servant has, therefore, to keep his belt tight.
Purpose of adverse entries is primarily to forewarn a government servant to mend his ways and to improve his performance.
Adverse entries are required to be communicated so that the government servant, to whom adverse entry is given, may have either opportunity to explain his conduct so as to show that adverse entry is wholly uncalled for, or to silently brood over the matter and on being convinced that his previous conduct justified such an entry to improve his performance.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx There being no material before the review committee, inasmuch as, there were no adverse remarks in the character roll entries, the integrity was not doubted at any time, the character roll entries subsequent to respondent's promotion were not available, it could not come to a conclusion that the respondent was a man of doubtful integrity, nor could have anyone else come to the conclusion that the respondent was a fit person to be retired compulsorily.
The order in the circumstances of the case, was punitive having been passed for a collateral purpose of the respondent's immediate removal rather than in public interest."
15.
In MS Bindra v. Union of India, 1998(4) SCT 325 (SC) : 1998(7) SCC 310, the Supreme Court, while quashing the order of premature retirement of the appellant, observed as under :  "Want of any material is almost equivalent to the next situation that from the available materials no reasonable man would reach such a conclusion.
While evaluating the materials the authority should not altogether ignore the reputation in which the officer was held till recently.
The maxim memo firut repente turpissimus (no one becomes dishonest all of a sudden) is not unexceptional but still it is a salutary guideline to judge human conduct, particularly in the field of administrative law.
The authorities should not keep the eyes totally closed towards the overall estimation in which the delinquent officer was held in the recent past by those who were supervising him earlier.
To infer an officer as one of doubtful integrity to is not enough that doubt fringes on a mere hunch.
That doubt should be of such a nature as would reasonably and consciously be entertainable by a reasonable man on the given material.
Mere possibility is hardly sufficient to assume that it would have happened.
There must be preponderance of probability for the reasonable man to entertain doubt regarding that possibility.
Only then there is justification to ram an officer with the label doubtful integrity."
16.
In the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the afore- mentioned case, I shall now consider whether the decision of the State Government to retire the petitioner just before 4 months of his superannuation by invoking the Rule 3(1) of the Rules, is legally correct and justified.
A perusal of the files produced by the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab shows that in a period of seven years preceding his premature retirement, the petitioner had earned the following reports:  Year Grading Integrity 1978-79 Good Honest 1979-80 Average Honest 1980-81 Very good Honest 1981-82 Average Honest 1982-83 Good Honest 1983-84 Good Honest 1984-85 (1-4-1984 to 18-7-1984) During this period he did not work under any Reporting Authority for the minimum period of 3 months and as such no confidential report could be recorded on his work and conduct.
27-8-1984 to 31-3-1985 Above Average Honest 17.
The file relating to consideration of the petitioner's case for extension of service beyond 50 years and/or premature retirement shows that his case for extension of service at the age of 50 years was considered by the Screening Committee which recommended that even though his previous record contained adverse remarks, keeping in view the later good reports, he may be given benefit of doubt and may not be retired at the age of 50 years.
At the same time, it was observed that he may be retired prematurely in case he earns adverse report.
In 1982-83 recommendations were made by the Department of Personnel for his premature retirement because he had earned adverse remarks in the ACR of 1981-82.
However, final decision was not taken because of the pendency of cases/Enquiries.
In 1986, the case was again processed for being placed before the Screening Committee.
On 21-10-1986, Joint Secretary Personnel prepared a note suggesting that no useful purpose would be served by prematurely retiring the petitioner because in the last 5 years, he had earned one very Good, one Above Average, two Good and one Average reports and he was due to retire on 31-3-1987.
On 24-10-1986, the then Chief Secretary recorded following note :  "Taking into account the fact Shri Dalip Singh Bedhor is retiring on 31-3-1987 in the normal course, he need not be prematurely retired at this stage."
18.
However, the then Chief Minister (respondent No. 2) did not agree and ordered that he may be retired forthwith.
In compliance of his order, the Chief Secretary issued the impugned order.
19 In my opinion the exercise of power by the State Government under Rule 3(1) of the Rules to prematurely retire the petitioner just 4 months before his superannuation is vitiated by arbitrariness and non-application of mind to the relevant considerations.
It is correct that in the earlier years, the petitioner had earned adverse reports but in the preceding 6 years, he had not earned any adverse report.
Rather, during that period, he had earned one Very Good, three Good, one Above Average and one Average reports.
The remarks recorded in the ACR of 1981-82 are not adverse.
Rather, the same are advisory in nature.
On a consideration of the record of immediate past, no person of reasonable prudence could have formed a bona fide opinion that the petitioner's retention in service up to 31-3-1987 would not be in public interest.
It appears to me that while overruling the opinion of the Department of Personnel and the Chief Secretary, respondent No. 2 was oblivious of the guidelines issued by the government for exercise of power of premature retirement under Rule 3(1) of the Rules and, therefore, he ordered the petitioner's retirement ignoring the fact that he would have retired in the normal course on 31-3-1987.
Therefore, by applying the ratio of the judgments of the Supreme Court in Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada (supra) and other cases, I have no hesitation to quash the impugned order retiring the petitioner w.e.f.
11-11-1986.
20.
Before concluding I may mention that the enquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioner were quashed by this court in CWP No. 454 of 1985 Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab and Others, decided on 30.101995, 1996(2) SCT 80 (P&H).
21.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P12 is quashed.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to give all consequential benefits to the petitioner in the form of arrears of salary and revised retiral benefits.
The needful be done within 3 months from the date of presentation of copy of this order failing which the petitioner shall get interest at the rate 9% on the arrears of salary as well as the arrears of revised retiral benefits.
Petition allowed.