GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against award dated 2181984 (Annexure P.3) passed by Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Faridabad (respondent No. 2) in Reference No. 290 of 1982 for reinstatement of respondent No. 3-Jai Pal (hereinafter described as the workman) with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
The workman was engaged in the services of the petitioner, which is now known as Municipal Corporation, Faridabad as Sweeper on 2071978.
His service was terminated on 22.5.1981 without ay charge-sheet and without any notice.
The dispute raised by him was referred by the State Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act') to Labour Court, Faridabad.
3.
Notice of the claim petition filed by the workman was duly served upon the petitioner but no one appeared on its behalf.
Consequently, respondent No. 2 passed order dated 31121982 for ex parte proceedings.
The statement of the workman was recorded on 711983.
Thereafter, an application dated 3111985 was filed on behalf of the petitioner for setting aside order dated 31121982.
A reply was filed on behalf of the workman on 321983 to contest the application of the petitioner.
However, without deciding the application of the petitioner, respondent No. 2 passed the impugned award.
4.
Shri Suman Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the impugned award should be declared as vitiated by an error of law and quashed because the same is totally bereft of reasons.
He submitted that even if respondent No. 2 was justified in proceeding ex parte against the petitioner, he was duty-bound to pass a reasoned award disclosing the application of mind on the various issues arising out of the reference made by the State Government.
Learned counsel then argued that respondent No. 2 committed a grave illegality by passing the impugned award without deciding the application filed on behalf of the petitioner for setting aside order dated 3112982.
5.
Shri SK Jain argued that even though the impugned award is not well- reasoned, this Court may not interfere with the same because substantial justice has been done between the parties.
He submitted that the writ petition may be disposed of as infructuous because during the pendency thereof, the workman was taken back in service and he is in continuous service for the last more that 18 years.
6.
In my opinion, the writ petition cannot be disposed of as infructuous simply because the workman may have been taken back in service and the issue relating to his entitlement to be reinstated with continuity of service and back wages will have to be decided on merits.
7.
A reading of the impugned award shows that after adverting to the fact that the petitioner's representative was absent on the date of hearing, i.e., 21.8.1994 and the fact that evidence of the workman had been recorded ex parte, respondent No. 2 straightaway declared the termination of the service of the workman as illegal ad ordered his reinstatement with continuity of service and ful back wages.
While doing so, respondent No. 2 did not record a finding that the workman was employed in an industry and that termination of his service was violative of the rules of natural justice or the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
It is, thus, clear that the award is silent on the basic issues and is totally devoid of reasons.
8.
The question whether the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Act is required to pass a speaking order was considered by the Full Bench of Gujarat High Court in M/s. Testeels Ltd v. N M Desai, Conciliation Officer and another, AIR 1970 Gujarat 1 and answered in the affirmative.
Speaking for the Full Bench, Bhagwati J (as his Lordship then was) referred to judicial precedents of India, America and Australia and laid down the following propositions :  "The necessity of giving reasons flows as a necessary corollary from the rule of law which constitutes one of the basic principles of the Indian Constitutional set up.
The administrative authorities having a duty to act judicially cannot therefore decide on considerations of policy or expediency.
They must decide the matter solely on the facts of the particular case, solely on the material before them and apart from any extraneous consideration by applying pre-existing legal norms to factual situations.
Now the necessity of giving reasons is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the duty to act judicially.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and excludes or, at any rate, minimises arbitrariness in the decision-making process.
Another reason which compels making of such an order is based on the power of judicial review which is possessed by the High Court under Art. 32 of the Constitution.
These Courts have the power under the said provisions to quash by certiorari a quasi-judicial order made by an Administrative Officer and this power of review can be effectively exercised only if the order is a speaking order.
In the absence of any reasons in support of the order, the said courts cannot examine the correctness of the order under review.
The High Court and the Supreme Court would be powerless to interfere so as to keep the administrative officer within the limits of the law.
The result would be that the power of judicial review would be stultified and no redress being available to the citizen, there would be insidious encouragement to arbitrariness and caprice.
If this requirement is insisted upon, then they will be subject to judicial scrutiny and correction."
9.
By applying the ratio of the afore-mentioned decision to this case, I hold that the impugned award suffers from an error of law and as such, it is liable to be quashed.
10.
Hence, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned award is quashed.
Respondent No. 2 shall now pass fresh award after hearing the parties.
The parties are directed to appear before respondent No. 2 on 1942004.
Thereafter, the said respondent shall take necessary steps for deciding the reference made by the State Government and pass fresh award.
Liberty is given to the petitioner to make a request to respondent No. 2 to first decide the application for setting aside ex parte proceedings.
11.
While disposing of the writ petition in the manner indicated above, I make it clear that if the workman has already been reinstated in service, this order shall not enable the petitioner or its successor, i.e., Municipal Corporation, Faridabad to dispense with his service till the passing of the fresh award.
Copy of the order be given dasti on payment of the fee prescribed for urgent applications.
Petition allowed.