Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioner has sought a writ in the nature of mandamus directing Baba Farid University of Heath Sciences, Faridkot to allow the petitioner to migrate in the BDS course in Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Dental Sciences & Research, Sri Amritsar, respondent No. 4.
2.
The petitioner has pleaded that he is a student of AB Shetty Memorial Institute of Dental Sciences, Karnataka which is recognised Institute by the Dental Counsel of India.
The petitioner has joined the third year in the B.D.S.
Course.
The petitioner is suffering from astopical skin allergy in its acute form.
The father of the petitioner is also suffering from severe Asthma and therefore, the petitioner wishes to migrate to Sri Guru Ram Das institute of Dental Sciences & Research, Sri Amritsar, respondent No. 4.
3.
It has been alleged that the Dental Council of India Regulations also permit the students studying in recognised Dental Colleges to migrate or transfer to other Dental Colleges, but the University is not giving "No Objection Certificate" to enable him to get admission in the Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Dental Sciences & Research, Sri Amritsar and therefore, the petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of this court.
4.
It has been pointed out by the petitioner that earlier petitioner had taken admission in Muratha Mandal Dental College, Bangalore in the year 1999.
Said Institute was not recognised College by the Dental Counsel of India.
However, in pursuance of the order passed by the Karnataka High Court, the petitioner was transferred to AB Shetty Memorial Institute of Dental Sciences, Karnataka in September, 2002, which is recognised Institute by the Dental Council of India and is also affiliated and recognised with the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences, Karnataka, Bangalore.
The petitioner was admitted in the second professional in the said college.
The petitioner has passed his second year in April, 2003 with 60 per cent marks.
The petitioner has relied upon the following regulation framed by Dental Counsel of India to seek migration :  "Student studying in a recognised Dental College may be allowed to migrate or transfer to another Dental College under another or same University provided a similar curriculum is followed by two Universities.
However, migration or transfer should be avoided in the middle of any year, and in no case before the completion of the first BDS Examination."
5.
It is thus stated the petitioner satisfies the prerequisite condition of the regulation framed by the Dental Council of India as he has completed his BDS examination and curriculum followed by two Universities is the same.
6.
It has been pointed out by the petitioner that the claim of the petitioner for migration is not being entertained on account of the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 8789 of 1992 Miss Puja Ahluwalia v. The State of Punjab and other decided on 18121992 wherein guideline was laid down to be followed by Medical/Dental Colleges Punjab.
"6.
(i) Migration/transfer would be allowed in 2nd Professional MBBS/BDS and not thereafter.
(ii) The migration would be permitted by the University on the recommendation of the Principal of the College concerned to which the migration/transfer is being sought."
7.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2 it was pointed out that the Division Bench of this Court has held that the migration can be allowed only in second professional and not thereafter.
Since the petitioner is studying in third professional he is not eligible for migration in view of the judgment of this Court which is binding and has to be followed by all concerned institution/authorities.
It has been stated that the regulations of the Dental Council of India relating to migration cannot override the binding judgment of this Hon'ble Court which has been rendered after considering all relevant aspects of the problems of migration to Medial and Dental Colleges in the State of Punjab.
8.
A short reply was filed on behalf of the Dental Council of India wherein it has been stated that the matter is required to be seen and looked into after by Baba Farid University of Health Sciences as to whether both the colleges are following the same curriculum or not.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the guide- lines issued by this Court are contrary to the regulations framed by the Dental Council of India.
It was stated that any direction issued in contravention of the regulations framed by Dental Council of India is not sustainable.
Reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Appeal (Civil) 8485 of 2001 of KS Bhoir v. State of Maharashtra and other decided on 12122001, 2002(1) SCT 499 (SC)., wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held to the following effect :  "The Court cannot direct to waive the mandatory requirement of law in exercise of its extraordinatory power under Article 226.
It is not permissible for the High Court to direct an authority under the Act to act contrary to the statutory provisions.
The power conferred on the High Court by virtue of Article 226 is to enforce the rule of law and ensure that the State and other statutory authorities act in accordance with law."
10.
However, the said argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is not sustainable.
The regulations were framed by Dental Council of India in the year 1983 i.e. much prior to the issuance of the guide-lines by this Court.
The guide-lines were issued by this Court after the matter was examined by a Committee headed by the Financial Commissioner and the Presiding Officer Schools and Colleges, Tribunal in respect of migration of the students in Medical/Dental Colleges in the State of Punjab.
The guide-lines were issued on the basis of the report furnished by the Committee appointed by the Court.
It cannot be presumed that the Committee has submitted report without examining the regulations framed by the statutory body i.e.
Dental Council of India.
In fact, guide-lines issued by the court are not contradictory to the regulations framed.
The guide-lines impose some additional conditions than the one contained in the regulations.
Such guide-lines were issued in respect of Medical and Dental colleges situated in the State of Punjab.
Such guide-lines cannot be said to be thus contrary to the regulations framed by the Dental Council of India.
11.
The migration is not a legal right.
It is a concession which has to be availed in terms of the regulations framed.
In Satish Govind Prabhu Desai v. State of Maharashtra and Ors, 1993(3) S.C.T.
771 : 1992(5) SLR 625 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the migration/transfer of a student from one Medical College to another is not de hors the conditions subject to which the migration/transfer is permitted.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot seek migration in violation of the guide-lines framed by this Court.
12.
The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that apart from fact that the petitioner is in third professional and does not satisfy the guide-lines reproduced above, the petitioner even does not satisfy the another guide-line issued by this Court i.e. migration can be permitted only after appearing in the joint test for deciding inter se merit of the candidates seeking migration.
Since the petitioner is entitled to migration on account of conditions No. 6, there is no necessity to address on the other issues raised by the respondents No. 1 on account of which petitioner cannot be migrated.
In view of guide-lines issued by this Court, I do not find any merit in the petition to command the respondent to permit the migration of the petitioner.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.