Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Steno-typist on 1181978 in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Jhajjar and was promoted as Assistant on 24.3.1992 on which post he is working since then.
The conditions of service for the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) are governed by statutory rules called as Haryana Revenue Department (District Subordinate) Group C Service Rules, 1988, (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
Rule 9 of the Rules provides the method of recruitment to the said post which reads as under :-  "9.
METHOD OF RECRUITMENT :- Recruitment to any post in the service shall be made :- (b) In case of Asstt.
Superintendent (Revenue and Record) :- By promotion from amongst the Assistants working in the Deputy Commissioner's office.
(c) to (j) xx xx xx xx Provided that if suitable persons are not available the vacancy/vacancies will be filled up by direct recruitment.
APPENDIX B SrNo.
Name of Post Academic Qualifications and Experience if any for appointment other than direct recruitment 5.
Assistant Supdt.
(Revenue and Record) Five years experience as Asstt.
in the Deputy Commissioner's Office.
2.
Three posts of Assistant Superintendents (R&R) became available in Jhajjar District.
According to the petitioner, these three posts ought to have been filled up from the feeder cadre of the Deputy Commissioner's office.
The Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Revenue Department, issued a circular dated 2061994, clarifying that the promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) in the District should be filled only from the District and strictly as per Rule 9(2) of the Rules.
The petitioner who claims to be eligible for promotion to the said post was not promoted and consequently he filled a writ petition in this Court, which was disposed of by a Division Bench vide order dated 1512001.
The representation of the petitioner filed in furtherance thereto on 2082002 was rejected vide order of the respondents dated 1332001, copy of which is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/4.
The Commissioner, Rohtak Division, while rejecting the claim of the petitioner concluded as under :-  "According to the present seniority list at the Division Level, Sh. Vidya Nand come in the seniority at Sr. No. 8 and in the said seniority list, Sh. Satdev and Telu Ram shown at Sr. No. 3 and 7, are still shown as Asstt.
So in the above circumstances, they are not entitled to be promoted as Asstt.
Supdt.
till the candidates of general category senior to them are promoted as Asstt/Asstt Supdt.
as they were promoted by taking the accelerated promotion and in this manner, Sh. Vidya Nand come at Sr. No. 6 and presently in the Division, 8 posts of Asstt.
Supdt.
are lying vacant.
So Sh. Vidya Nand entitled to be promoted as Asstt.
Supdt.
Sh. Vidya Nand if taken back in the Division Office, the petitioners are not benefited in any manner.
Apart from that it is necessary to mention here that Vidya Nand was promoted on 22698 and his promotion has not been set aside by the Hon'ble High Court.
It is also necessary to mention here that when writ petition was pending in the Hon'ble High Court, the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) Bahadurgarh, has sent the proposal of Sh. Prem Singh Chhikara, petitioner No. 3 and following order was passed on the said proposal :-  "Promotion can not be given, but the senior-most Asstt.
can be given concurrent charge of Asstt.
Supdt.
in the interest of smooth functioning of the office."
Taking into consideration the above circumstances, Sh. Sudam Singh, Umed Singh and Prem Singh Chhikara (Petitioner No. 1, 2 and 3) are not fit for promotion and their representations are hereby rejected and they may be informed accordingly."
3.
In fact, in the meanwhile, respondent No. 4 Shri Vidya Nand was promoted to the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) on 22.6.1998 as the authorities did not find any merit in the claim of the petitioner.
4.
In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner impugned the order dated 1332001, Annexure P/4 to the writ petition, on various grounds.
5.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed written statement.
The facts as stated are really not in dispute.
However, the basic plea of the respondents is that the petitioner had taken accelerated promotion as Assistant being a candidate of the reserved category and also possessed five years experience as an Assistant but in view of the law laid down in RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : 1995(2) Supreme Court Cases 745, he could not have been given further promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent over the head of the general category candidates senior to him as Clerks but who have been promoted as Assistants after him.
In regard to the rules it is stated that the District cadre of the Assistant Superintendent was abolished vide Haryana Government Notification No. G.S.R.
52-Const/Article 309/2000 dated 1882000, copy of which is annexed to the written statement as Annexure R.6 and it was made a divisional level cadre on 2282000.
Various vacancies which occurred at that level in all the Districts including Jhaggar were filled on the basis of common divisional level seniority as shown in Annexure R.8 to the written statement.
Learned counsel for the respondents while praying for dismissal of the writ petition and referring to the instructions of the Government as contained in the letter dated 1011997 annexed to the reply as Annexure R/3, placed emphasis on the concluding part of the said instructions, which reads as under :-  "In view of the aforesaid judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court and Punjab and Haryana High Court, it is thus clear that under the reservation policy, the employees belonging to the scheduled castes and backward classes categories can be given accelerated promotion but not accelerated consequential seniority and that the inter se seniority of the employees of general category and reserved should continue to be governed by their original seniority in the feeder cadres.
The matter has been carefully examined.
It has been decided that from the date of pronouncement of the judgment by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab i.e. 1021995, no employee belonging to reserved categories of scheduled castes or backward classes be given the benefit of accelerated seniority and other consequential benefits over his/her senior on account of his/her accelerated promotion from the feeder services under the policy of reservation in Class III and IV services."
6.
We have given our considered view to the entire matrix of the matter and the contentions raised before us by the learned counsel for the respective parties.
7.
The proposition of law as settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Ajit Singh Janjua and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1999(4) RSJ 211, and RK Sabharwal's case (supra) it cannot be disputed that an employee who gets an accelerated promotion to the next higher post as belonging to reserved category, cannot get that benefit once against over and above the candidates belonging to the general category.
This would be true even when the candidates of the general category are promoted to the higher class subsequent to the promotion of the candidates belonging to reserved category.
The concept of accelerated promotion would not provide to a reserved candidate double advantage over and above his colleagues of the same class.
8.
Even the petitioner before us has not raised a claim that he was entitled to an accelerated promotion over and above the general candidates to the post of Assistant Superintendent from the post of Assistant.
The case of the petitioner on the basis of the above pleaded facts is that the vacancy for the post of Assistant Superintendent had arisen in the year 1997 and the petitioner was the only qualified person who was entitled to be promoted on his own turn and not in supersession or otherwise to the candidates of the general category, who had also been promoted as Assistants in the meanwhile, but did not possess the requisite experience of five years as an Assistant.
There is also no doubt to the effect that the petitioner was promoted as an Assistant on 24.3.1992 while respondent No. 4 was promoted to the said post on 13.1.1990 in terms of Annexure R.8 to the reply.
Other undisputed but material facts are that the vacancy of Assistant Superintendent arose in the year 1997.
Rules to make the feeder cadre at the divisional level were incorporated and amended vide notification dated 2282000.
Respondent No. 4 was promoted to the said post on 22.6.1998, Annexure P/2 to the writ petition, while he was working at the divisional level in the office of the Commissioner at Rohtak.
9.
The arguments raised on behalf of the respondents could have some bearing on the matter, but the arguments raised by them are of no substance in view of the intervening circumstances that the petitioner had earlier filed Civil Writ Petition No. 14325 of 1998 in the month of August, 1998 and the same was disposed of vide order dated 1512001 passed by a Division Bench of this Court.
We consider it appropriate to make a reference to the contents of the order at this stage.
The order reads as under :-  "Heard learned counsel for the parties.
During the course of arguments, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has made statement that the case of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendents (Revenue and Records) is under consideration and is likely to be decided finally.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of directing the respondents to decide the case of the petitioners for promotion to Assistant Superintendent, as per the rule applicable when the vacancies had occurred, within a period of one month from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
10.
It is not disputed before us that the said order has attained finality and has been accepted by the State.
Once this order is accepted, then the respondents would be estopped from taking a stand contrary thereto.
They had made a statement to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion as per the rules applicable when the vacancy had occurred.
Admittedly, the vacancy had occurred in the year 1997 and the rules were amended in the year 2000, while respondent No. 4 was promoted on 22.6.1998.
The respondents were obliged to consider the case of the petitioner in terms of the judgment of the Division Bench dated 1512001.
Thus, this order would always operate as impediment for the respondents to decline relief to the petitioner in light of the rules which have come into force on 2282000.
Respondent No. 4 was, admittedly, not employee of the Deputy Commissioner's office, but was working in the office of Commissioner at Rohtak, Jhajjar, which was earlier a part of District Rohtak, had vacancies at the level of the Assistant Superintendent even on 781997 as is clear from the bare reading of the impugned order.
The Commissioner, Rohtak Division, despite having noticed the judgment of the Court dated 1512001, failed to carry out the directive of the Court and did not consider the case of the petitioner in accordance with the rules prevalent at the relevant time i.e. when the vacancy occurred.
If the petitioner, at that relevant time, was the only person possessing essential qualifications of experience, we see no reason as to how could he be denied the benefit in the year 1997 in accordance with the rules in force at that time.
11.
We are unable to appreciate the approach adopted by the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, especially in face of the clear mandate of Division Bench of this Court, as contained in the order dated 15012001.
The right of consideration of the petitioner was to be granted in accordance with the rules in force prior to August, 2000 and the qualifications and eligibility as it stood at that time.
In 1997, respondent No. 4 was not even part of the Deputy Commissioner's office.
12.
For the reasons afore-stated we are of the considered view that the impugned order passed by the respondents dated 1332001 is liable to be set aside and petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) in accordance with the rules as in force in the year 1997.
Thus, we allow this writ petition; set aside the order dated 1332001 (Annexure P/4 to the writ petition) and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as in the year 1997, in accordance with the Rules prevalent at that time.
However, we make it clear that unless it is essential for the respondents to revert respondent No. 4, they may grant relief to the petitioner without disturbing his promotion, as it is stated on record that there are number of vacancies of Assistant Superintendents after enforcement of the amended Rules.
The relief grantable and granted shall include all consequential benefits accordingly.
While allowing the writ petition in the above terms, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.