Vikramajit Sen, J - The order which has been impugned in this writ petition is dated September 23, 1996, in which the Tribunal-II had dismissed the approval application of the petitioner as a consequence of the management's failure to pay costs.
2.
Ms. Kittoo Bajaj, learned counsel for the respondent, at the very threshold, concedes that the order of dismissal of the approval application on the ground of non-payment of costs may not be sustainable in view of the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in L.P.A. No. 480 of 2000, entitled Delhi Transport Corporation v. Hari Narain Giri.
The Division Bench had followed the view of the Apex Court in Punjab National Bank Ltd v. Sri Ram Kunwar, Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1957 SC 276 : 1957-I-LLJ-455, holding that in terms of Section 11(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the cost of the proceedings would mean costs of the entire proceedings as determined on its conclusion and not costs in a pending proceedings, nor costs to be incurred in future by a party.
Single Benches of this Court have remanded cases for this very reason.
3.
The contention of Ms. Kittoo Bajaj, learned counsel for the respondent- workmen, however, is that the present petition ought not to be entertained in view of the inordinate and unexplained delay in its filing.
The facts arc that the approval application, which has been assailed in this writ petition, was passed on September 23, 1996.
Thereafter, the workmen initiated the present proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It is not in controversy that those proceedings were contested by the DTC/petitioner.
Those proceedings came to an end on May 9, 2002, and the Labour Court-VII had quantified the workmen's dues at Rs. 1,34,985 for the period September, 1994, to August, 1997.
The present writ petition has been filed on April 4, 2000.
The period intervening between the dismissal of the approval application and the filing of the present writ petition is, therefore, approximately four years.
4.
My attention has been drawn by Ms. Bajaj to the judgment of the Constitution Bench in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006.
The Apex Court observed that :  "It is not easy nor is it desirable to lay down any rule for universal application.
It may, however, be stated as a general rule that if there has been unreasonable delay, the Court ought not to ordinarily lend its aid to a party by this extraordinary remedy of mandamus.
It appears to us, however, that the maximum period fixed by the Legislature as the time within which the relief by a suit in a civil Court must be brought may ordinarily be taken to be a reasonable standard by which delay in seeking remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can be measured.
This Court may consider the delay unreasonable, even if it is less than the period of limitation prescribed for a civil action for the remedy but where the delay is more than this period, it will almost always be proper for the Court to hold that it is unreasonable".
It will be relevant to bear in mind that the Constitution Bench was concerned with a situation where the petitioner had voiced the grievance that he had been assessed to tax under a void statute.
Even in those extraordinary circumstances, the Supreme Court had declined to overlook the laches.
Ms. Kittoo Bajaj also relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation v. Balwant Regular Motor Service, Amravati, AIR 1969 SC 329.
In that case, the Apex Court again articulated that :  "It is well-established that the writ of certiorari will not be granted in a case where there is such negligence or omission on the part of the applicant to assert his right as, taken in conjunction with the lapse of time and other circumstances, causes prejudice to the adverse party".
The Court relied on Lindsay Petroleum Co v. Prosper Armstrong Hurd, Arbran Farewell and John Kemp, [1874] 5 PC 221 and also specifically noticed in its earlier decision in Moon Mills Ltd v. MR Meher, President, Industrial Court, Bombay, AIR 1967 SC 1450 : 1967-II-LLJ-34.
Ms. Kittoo Bajaj relies on the observations of the Apex Court in Naik Subedar Lachhman Dass v. Union of India, AIR 1977 SC 1979, where the Court found that the writ petition had been filed after a gross delay for which there was no specific explanation and, therefore, endorsed the High Court's decision for a summary dismissal of the action.
It may be observed that the laches have not even been attempted to be answered or explained by the DTC.
5.
On the issue of delay and laches, Mr. Vibhu Shankar, learned counsel for the petitioner, has relied heavily on paragraph 6 of the judgment in Moon Mills Ltd v. MR Meher, President, Industrial Court, Bombay (supra), which reads as under at p. 38 of 1967-II-LLJ-34 :  "On behalf of the respondents, Mr. B Sen, however, pointed out that the conduct of the appellant does not entitle it to the grant of acquiescence or delay.
It was pointed out that the award of Mr. Bhat was given on April 25, 1958, but an application to the High Court for grant of a writ was made long after on November 16, 1959.
We do not think there is any substance in this argument, because the second respondent had made an application, dated August 19, 1958, to the Labour Court for enforcement of the award and the appellant had contested that application by a written statement, dated September 15, 1958.
The Labour Court allowed the application on August 4, 1959, and the appellant had preferred an appeal to the Industrial Court on August 31, 1959.
The decision of the Industrial Court was given on October 24, 1959, and after the appeal was dismissed the appellant moved the High Court for grant of a writ on November 16, 1959.
Mr. B Sen then put forward the argument that the appellant itself had acted on the bonus agreement and on October 14, 1957, had issued a notice informing its workers that pursuant to the award of the Industrial Court in terms of the agreement, dated March 1, 1956, reached between the Mill-owners' Association, Bombay, and the Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, regarding payment of bonus would be paid to them at 48 per cent, of the total basic earning during 1956.
On October 27, 1956, the appellant and the secretary of the second respondent signed a joint statement in which it was stated as follows : 'Since it has not yet been possible to complete bonus calculations for all these years, it is hereby agreed between the Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay and the Moon Mills Ltd, Bombay, that under the bonus agreement the Moon Mills should pay a bonus at the rate of 48 per cent for each of the years 1953, 1954 and 1955 as a tentative payment.'
It was, therefore, contended that the appellant itself had agreed with the second respondent to pay bonus for 1953, 1954, 1955 and 1956 according to the terms of the bonus agreement.
It was also pointed out that the appellant had not pressed its objection with regard to jurisdiction before the Labour Court or the Industrial Court.
But it appears that the decision of this Court in Prakash Cotton Mills v. State of Bombay, AIR 1961 SC 977 : 1962-I-LLJ-108 was given on February 16, 1961, after the decision of KK Desai, J on July 1, 1960, and before the decision of the Letters Patent Bench on February 6, 1962.
In the circumstances of this case, we do not consider that there is such acquiescence on the part of the appellant as to disentitle it to a grant of a writ under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It is true that the issue of a writ of certiorari is largely a matter of sound discretion.
It is also true that the writ will not be granted if there is such negligence or omission on the part of the applicant to assert his right as, taken in conjunction with the lapse of time and other circumstances, causes prejudice to the adverse party.
The principle is to a great extent, though not identical with, similar to the exercise of discretion in the Court of Chancery.
The principle has been clearly stated by Sri Barnes Peacock in Lindsay Petroleum Co v. Prosper Armstrong Hurd, Arbran Farewall, and John Kemp, (1874) 5 PC 221 at page 239, as follows :  'Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an arbitrary or a technical doctrine.
Where it would be practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where by his conduct and neglect he has, though perhaps not waiving that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it would not be reasonable to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases, lapse of lime and delay are most material, but in every case, if an argument against relief, which otherwise would be just is founded upon mere delay, that delay of course not amounting to a bar by any statute of limitations, the validity of that defence must be tried upon principles substantially equitable.
Two circumstances, always important in such cases, are, the length of the delay and the nature of the acts done during the interval, which might affect either party and cause of balance of justice or injustice in taking the one course or the other, so far as relates to the remedy.'
In the present case, we are of the opinion that there is no negligence or laches or acquiescence on the part of the appellant as may disentitle it to the grant of a writ."
6.
Predicated on the above passage, it is Mr. Vibhu Shankar's contention that since the petitioner was actively defending the action under Section 33-C(2) filed by the respondent-workmen, the decision applies on all fours.
What needs to be borne in mind is that the period within which all the relevant litigations had taken place in that case was less than two years.
It was in these circumstances that the Supreme Court found the absence of any acquiescence on the part of the management.
The central point before me is not one of the acquiescence but that of delay.
It is also great significance that there is not even a whisper of an explanation given in the petition justifying or explaining the petitioner's approaching this Court after a period of four years ie, one year beyond the sanction period action.
It may even be possible to perceive acquiescence in the petitioner's conduct inasmuch as it has correlated the petition to the issue of "leave without pay" rather than the dismissal for non-payment of costs.
7.
Mr. Vibhu Shankar reiterates the argument that since the Division Bench has specifically ruled that an industrial action cannot be dismissed for failure to pay costs, particularly in view of Section 33, the petitioner has a good case on the merits, and, therefore, the laches should be ignored.
I am unable to accede to this argument, since it would annihilate the legal principles concerning delay and laches altogether.
As has already been noticed, even where a person had been taxed under a void statute, the Supreme Court refused to interfere because of delay of a period beyond that prescribed for a civil action.
It must also be mentioned once again, that Ms. Kittoo Bajaj has not laboured on the correctness of the petition on merits in view of the judgment of the Division Bench.
8.
In these circumstances, even though the petitioner may have a good case on the merits, I am unable to close my eyes to the fact that this Court has been approached after an inordinate period of four years during which the appellant, while defending the approval application under Section 33-C(2), took no action to assail the dismissal of the approval application on which the subsequent action was predicated.
In paragraph 40 of the writ petition, there is a reference to the pendency of a number of writ petitions on the issue of "leave without pay".
It is quite clear that it is the pendency of those petitions which spurred the petitioner to file the present petition.
The petition is clearly barred by delay, laches and limitation and is dismissed on this ground.
9.
In the facts of the present case, keeping in perspective that the petitioner has a good case on merits, there shall be no orders as to costs.
Ms. Kittoo Bajaj further presses for interim relief, as has been granted in C.W.
No. 2830 of 1996 by orders dated July 23, 1997.
The facts of that case are not forthcoming from the orders.
I am not persuaded to grant any interim measures.
The petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.