Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the office of the District & Sessions Judge, Jalandhar.
She was given assignment of Copyist in the said office.
The petitioner became pregnant and her expected date of delivery was 632001.
Unfortunately, the petitioner delivered a still-born child on 1122001.
She applied for maternity leave but was granted abortion leave for one month.
Because of her ill health, she could not attend the office and as such her services were terminated on 792001.
Copy of the said order of termination has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/10.
According to this order, the petitioner was on probation for a period of two years and her services were terminated without giving her any opportunity of being heard and even serving a show cause notice upon her.
It is the case of the petitioner that she was sick and had applied for leave.
She even joined her duties on 16th August, 2001, but still her services were terminated without any justification.
2.
In the written statement, it is not disputed by the respondents that the petitioner was appointed as a Clerk on temporary basis and was on probation for two years.
The termination of the services of the petitioner is simplicitor, as she has rendered only one year 11 months and 10 days services as on the date of termination.
She remained absent for six months and 27 days.
According to the respondents, she being probationer, cannot claim any right to the post and her termination is in consonance with the rules of Punjab Subordinate Courts Establishment (Recruitment and General Conditions of Service) Rules, 1997.
It is also stated that in terms of the relevant rules, she was not entitled to the grant of maternity leave as she has given birth to a still-born child and she was rightly granted abortion leave.
3.
From the pleading on record, it appears that the primary question that needs to be decided by the Court is whether the petitioner was entitled to grant of maternity leave under Section 3(b) of the Maternity Benefits Act, 1961 or could be granted only abortion leave.
Finding on this issue would help in resolving the main controversy as to whether order of termination of service dated 7th September, 2001 is an order of simplicitor.
The reasons which have now been stated in the written statement can be subjected to judicial review or not.
4.
Undisputed facts, as they emerged from the record, are that the petitioner was pregnant and her due date of delivery was 6th March, 2001 and she delivered a still-born on 11th February, 2001.
The provisions is regard to grant of maternity leave have been placed on record by the respondents along with their reply as Annexure R/5.
Relevant provisions read as under :-  (iii) Maternity leave 8.137-A.
(1) The competent authority under Rule 8.23 may grant to a female Government employee maternity leave on full pay for a period not exceeding 180 days without the necessity of production of a medical certificate and the grant of such leave shall be so regulated that the date of confinement falls within the period of this leave.
Provided that no leave under this sub-rule shall be granted to a female Government employee who has three or more living children.
Note.
1 : Extension, in leave, if any, beyond 180 days shall, however, be permissible by the grant of leave of the kind due.
(2) Maternity leave will not be debited against the leave account of the concerned female Government employee.
xx xx xx xx xx xx Note.
2 :- Where a female Government employee has less than two living children, maternity leave under this rule may also be granted in cases of miscarriages and abortion including abortion included under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, subject to the conditions that the leave does not exceed six weeks and the application for leave is supported by a certificate from a registered medical practitioner and in case of doubt certificate of a Principal Medical Officer or Assistant to Civil Surgeon or Gazetted Medical officer may be called for : Provided that a female Government employee having two or more children shall not be entitled to avail of this concession, but, is required, can be sanctioned leave to kind due, on the production of a medical certificate."
5.
The language of the above rule makes it clear that the rule making authority has drawn a distinction between the miscarriage/abortion on the one hand and maternity leave for delivery on the other.
This distinction clearly relates to the medical conditions and grounds which are available to a female employee.
The birth of (still-born) child few days prior to the date of the normal delivery cannot be termed as an abortion or miscarriage.
It is a matter of common knowledge that there can not be abortion of 8th month old pregnancy.
Abortion in its apparent and clear contra-distinction to birth of a child must be understood as known in its common parlance duly supported by medical science.
The medical evidence available on record is the medical certificate issued by the doctor on 27th March, 2001, stating that the petitioner had delivered a still-born child on 11th February, 2001.
Nothing has been placed on record to the contrary.
Under Section 3(b) of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 a child has been defined to include a still-born child.
While delivery under Section 3(c) means birth or a child.
The scheme of the Act further shows that the maternity leave must regulate and be covering the date of expected delivery.
In other words, the maternity leave under the above provisions can be extended up to six months, which would obviously cover a period immediately preceding and subsequent to the date of delivery.
This social legislation is primarily intended to protect the interest of a pregnant lady, safeguard the interest of the child in the womb.
In these circumstances, we are of the considered view that the respondents were not justified in treating the maternity leave claimed by the petitioner as abortion leave.
6.
It was contended by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that the petitioner was not in any case entitled to maternity leave being a temporary employee on probation.
According to the learned counsel, this would be travesty of justice, it the person who is on probation for two years is granted maternity leave for a period extended upto six months.
We are not impressed with the submission inasmuch as this argument is no more res-integra and has been squarely answered by the different judgments of Hon'ble Apex Court as well as this Court.
Reference in this regard can be made to the judgment of this Court in the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Madhuri Garg and another v. The State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 8185 of 2001 decided on 2282002, where the Court held as under :-  "As is clear from the above facts the controversy between the parties is limited to the question as to whether the contractual employees are entitled to grant of benefit of maternity leave or not ?
Learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Rattan Lal & others v. State of Haryana and others, 1985(3) SLR 548 and of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dr. Sanjiv Kumar (supra).
The learned counsel for the State has not been able to bring to the notice of the Court any judgment to the contrary or any order or stay granted by the Hon'ble Apex Court on numerous Division Bench judgments of this Court.
In the case of Raj Bala etc. v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 12753 of 1999, decided on 1142002 (reported as 2002(4) Services Cases Today 172) the matter was discussed at great length by a Division Bench of this Court and the petitioners in those cases were granted the benefit of maternity leave.
The employees in those cases were also contractual employees.
As the matter in controversy in the present case is squarely covered by different judgments of this Court, we are of the considered view that on the principle of precedents, the judgment in Raja Bala's case (supra) is fully applicable even on ratio decidendi to the present case and the petitioners are entitled to the relief claimed for.
We can appropriately made a reference to the relevant portion of the findings recorded in Raj Bala's case (supra) as under :-  "Different Division Benches of this Court had granted relief to the petitioners who were similarly placed alike the present petitioners.
Reference can be made to CWP No. 2783 of 1996 titled as Sunita Rani v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 12121996; Vijay Bala and others v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 5277 of 1999, decided on 2072000 and Uma Rani (supra).
In the case of Polu Ram (supra) it was held that the practice of giving 89 days appointments was illegal and unconstitutional and offended Articles 14, 16 and 39-B of the Constitution of India.
Direction was given to continue the petitioners till regular selected candidates were appointed and they were directed to be paid regular pay scales.
The special leave petition filed in the case of Uma Rani (supra) was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 5102001.
In the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Female Workers (Muster Roll) and another, 2002(2) RSJ 131 : 2000(2) SCT 258 (SC), the Hon'ble Apex Court while dealing with the female workers working on muster roll in the Municipal Corporation, Delhi held that the Municipal Corporation was an industry.
The Court held as under :-  "It is in the background of the provisions contained in Article 39, specifically in Articles 42 and 43, that the claim of the respondents for maternity benefit and the action fo the petitioner in denying that benefit to its women employees has to be scrutinised so as to determine whether the denial of maternity benefits by the petitioner is justified in law or not.
Since Article 42 specifically speaks of "just and humane conditions of work" and "maternity relief", the validity of an executive or administrative action in denying maternity benefit has to be examined on the anvil of Article 42 which, though not enforceable at law, is nevertheless available for determining the legal efficacy of the action complained of.
The Parliament has already made the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
It is not disputed that the benefits available under this Act have been made available to a class of employees of the petitioner-Corporation.
But the benefit is not being made available to the women employees engaged on muster roll, on the ground that they are not regular employees of the Corporation.
As we shall presently see, there is no justification for denying the benefit of this Act to casual workers or workers employed on daily wage basis."
"............In the meantime, the benefit under the Act shall be provided to the women (muster roll) employees of the Corporation who have been working with them on daily wages."
A Single Bench of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Dipikaben R Parmar v. State of Gujarat, 1999(2) SCT 847 clearly held while relying upon different judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court that lady employees appointed on ad hoc basis are entitled to maternity leave."
7.
In view of the above settled position of law, we reject this contention of the respondent as well.
The order of termination passed against the petitioner in the facts and circumstances of the case is not an order simplicitor termination and the Court must necessarily lift the veil and examine the circumstances leading to the passing of the order more particularly, in view of the error of the law in which an administrative authority have fallen.
8.
Lastly, it was contended that under rule 14 of the above referred rules, an appeal is provided to the High Court against the order passed by the learned District Judge and would be disposed of by Hon'ble the Chief Justice or a Judge nominated for that purpose the alternative remedy is available the present writ petition is barred.
This argument needs not detain us any further as the present writ petition was filed in the year 2001 and it would not be fair to dismiss this writ petition in 2003 on the ground of maintainability.
Secondly, according to rule 14 of the said rule appeal would lie only against an order of penalty.
According to the respondents, the order is one that of termination simplicitor and is not punitive.
If we accept this argument, objection raised by the respondents is not maintainable.
9.
The result of the above discussion is that we set aside the order of termination dated 792001, Annexure P/10 to the writ petition, however, with complete liberty to the learned District Judge, Jalandhar to look into the matter afresh, in view of the observations, afore-noticed and pass such other orders as the authority may consider fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case and in accordance with law.
We also make it clear that all consequential benefits to the petitioner shall also be governed by the order which may be passed by the said authority.
No costs.
Petition allowed.