TS Doabia, J - Petitioner having been denied disability pension has approached this Court.
2.
Petition stands admitted.
3.
Respondents submit that objections preferred be treated as counter;  The above prayer is allowed.
4.
Before noticing the facts in this case, it would be apt to refer to a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Madan Singh Shekhawat v Union of India and Ors, 1999(4) SCT 89 (SC) : (1999) 6 SCC 459, wherein the view expressed is that while dealing with pension matters of those who were serving the armed forces, a liberal approach can be adopted.
In the above case, the appellant was allowed disability pension.
He had suffered injury while he was travelling from Jodhpur to his home station for availing casual leave.
The facts in this case are also required to be taken note of not only on the basis as projected but also keeping in view the observations made by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case.
5.
Petitioner was enrolled in the Jammu and Kashmir Rifles on 23rd Jan 79.
Petitioner performed his duty with devotion and dedication to which fact there is no dispute.
The petitioner suffered an injury "Fracture neck Fumer Rt."
This injury was of severe nature.
This was when he was on annual leave.
This was sustained by him on 24th Feb, 81.
He was admitted in Medical Hospital, Udhampur.
Thereafter, he remained admitted in Base Hospital, Delhi and was ultimately down-graded to medical category CEE (T) for six months.
A court of inquiry was held.
It was found that the petitioner sustained injury during annual leave.
It has been observed that this is not attributable or aggravated to by military service.
These findings are sought to be substantiated by placing reliance on Annexure R1 and R2.
It has been stated that the disability is to the extent of 50% but this was during the period when the petitioner was on annual leave, and therefore, is not attributable to army service.
Petitioner's case was reviewed on 29th May, 82.
He continued to remain in medical category CEE (T) for a further period of six months.
The case was again reviewed after six months.
He was then placed in medical category CEE (P) for two years.
Yet another review was held at Medical Hospital, Jaipur.
The petitioner continued to be placed in category CEE (P).
Ultimately in the exercise of power conferred under Army Rule 13(3) item III(V), the petitioner was discharged from service w.e.f.
29th Oct' 86.
The medical board assessed the disability at 50% but opined that this was not on account of military service.
It is, however, not in dispute that the claim of the petitioner was forwarded to the Pension sanctioning authority at Allahabad but the same has been declined on the plea that the injury which was sustained by the petitioner was not attributable to army service.
6.
The question arises as to whether an army personal while on annual leave is entitled to claim disability pension.
7.
It be seen that there are number of decisions where disability pension has been allowed even when the concerned employee was on casual leave.
In OWP No. 1087/97, titled Mohinder Kaur v. Union of India and others, decided by this Court on 11th Dec'98, the son of the writ petitioner died when he was on casual leave.
A speeding matador coming from the opposite direction hit the scooter on which the son of the petitioner in the above case was coming from RS Pura.
The above aspect of the matter was considered and the petitioner in the above was held entitled to family pension.
While coming to the conclusion that the writ petitioner is entitled to claim family pension, a decision given by a Division Bench of this Court in the cse of Pritam Singh v. State of Ors, 1980 JKLR 16 was taken note of.
In the above case, the Division Bench speaking through Dr. AS Anand, later Chief Justice of India, expressed an opinion that even an employee on casual leave would be treated as on active duty.
In the above case, this issue was decided on a different context.
The question was whether a court martial can be held when an army personnel commits an act when he is on casual leave.
Taking note of the provisions of Section 3(1) read with Section 70 and also the leave rules and more particularly Rr.
9 and 10(a), the Division Bench was of the opinion that an employee would be on duty even if he happens to be on casual leave.
8.
The above aspect of the matter was again considered by this Court in writ petition SWP No. 1327/93 decided on 16th Nov' 98.
The concerned employee had gone to a cinema hall for seeing a movie.
When he was returning back, he met with an accident.
He died.
Taking into consideration the relevant rules, a conclusion was arrived at that the defendants of the concerned employee were entitled to the pensionary benefits.
In Shashi Kumar Mishra v. Union of India, 1996(3) SCT (M.P)(Jabalpur) 441, an army officer while undergoing recruitment training was granted fifteen days casual leave.
He proceeded to his home town.
While travelling, he met with an accident.
He was not found fit for service and was invalidated out of service.
The Madhaya Pradesh High Court came to the conclusion that such an officer would be entitled to disability pension as he would be deemed to have been injured while on duty.
Reliance in this case was also placed on the decision reported as Harbans Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1971 Delhi 227 and Division Bench judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Chhatru Ram v. Secy, Defence, 1991(1) SCT 316 (P&H).
In view of the above, the petitioner would be deemed to have injured while on duty.
9.
It be further seen that the claims of the petitioner for grant of disability pension were forwarded to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, and it is this authority which declined the claim on the ground that the injury sustained by the petitioner is not attributable to military service.
In this regard, the position of law is settled that once an opinion is expressed by the Medical Board, then the Controller of Defence Accounts is not supposed to sit over the judgment and if any decision is to be taken, then that has to be taken after constituting a medical board and compliance of natural justice.
In Janak Raj v Union of India, 2000(2) SCT 456 (P&H), the disability of the aggrieved army personnel was determined by the Medical Board at 40% but the Controller of Defence Accounts rejected the claim.
It was observed that the Controller of Defence Accounts cannot sit over the findings of the Medical Board as he is not an expert in this regard.
10.
In Nk.
Darshan Singh v. Union of India, 2000(2) SCT 504 (P&H), the claimant came to suffer from a paralytic stroke.
It was a case of 100 percent disability.
The Medical Board recommended the case, which was negatived by the Controller Defence Accounts.
It was observed that the Medical Board's opinion should prevail and the claimant was held entitled to family pension.
Similar view has been expressed in the case of Ex. Capt Harbhajan Singh v. Union of India, 2001(2) SCT 1123.
As a matter of fact, once a person is invalidated on medical grounds, the onus is upon the army authorities to prove that the disability suffered by the concerned army personnel was not attributable or aggravated by army service.
Such a view has been expressed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Vir Yagya Dutt v. Union of India, 2001(2) SCT 801 (P&H).
11.
Again in Hari Chand v. Union of India, 2001(2) SCT 524 (P&H), the view expressed is that once the disability is fixed at 20 percent, then the Controller of Defence Accounts has no locus standi to reduce the same and if it is to be done, then the principles of natural justice are supposed to be complied with.
Similar view has been expressed in the case of Darshan Singh v. Union of India, 2001(2) SCT 813 (P&H).
12.
In view of the above and in view of the conclusion arrived at that the injury sustained by the petitioner would be deemed to have been sustained while on duty, the petitioner is held entitled to disability pension.
Let this be paid to him at the percentage assessed by the Medical Board.
The same would be released in his favour within a period of three months from the date, a copy of this order is made available to the respondents by the petitioner.
The petitioner would also be entitled to interest at the rate of 6 percent on the arrears.
In case, the disability pension is not released, the rate of interest would be 9 percent and this enhanced component would be payable by the person on whose account the delay occurs.
Disposed of as such.
Petition allowed.