SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - Heard the counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the record.
2.
The petitioner was in service of the respondent-Corporation as Conductor and had served for more than 5 years.
He was drawing a sum of Rs. 375/- per month as wages.
His services were terminated on 641978, the workman served a demand note on the Management on 3181981.
An industrial dispute was referred to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Jalandhar.
3.
On the basis of the pleadings, the Labour Court framed the following issue :-  1.
"Whether termination of service of Shri Surjit Singh workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
4.
After considering the evidence led by the parties the Labour Court has held that the charges were not proved against the petitioner.
It was also held that the order passed on 641978 which is based on unfair and improper inquiry, is set aside and the workman has been held entitled to reinstatement in service with continuity of service.
However, the workman has not been granted the benefit of back wages for the period of 641978 to 3181981.
Further, the management has been directed to pay him only 25% of the back wages from 3181981 till the date of reinstatement.
I am of the considered opinion that the relief part of the awarded can only be partly justified.
The workman had not given any justification for the delay in raising the demand for an industrial dispute from 641978 till 3181981.
Therefore, the Labour Court was justified in denying the benefit of back wages for the aforesaid period.
However, the Labour Court has committed an error, which is apparent on the face of the record, by denying the benefit of full back wages to the workman w.e.f 3181981 till reinstatement.
5.
It is settled proposition of law that ordinarily when a workman is reinstated in service with continuity of service, he would be entitled to full backwages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
This view of mine finds support from the Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer Labour Court and another, Vol. LXXXI-1979 P.L.R.
720.
After analysing the legal position, on the basis of principle as well as precedent, SS Sandhawalia, Chief Justice, speaking for the Bench has observed as follows :-  "5.
There is no gain saying the fact that there has been some divergence of opinion in the various High Courts on the point earlier.
Varying views had been expressed as to where precisely the onus lay with regard to the claim to back wages and also with regard to the striking of the issues or the necessary point for determination thereof by the Labour Court itself.
Within this Court, a Division Bench in Daljeet and Co.
Private Ltd., Ropar v. The State of Punjab and others, AIR 1964 Pb.
313, has held that the dismissed employee is reinstated with continuity of service, the normal relief would be the payment of full wages from the date of dismissal, and it is for the employer to raise this matter and prove that the employee had been earning wages for the whole or any part of the period in question.
The aforesaid view has been consistently followed in this Court and reaffirmed in Harbans Singh and others v. The Assistant Labour Commissioner and others, (1976) 78 P.L.R.
221.
The Allahabad High Court was inclined to take a similar view in Postal Seals Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd v. Labour Court, Lucknow, (1971) 1 Lab.
LJ 327, and the same tenor is the judgment of the Gujarat High Court in Dhari Gram Panchayat v. Safai Kamdar Mandal, (1971) 1 Lab.
LJ 508.
6.
However, all controversy now seems to have been set at rest by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, A.I.R. 1979 Supreme Court 75, wherein the appeal by Special Leave was expressly limited to the question of grant of back wages.
It has been held therein in no uncertain terms :- "Ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
Any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer."
And again :  "Full back wages would be normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure".
The aforesaid view has been reiterated by their Lordships in GT Lad and others v. Chemicals and Fibres India Ltd, 1979 Labour and Industrial Cases 298."
6.
In view of the above enunciation of law, it becomes apparent that the matter stands concluded in favour of the petitioner so far as the grant of full back wages are concerned from 3181981 till the date of reinstatement.
7.
The petition is allowed.
The award of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the petitioner is entitled to full backwages from 3181981 till reinstatement.
Petition allowed.