GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing notice Annexure P1 dated 1311986 and order Annexure P2 dated 19/2011986 issued by Superintendent of Police, Faridabad (respondent No. 4) compulsorily retiring him from service w.e.f.
1641986.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Constable in Police Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 3.8.1951.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 1111955 and then as officiating Assistant Sub Inspector of Police (for short, `ASI') w.e.f.
5.3.1964.
In 1969, he was reverted to the post of Head Constable.
After passing the Intermediate School Course, he was re-promoted as ASI on 2011975.
In 1979, he passed the Upper School Course and was brought on List `E'.
Consequently, he was promoted as Sub-Inspector of Police (for short, `ASI') w.e.f.
521980.
He was also allowed to cross efficiency bar due on 111981.
Later on, his name was brought on List `F', but he was not promoted as Inspector of Police.
In January, 1986 respondent No. 4 issued notice Annexure P1 for his deemed retirement from service after expiry of 90 days notice period.
The same was followed by order Annexure P2 for his deemed retirement w.e.f.
1641986.
3.
The petitioner has challenged his premature retirement on the ground that the decision taken by Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2) to retire him before attaining the age of superannuation is vitiated by arbitrariness, non-application of mind and violation of the instructions issued by the State Government.
He has averred that in 15 years preceding the notice/order of retirement, he was not conveyed any adverse remarks in his Annual Confidential Reports (for short, `ACRs') and, therefore, no tangible material was available before the competent authority for his premature retirement from service.
He has further averred that any adversity in his service record of the remote past will be deemed to have been wiped out by virtue of his promotion as ASI on 2011975 and as SI in February, 1980 and the fact that he was allowed to cross efficiency bar which fell due on 111981.
4.
The respondents have defended the impugned notice/order by asserting that decision in this regard was taken by the competent authority after due consideration of the entire record of the petitioner.
They have placed reliance on the instructions contained in circular letter Nos. 28/138/81-GS-I dated 491981; 32/95/82-4GSI dated 2481982; 32/198/83-4GS-I dated 1681983, 2/10/85-2GSI dated 951985 and averred that premature retirement of the petitioner was justified because he had earned adverse reports relating to integrity between 1964 to 1969.
They have further averred that promotions accorded to the petitioner in the years 1975 and 1980 and the fact that he was allowed to cross efficiency bar w.e.f.
111981 did not have the effect of washing out the adverse reports relating to integrity.
5.
Shri NS Panwar, learned counsel for the petitioner laid emphasis on the fact that despite adverse reports pertaining to the years 1964-65, 1967-68 and 1968-69 casting reflection on his integrity, the petitioner was promoted as ASI and SI on the basis of merit and was also allowed to cross efficiency bar w.e.f.
111981 and argued that the old adverse entries could not have been relied upon for the purpose of prematurely retiring the petitioner ignoring the fact that in the last 15 years, he had consistently earned good reports.
He further argued that the decision taken by respondent No. 2 for premature retirement of the petitioner should be declared as vitiated by legal malice because on the basis of his record of last 15 years, no reasonable person could possibly form an opinion that he had outlived the utility for public service or that his retirement would be in public interest.
6.
Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General candidly and fairly admitted that ACRs of the petitioner of 15 years preceding the impugned notice and order do not contain any adverse remarks.
He also admitted that the petitioner was promoted as ASI in 1975 and as SI in 1980 and was allowed to cross efficiency bar as on 111981, but argued that adverse entries contained in the ACRs for the years 1964-65, 1967-68 and 1968-69 could be taken into consideration for forming an opinion whether his continued retention in service would be in public interest.
In reply to the Court's query, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General stated that the petitioner's case had not been referred to the Officers' Committee.
7.
I have given serious thought to the respective arguments and perused the record including the file produced by Shri Jaswant Singh which contains various documents including the extracts of ACRs of the petitioner.
8.
Before dealing with the all important issue relating to the legality of the impugned notice/order, I deem it proper to notice the principles which govern the exercise of power of judicial review in such matters.
9.
The primary object underlying the statutory provisions and executive instructions which enable the competent authorities to retire the employees before attaining the age of superannuation is to weed out from the public service those, who are inefficient and corrupt or who have outlived utility for public services.
The Courts have generally upheld the government's right to prematurely retire an employee and also recognised the fact that the scope of judicial review in such matters is extremely limited - Shyamlal v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 369; Union of India v. Col. JN Sinha, AIR 1971 SC 40; ME Reddy v. Union of India, AIR 1980 SC 563; Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada, 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : 1992(2) SCC 299; Bishwanath Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar, 2001(1) SCT 328 (SC) : 2001(2) SCC 305; State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M Patel, 2001(2) SCT 339 (SC) : AIR 2001 SC 1109 and State of UP v. Vijay Kumar Jain, 2002(2) S.C.T.
408 : 2002(3) SCC 641.
10.
In Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada (supra), the Supreme Court referred to various judicial precedents on the subject of compulsory retirement and culled out the following propositions :-  "(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the Government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a Government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the Government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice has no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate Court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide, or (b) that it is `arbitrary' in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material in short; if it is found to be perverse order.
(iv) The Government (or the Review Committee as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it, uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference."
11.
In State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M Patel (supra), a two-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court reviewed the case law on the subject and laid down the following principles :-  (1) Whenever the services of a public servant are no longer useful to the general administration, he can be compulsorily retired for the sake of public interest.
(2) Ordinarily, the order of compulsory retirement is not to be treated as a punishment coming under Article 311 of the Constitution (3) For better administration, it is necessary to chop off dead wood, but the order of compulsory retirement can be passed after having due regard to the entire service record of the officer.
(4) Any adverse entries made in the confidential record shall be taken note of and be given due weight in passing such order.
(5) Even uncommunicated entries in the confidential record can also be taken into consideration.
(6) The order of compulsory retirement shall not be passed as a short cut to avoid departmental enquiry when such course is more desirable.
(7) If the officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the confidential record, that is a fact in favour of the officer.
(8) Compulsory retirement shall not be imposed as a punitive measure."
(Underlining is mine) 12.
In State of UP v. Vijay Kumar Jain (supra), the Supreme Court considered the ambit and scope of the employer's right to retire an employee and observed as under :-  "If the conduct of a government employee becomes unbecoming to the public interest or obstructs the efficiency in public services, the Government has under FR 56(c) read with Expln.
(2) an absolute right to compulsorily retire such an employee in public interest.
The Government's right to compulsorily retire an employee is a method to ensure efficiency in public service and while doing so the Government is entitled under Fundamental Rule 56 to take into account the entire service record, character roll or confidential report with emphasis on the later entries in the character roll of an employee.
In fact, entire service record, character roll or confidential report, furnishes the materials to find out whether a government servant has outlived his utility in service.
It is on consideration of totality of the materials with emphasis on the later entries in the character roll that the Government is expected to form its opinion whether an employee is to be compulsorily retired or not."
13.
In Bishwanath Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar (supra), a three-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court highlighted the distinction between compulsory retirement by way of the punishment and compulsory retirement in public interest in the following words :-  "Compulsory retirement in service jurisprudence has two meanings.
Under the various disciplinary rules, compulsory retirement is one of the penalties inflicted on a delinquent government servant consequent upon a finding of guilt recorded in disciplinary proceedings.
Such penalty involves stigma and cannot be inflicted except by following procedure prescribed by the relevant rules or consistently with the principles of natural justice if the field for inflicting such penalty be not occupied by any rules.
Such compulsory retirement in the case of a government servant must also withstand the scrutiny of Article 311 of the Constitution Then there are service rules, such as Fundamental Rule 56(i) of the Fundamental Rules, which confer on the Government or the appropriate authority, an absolute (but not arbitrary) right to retire a government servant on his attaining a particular age or on his completing a certain number of years of service on formation of an opinion that in public interest it was necessary to compulsorily retire him.
In that case, it is neither a punishment nor a penalty with loss of retiral benefits.
Compulsory retirement in public interest under service rules is like premature retirement.
It does not cast any stigma.
The government servant shall be entitled to the pension actually earned and other retiral benefits.
So long as the opinion forming basis of the order for compulsory retirement in public interest is formed bona fide, the opinion cannot be ordinarily interfered with by a judicial forum.
Such an order may be subjected to judicial review on very limited grounds such as the order being mala fide, based on no material or on collateral grounds or having been passed by an authority not competent to do so.
The object of such compulsory retirement is to weed out the worthless who have lost their utility for the administration."
(Underlining is mine).
14.
In Swami Saran Saksena v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1980 SC 269, the Supreme Court reversed the order of Allahabad High Court dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant against his compulsory retirement and observed as under :-  "The contention which has found favour with us is that on a perusal of the material on the record and having regard to the entries in the personal file and character roll of the appellant, it is not possible reasonably to come to the conclusion that the compulsory retirement of the appellant was called for.
This conclusion follows inevitably from the particular circumstances, among others, that the appellant was found worthy of being permitted to cross the second Efficiency Bar only a few months before.
Ordinarily, the court does not interfere with the judgment of the relevant authority on the point whether it is in the public interest to compulsorily retire a Government servant.
And we would have been even more reluctant to reach the conclusion we have, when the impugned order of compulsory retirement was made on the recommendation of the High Court itself.
But on the material before us we are unable to reconcile the apparent contradiction that although for the purpose of crossing the second Efficiency Bar the appellant was considered to have worked with distinct ability and with integrity beyond question, yet within a few months thereafter he was found so unfit as to deserve compulsory retirement.
The entries in between in the records pertaining to the appellant need to be examined and appraised in that context.
There is no evidence to show that suddenly there was such deterioration in the quality of the appellant's work or integrity that he deserved to be compulsory retired."
15.
In D Ramaswami v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1982 SC 793, the compulsory retirement of the appellant was quashed on the ground that there was no material to justify the decision of the government to retire him soon after his promotion.
Some of the observations made in that decision are reproduced below :-  "Where the charges framed on basis of adverse entry in the confidential roll of an officer were dropped and he was subsequently not only promoted to a selection post but was appointed to a very responsible post on such promotion, his compulsory retirement shortly after such promotion was invalid and unsustainable when there was nothing even mildly suggestive of inaptitude or inefficiency thereafter and there was no entry in the service book to his discredit or hinting even remotely that he had outlived his utility as a Govt. servant.
If there was some entry, not wholly favourable to the officer after his promotion, one might hark back to similar or like entries and conclude that the time had arrived for the Government servant to quit Government service."
16.
In Narasingh Patnaik v. State of Orissa, 1996(2) SCT 635 (SC) : 1996(2) SLR 615, the Supreme Court took cognizance of the fact that after adverse reports recorded in the ACRs of 1975-76 and 1977-78, the appellant's performance was rated as good and he was promoted as Superintending Engineer and then as Chief Engineer and observed that there was no justification to compulsorily retire him from service.
Their Lordships referred to the propositions laid down in Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada (supra) and observed as under :-  "In the instant case, after the remarks were made in the confidential reports for the years 1976-76 and 1977-78 the appellant had been promoted on the post of Superintending Engineer in the year 1978 and thereafter Executive Engineer in 1984.
It has been pointed out that in respect of years prior to 1975-76, in the year 1976-77 and in the years subsequent to 1977-78 the performance of the appellant was appraised as "good".
In these circumstances, we are of the view that the adverse remarks in the annual confidential reports for the years 1975-76 and 1977-78 referred to above, by themselves, cannot sustain the opinion leading to the compulsory retirement of the appellant on the basis that further retention of the appellant in service was not in public interest.
We are, therefore, unable to uphold the order of compulsory retirement dated March 5, 1996 and the same has to be set aside."
17.
If the petitioner's case is examined in the light of the above noted propositions, I am inclined to hold that the decision of respondent No. 2 to prematurely retire him is vitiated by arbitrariness and legal mala fides.
The file produced by Shri Jaswant Singh shows that the petitioner was rated as a good officer in the ACRs of 10 years preceding his retirement.
This is clearly borne out from the extracts of the ACRs of those years, which are reproduced below :-  18.
It is true that during the years 1964-65, 1967-68 and 1968-69, the petitioner had earned adverse reports casting reflection on his integrity, but the effect of these reports will be deemed to have been substantially diluted by good reports earned by him in 10 years preceding his premature retirement and the fact that notwithstanding the adverse reports he was found suitable for promotion to the post of ASI in 1975 and then as SI in 1980 and was also allowed to cross efficiency bar w.e.f.
111981.
The instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide letter No. 931/IGS-72/10308 dated 1341972 postulated consideration of 10 years record of the employee for promotion to the higher post.
At the relevant time, those instructions provided that the officials who have earned 50% good or better than average reports should be considered eligible for promotion.
It is, thus, clear that even though the petitioner had adverse reports, he was suitable for promotion on the post of ASI in 1975 and as SI in the year 1980 and he was also allowed to cross efficiency bar as 111981.
19.
In my opinion, on an objective consideration of the entire material, no reasonable person could possibly form an opinion that the petitioner had outlived the utility for public service or that his retirement would be in public interest.
It, however, appears that without applying mind to the good entries earned by the petitioner in the last 15 years including 10 years preceding his retirement and the fact that he had been twice promoted and was also allowed to cross efficiency bar, respondent No. 2 arbitrarily ordered his premature retirement from service.
Therefore, the decision taken by respondent No. 2 to retire the petitioner before attaining the age of superannuation, albeit without objectively considering his record is liable to be declared illegal and quashed on the ground of arbitrariness and legal mala fides.
20.
I am further of the view that the decision taken by respondent No. 2 is violative of the instructions issued by the State Government and is liable to be quashed on that ground as well.
The circular letters annexed with the written statement provide for consideration of the case of premature retirement by the Officers Committee if the service record of the employee is good, but his integrity has been doubted in the entire service career.
It is an admitted position that the petitioner's case was not referred to the Officers' Committee.
In their written statement, the respondents have not explained as to why respondent No. 2 bye-passed the Officers Committee.
Therefore, it must be held that the impugned notice and order are ultra vires to the instructions issued by the State Government.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned notice and order are quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
The respondents shall pay him monetary benefits within a period of three months from the date of presentation of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.