ML Singhal, J - Through this writ petition filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, Ex-Captain RS Dhull, now posted as Tehsildar at Hissar Division, Hissar has prayed for the issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 21.8.1987 Annexure P-4 whereby he was punished with the stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect and also retrospectively.
2.
It is stated that he was posted as Tehsildar, Nuh in the year 1985 with the powers of Assistant Collector First Grade under the Punjab Land Revenue Act, limited to hearing partition cases.
Vide order dated 14.8.1984 District Revenue Officer, Gurgaon had remanded case Mohammad Isa v. Punam and others, to the petitioner for decision afresh after giving fresh opportunity to the parties.
At the time of hearing of the case, counsel for one of the parties objected that the remand order was non-est and without jurisdiction as the District Revenue Officer had not been vested with the powers of District Collector under the Punjab Land Revenue Act.
Petitioner noted down the contention of the parties in the order dated 12.8.1985 and decided the case on merit without giving any weight to that contention.
Respondent No. 2, who was Commissioner, Hissar Division, Hissar took this act as an act of insubordination on his part or involving contempt of court.
He punished him with the stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect and retrospectively vide order Annexure P-4.
Petitioner's grievance is that stoppage of increments with cumulative effect was a major penalty.
For major penalty, the procedure is as defined in rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 (for short the rules), as such there should have been a regular inquiry.
It is stated that the punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was passed against him without any regular inquiry.
No charge sheet was drawn up against him.
No statement of allegations was supplied to him.
No list of witnesses etc. was suppled to him.
Procedure as to the imposition of minor penalties as envisaged in rule 8 of the rules was followed.
3.
Respondent No. 2 contested this writ petition and urged that the punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effects was a minor penalty and the same was imposed upon him under the rules after following procedure under rule 8 of the rules.
He was charge-sheeted under rule 8 of the rules provided for minor penalty.
No procedure for major penalty was required to be followed.
4.
In my opinion, the grievance of the petitioner is genuine.
Punishment of increments with cumulative effect is a "major penalty" and, therefore, before imposition of such punishment, there should have been a regular inquiry according to the procedure as envisaged in rule 7 of the rules.
It was held in Randhir Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) S.C.T.
468 : 1994(4) Services Law Reporter page 44 that the stoppage of increments with cumulative effect was a major penalty.
For imposing major penalty holding of enquiry is essential.
In Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) S.C.T.
30 : 1990(6) SLR 73, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the order of imposition of stoppage of increment with cumulative effect will fall under Rule 5(v) of the Rules and as such, regular inquiry is needed.
5.
In this case, thus the imposition of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect retrospectively has to be quashed as no procedure was followed for imposition of major penalty.
Mere show cause notice and consideration of explanation would not suffice so far as the imposition of stoppage of increments with cumulative effects is concerned.
Punishment of stoppage of increments with cumulative effect without holding regular inquiry is illegal.
There is yet another hurdle in the way of the State.
How could Commissioner, Hissar Division, Hissar punish the petitioner for the contempt of court which he had allegedly committed ?
It is the High Court which could take cognizance of the contempt of the court of District Revenue Officer (Revenue Court) if the petitioner had committed any.
Commissioner under the Punjab Land Revenue Act is not a proper forum for punishing for contempt of court.
He could, at best, make reference to the High Court for punishing the petitioner for the alleged contempt of court committed by him.
So, order Annexure P-4 is quashed.
This writ petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.