Swatanter Kumar, J - Whether a settlement between the workman and the Management, the execution and validity of which is questioned, can frame an absolute bar on the powers of the appropriate Government to make a reference of dispute relating to termination under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), is the short question but pertinent question of law that arises for consideration in the present writ petition before us.
In order to examine the merit of the rival contentions raised by the respective parties to this lis and to decide the above question, reference to basic facts of the case would be necessary.
2.
Shri Gurmail Singh, workman-respondent No. 3, was employed in the factory of Escorts Mahle Limited at Bahadurgarh, Patiala on 1111967.
On 2591999, according to the Management, the workman sought early retirement on the ground that he was unable to continue with his job in view of his domestic circumstances.
The Management claimed to have entered into a settlement within the meaning of Section 2(p) of the act, read with Rule 58 of the Industrial Disputes (Punjab) Rules, 1958.
Upon execution of this settlement, a sum of Rs. 2,50,229/- (Rs. 2,40,024/- by check and Rs. 10,275/- by cash) is stated to have been paid by the Management to the workman.
Copy of the settlement was sent by the Management to the Secretary, Labour Punjab on 3091999 in accordance with rules which was received on 1101999 in the office of the Labour Commissioner, Punjab.
Workman also received, on account of his gratuity, a sum of Rs. 96268/- which was paid on 13101999 in terms of the application and affidavit submitted by the workman on 2991999.
In spite of having taken early voluntary retirement together with the benefits afore- referred and service compensation, workman served a demand notice on 24.12.1999 upon the Management asking for his reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
By note dated 2522000, the Conciliation Officer could not settle the matter.
However, he recommended the case of workman to be rejected as he has taken voluntary retirement and had claimed all the dues.
It is the case of the Management that despite above facts, the appropriate Government vide order dated 852000, referred the industrial dispute to the Labour Court, Patiala, while exercising its powers under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
Challenge in the writ petition is to this order of reference.
3.
Upon notice, the workman filed the written statement.
According to the workman, he had never tendered any application for voluntary retirement from his employment.
On the contrary, certain blank papers were got signed by the Management fraudulently.
The signatures of the workman were obtained on some letter heads of the company, plain papers, blank vouchers and some other papers.
According to the workman, his services have been terminated illegally and on the basis of these forged documents, the Management have thrown the workman out of his employment.
There was no occasion for the workman to seek voluntary retirement and large number of employees, who were working with the workman, still continue to work in the company.
The workman pleaded that his services were wrongly terminated on 27.9.1999.
His signatures were obtained on 2591999; 2691999 was a weekly rest for the workman and on 27.9.1999 he was refused entry to the factory on the plea that his services were no longer required as payments had already been paid to him.
This demand notice was served by the workman on 25th September, 1999.
There was no dispute pending or even apprehending between the workman and employer so as to necessitate execution of settlement within the meaning of Section 2(p) of the Act.
This was an attempt on the part of the Management to obtain/procure the signatures of the answering respondent on certain documents which were subsequently mis- used and termed as resignation/settlement between the workman and the Management.
4.
On the basis of the above pleadings, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that a settlement was executed between the parties which was even submitted to the authorities concerned in accordance with rules, as such, the said settlement would operate as a bar for the appropriate Government to make a reference to the Labour Court, particularly in view of the finding returned by the Conciliation Officer, the claim of the workman should be rejected.
He also contended that any item covered by a settlement cannot be subject-matter of reference.
For this purpose, the learned counsel relied upon the cases of M/s Shukla Manseta Industries Pvt. Limited v. The Workmen employed under it, 1977 Labour Industries Cases 1541, Ballarpur Industries, Ltd v. Presiding Officer Labour Court, Ambala and another, 1994(4) SCT 57 (P&H) : 1995(1) LLN 180, The Sirpur Paper Mills Limited v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and another, AIR 1964 SC 160 and National Engineering Industries Limited v. State of Rajasthan and others, 2001(1) SCT 717 (SC) : 2000 Labour Industrial Cases 260.
It was further contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that a party taking up the plea of fraud must set-forth full particulars with definite allegations.
General allegations cannot establish a plea fraud.
For this purpose, he relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Bishandeo v. Seogeni Rai, AIR 1991 SC 250.
According to him, the statement of claim of the workman entirely lacks these particulars and, as such the demand notice of the workman ought to have been rejected by the Government.
The order of reference Annexure P-14 to the writ petition is unsustainable.
5.
On the contrary, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-workman, contended that function of the Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act while making a reference, is merely an administrative function.
The appropriate Government cannot become an adjudicator to the dispute on merits.
He relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the cases of State of Madras v. CP Sarathi and another, AIR 1953 SC 53 and Harnam Singh and others v.
P.S.E.B., 2002 Supreme Court Cases (L&S) 907.
It is contended that the alleged voluntary resignation was a result of coercion and fraud upon the workman and, as such does not fall within the limited scope of an inquiry entertainable by appropriate Government.
The appropriate Government cannot go into the disputed question of facts or hold a detailed inquiry on evidence.
Such matter can only be referred for appropriate determination to the Labour Court.
Reference was made to Shri Jai Nath Jindal v. State of Haryana, 1994(1) SCT 151 (P&H) : 1994(1) P.L.R.
73 (P&H) and SB Vij v. State of Haryana, 1996(3) SCT.
220.
6.
No doubt, a workman and employer can enter into a settlement otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceedings.
Such agreement shall be binding on the parties to the agreement.
The concept of settlement is well- known and accepted norm of industrial law.
Normal pre-requisite of a valid settlement would be existence of a dispute between the workman and the Management.
If the workman had submitted his resignation and had opted for voluntary retirement on 25th September, 1999, there was hardly any occasion for the workman and the management to arrive at a settlement on that very day.
The settlement is stated to have been executed as an agreement within the purview of scope of Section 2(p) of the Act.
This is so recorded in the settlement itself.
The expression "settlement" as understood even in its common parlance would mean "compromising a dispute between the parties through the process of negotiation or otherwise".
To settle is to resolve definitely and conclusively or agreeing upon the terms of resolving the dispute.
The Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language (New Revised Edition) defines the expression `settlement' "the act of making stable or putting on a permanent basis; a state of stability or performance, an arrangement or adjustment, as of business affairs, a disagreement etc."  7.
If no agreement was in existence the mode of settlement would lose its relevancy.
On the very same day the application for registering the settlement was allegedly signed by the workman.
There appears to be some contradiction in the stand of Management.
Of course, whether such a stand can be accepted finally or not upon evidence, is not for this Court to determine at this stage.
Annexure P-7 to the writ petition is the receipt for the amount towards compensation and in full and final settlement of all claims.
This, in terms, does not refer to the request of the workman for voluntary retirement and are not stated to be retiral benefits per se.
8.
The workman has raised allegations against the Management by getting signatures of the workman on some blank papers in the demand notice itself.
He further apprehended that these forged documents would be used by the Management for terminating the services of the workman.
It was stated in addition to the facts, that large number of employees are still working in the concern.
Two factors which cannot be ignored are - (i) that workman served the demand notice after acceptance of the money and, particularly a period of more than two months from the date when admittedly the documents were signed by the workman and (ii) it is also to be seen that the workman encashed the benefits received by him in furtherance to the said documents.
The conduct of the workman does raise a suspicion as to the bona fides of the workman in raising the industrial dispute by his notice of demand dated 24.12.1999, but the actual controversy which primarily needs answer from this Court is as to the scope of the jurisdiction to be exercised by the appropriate Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the act.
This question hardly needs an elaborate discussion as there cannot be a dispute to the proposition of law that power of the appropriate Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act is an administrative power and does not take within its ambit the power to adjudicate.
Power of adjudication on merits of the dispute squarely falls in the domain of the Labour Court.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the workman on the judgment of the Supreme Court in CP Sarathi's case (supra) is the very foundation of this principle.
Reference can also be made to the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in Radhey Shyam and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(2) SCT 1 (P&H) (FB) : (1998-2) 119 P.L.R.
1.
9.
Once, admittedly, there is a settlement executed between the parties, which itself is not in question, in that event, the provisions of Section 18(1) read with Section 2(p) of the Act would operate as an impediment to the jurisdiction of the appropriate Government to make a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
This cannot be an absolute proposition of law applicable uniformly to all cases.
The principle has to be applied on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner in the case of Sirpur Paper Mills Limited and other cases, there cannot be any dispute to the proposition of law.
In these cases, there was hardly any dispute with regard to execution of the settlement and allegations of coercion or fraud were not made in those cases.
The question was whether the Government could go into the question of bona fides of a settlement which was binding under Section 18(1) of the Act and, in all these cases, settlements were executed after dispute had arisen between the parties.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to demonstrate before us as to where was the occasion for the Management to execute a settlement with the workman so as to execute an agreement under Section 18(1) of the Act.
The allegations and counter-allegations made and conduct of either of the parties before us is sought which would require proper adjudication of rival contentions upon recording of detailed documentary and oral evidence.
Such a function certainly falls outside the ambit of the appropriate Government while exercising its powers under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
Undue weightage cannot be given to what is stated by the Conciliation Officer as, admittedly, the conciliation proceedings have failed.
There was nothing before the Conciliation Officer to record such a finding.
11.
The jurisdiction of the High Court to examine an order of reference is a limited jurisdiction in complete contra distinction to the powers of the appellate Court while hearing an appeal.
Within the four corners of the limited jurisdiction the High Court has to find an error of law or a conclusion which no other prudent person could come to in the facts and circumstances of the case.
This principle has been enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Harnam Singh and others relied upon by the learned counsel for the workman, where the Court held as under :  "The High Court, though notices that the proceeding arises under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act and making of a reference thereto is administrative in character, still it has examined this matter as if sitting in appeal on the reference made.
In fact, the scope of the investigation in such a matter is very limited and in this case the two issues could not have been decided except by adjudication before the competent authority concerned."
12.
Certainly, the appropriate Government is competent to examine whether an industrial dispute at all existed or apprehended or not.
This jurisdiction has to be exercised without adjudicating the controversial issue arising in the case.
The appropriate Government can hardly be vested with the jurisdiction to determine whether a fraud has been played or a document would stand invalidated on the ground of coercion or mis-representation while exercising powers under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
A controversial issue arises for determination in the present case which would require oral and documentary evidence.
Thus, the appropriate Government in its wisdom consider the matter which appropriately should be referred to the Labour Court for determination of the dispute in relation to alleged termination of the workman and obviously the plea of settlement of the Management.
The discretion exercised by the appropriate Government in holding that the dispute exists in the facts and circumstances of the case for reference to the Labour Court, does not patently suffer from any error or law.
13.
For the reasons afore-stated, we are of the considered view that this Court should not interfere in the impugned order of reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act in exercise of our jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we would grant opportunity to the petitioner to require the workman to refund the amounts received by him under the alleged settlement, the validity and very execution of which he is challenging before the Labour Court.
If such an application is moved, the Labour Court shall deal with it at the very outset.
14.
However, with the above observations, this writ petition is dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.