Swatanter Kumar, J This judgment of ours would dispose of all the above mentioned writ petitioners, however, the facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 4695 of 1999 titled as Sunil Kumar and others Versus Food Corporation of India and others.
2.
60 petitioners, who are working as watchmen at various godowns of Food Corporation of India in District Sangrur, hereinafter referred to as the Corporation, have approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction, directing the respondent-Corporation to treat the petitioners as its regular employees and further for a direction that their salaries be released with effect from January, 1990.
Interim prayer for restraining the respondents from terminating their services has also been made in the petition.
3.
The respondent-Corporation is a statutory body.
All the petitioners are shown as employees of respondent No. 3 Delta Protective Systems, a private party, but they were working right from the days of their initial appointment in the godowns of the respondent-Corporation.
All the petitioners joined the employment from February, 1992 to February, 1998.
All of them were working in different godowns in District Sangrur, Punjab.
Respondent-Corporation had executed an agreement on 2971998, copy of which has been annexed to the writ petition by the petitioners as Annexure P/2.
Under this agreement respondent No. 3 was to supply security guards and the responsibility for payment of salaries etc. was of respondent No. 3, of course, respondent No. 1 was to pay the contracted amount as per terms of the agreement afore-referred.
Letters of appointment were issued and one of such letters dated 29111998 issued by respondent No. 3 to one Shri Jaspal Singh has been placed on record as Annexure P/3 to the writ petition.
According to the petitioners, the contractors have changed right from 1992 onwards, but they have been working continuously under the effective control of the respondent-Corporation.
Even in the selection process, respondent-Corporation's representatives participate and the agreement is stated to be just a facet.
The Central Government enacted law with regard to prohibition of contractual labour under the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, hereinafter referred to as the Act, came into force and on 9.12.1976 the Central Government issued a notification under Section 10 of the Act, prohibiting engagement of contractual labour for watching of buildings in respect of the establishments to which the Central Government was the appropriate Government.
Copy of the notification is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/4.
4.
The petitioners stated that they have been continuously working with the respondent-Corporation and they are not even granted weekly rest.
The contract labour has been prohibited and as such the petitioners would be deemed to be direct employees of the Corporation and, therefore, are entitled to all consequential benefits.
The reliefs claimed by the petitioners are based upon the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in he case of Air India Statutory Corporation etc. v. United Labour Union and others, etc., AIR 1997 Supreme Court 645.
5.
Upon notice, the respondent-Corporation filed a detailed reply.
Amongst others, a preliminary objection has been taken by the respondents in the written statement that no cause of action has accrued in favour of the petitioners.
There is no relationship of employee and employer between the petitioners and the respondent-Corporation.
On the other hand, they are employees of respondent No. 3.
The notification dated 9.12.1976 is not applicable in the present case.
Disputed questions of facts have been raised in this writ petition between the parties and as such the writ is not proper remedy for the petitioners and they should be directed to approach the Labour Court.
The respondent-Corporation is engaged in procurement of food- grains, its storage in the State of Punjab and further distribution to all over India.
The procurement of food-grains is a seasonal work and at the time of procurement, the Corporation, in order to protect its stocks and to meet the emergent needs, engages services of private security agencies, who in turn, deploy their security personnel.
The Corporation only enters into contract with such private agencies and in terms of the agreement, the Corporation has no liability towards the employees of respondent No. 3.
In terms of the letter dated 2851992, copy whereof is annexed herewith as Annexure R/1, the Government of India, Ministry of Labour, had permitted the Corporation to engage contractual labour for sweeping, cleaning, dusting and watching of buildings owned or occupied by the Government.
However, vide another letter dated 821999 thee Central Government advised the Corporation not to engage contractual labour in the job specified in the notification dated 9.12.1976.
According to the respondents, as the matter stands even as of today, they have no liability to regularise the services of the petitioners and the petitioners are not entitled to any benefit.
6.
Before we proceed to discuss the merits of this petition, reference to certain judgments and the provisions of relevant Acts would be necessary.
The Government of India issued a notification under sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the Act, prohibiting employment of contractual labour for sweeping, cleaning, dusting and watching of buildings in respect of which Central Government is the appropriate Government with effect from 131977.
This notification continued to be subject matter of some legal controversies for a considerable period and the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Food Corporation of India Workers Union v. Food Corporation of India and others, 1999(1) SCT 619 (P&H) : AIR 1985 Supreme Court 488 held that under Sections 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(i) appropriate Government in regard to regional offices of the Food Corporation of India and their warehouses in the States, were the State Government and not the Central Government.
There was admittedly no notification issued by the State Government prohibiting employment of contractual labour for the noticed purposes.
In the year 1986 provisions of the Act were amended so as to adopt the definition of appropriate Government as defined under Section 2(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
As a result of this amendment, the appropriate Government of Food Corporation of India and its various ware-houses became the Central Government.
It is conceded case before us that on 2851992 the Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi, had issued a letter stating :-  To All the members of Central  Advisory Contract Labour Board.
Subject : Report (Part-I) of the Committee constituted to study the working of Contractor Labour System in Sweeping, Cleaning, Dusting and Watching of Buildings owned or occupied by establishments in respect of which the Central Government has become the appropriate Government after the amendment in 1986 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
Sir,  I am directed to refer to this Ministry's letter of even No. dated 3rd April, 1992 and to say that the matter relating to the dusting and watching of buildings owned or occupied by the Corporation of India, Unit Trust of India, and Central Warehousing Corporation was discussed in the 24th meeting of the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board held on 29.02.1992 at New Delhi under the Chairmanship of Union Deputy Labour Minister.
It was inter-alia decided to leave the matter further for a decision by Government keeping in view the views expressed in the matter.
2.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Board, the matter has been considered in detail by the Central Government and it has been decided not to prohibit employment of Contract Labour in the sweeping, cleaning, dusting and watching of Buildings owned or occupied by the establishments, of Food Corporation of India, Industrial Finance Corporation of India, for which the appropriate Government under the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 is the Central Government."
7.
An interesting development took place at this juncture that the workers of a union i.e. Food Corporation of India Class IV employees Union (Regd.)
Sangrur filed a writ petition in this Court claiming prohibition of engagement of labour on contract basis by the Food Corporation of India in regard to the specified matters.
The writ petition was dismissed by a learned Single Judge of this Court.
However, on letters patent appeal being preferred by the Union, the matter was adjudicated in favour of the Union in the case of Food Corporation of India, Class IV Employees Union (Regd.
), Sangrur v. Food Corporation of India, Chandigarh, 1999(1) P.L.R.
35.
The Letters Patent Bench while relying upon a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Air India Statutory Corporation (supra) granted the following relief to the petitioners:-  "In the result, we allow the appeal and set aside the order of the learned Single Judge.
Consequently, the writ petition filed by the appellant is accepted and the respondent-Corporation is directed to give effect to the notification dated 9.12.1976 while making employment in its establishment.
As a logic corollary, the respondent is restrained from employing watchman for its godowns as contract labour."
8.
The Food Corporation of India, against the judgment of the Letters Patent Bench, preferred special leave petition before the Hon'ble Apex Court, upon which notice was issued.
However, ultimately the said special leave petition was dismissed by the Apex Court vide order dated 30.8.1999 passed in Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 4605/1999, titled as FCI v. FCI Class IV Emp.
Union.
The order reads as under :-  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE GT NANAVATI HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SN PHUKAN.
For Petitioner(s) Mr. Y Prabhakara Rao, Advocate.
For Respondent(s) Mr. Arun Jaitley, Senior, Advocate and Mr. Navin Chawla, Advocate.
Upon hearing counsel the court made the following ORDER In view of the circular No. 2 of 1990 dated 2331999 by the Food Corporation of India and Office Memorandum No. S-16-11/2/99-LW dated 821999 issued by the Government of India, this Special Leave Petition deserves to be dismissed.
The Special Leave Petition is, therefore, dismissed."
9.
It must be noticed that vide memorandum dated 821999 issued by the Government of India making reference to Air India Statutory Corporation's case (supra) and the provisions of Section 10(1) of the Act, finally it was said that the 1992 letter had become non-est in law and directed the Corporation as under :-  "In the circumstances, since the jobs in watching of the buildings owned or occupied by the establishment, for which the appropriate Government is the Central Government, have been prohibited by the notification dated 9.12.1976, the Food Corporation of India would be well advised not to engage contract labour in the jobs specified in the notification."
10.
All matters of controversy in regard to the validity, effect or otherwise of notification dated 2121976 and the operation and consequences flowing from the judgment of Supreme Court of India in the case of Air India Statutory Corporation (supra) were put at rest by a recent judgment of Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court of India in the case of Steel Authority of India Ltd and others etc. etc. v. National Union Water Front Workers and others etc. etc., 2001(4) SCT 1 (SC) : JT 2001(7) SC 268.
While over-ruling the judgment of Apex Court in the case of Air India Statutory Corporation (supra) and setting aside the notification of 1996 as being not in conformity with the provisions of Section 10(1) of the Act, their Lordships carved out certain exceptions which were clearly spelled out in paragraph No. 121 of the judgment, which read as under :-  "121.
The upshot of the above discussion is outlined thus :- (1)(a) Before January 28, 1986, the determination of the question whether Central Government or the State Government, is the appropriate Government in relation to an establishment, will depend, in view of the definition of the expression "appropriate Government" as stood in the CLRA Act, on the answer to a further question, is the industry under consideration carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government or does it pertain to any specified controlled industry; or the establishment of any railway, cantonment board, major port, mine or oil-field or the establishment of banking or insurance company ?
If the answer is in the affirmative, the Central Government will be the appropriate Government; otherwise in relation to any other establishment the Government of the State in which the establishment was situated, would be the appropriate Government.
(b) After the said date in view of the new definition of that expression, the answer to the question referred to above, has to be found in clause (a) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act; if (i) the concerned Central Government company/undertaking or any undertaking is included therein eo nomine; or (ii) any industry is carried on (a) by or under the authority of the Central Government, or (b) by railway company; or (c) by specified controlled industry, then the Central Government will be the appropriate Government otherwise in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that other establishment is situated, will be the appropriate Government.
(2)(a) A notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act prohibiting employment of contract labourer in any process, operation or other work in any establishment has to be issued by the appropriate Government : (1) after consulting with the Central advisory board or the state advisory board, as the case may be, and; (2) having regard to  (i) conditions of work and benefits provided for the contract labourer in the establishment in question; and  (ii) other relevant factors including those mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 10; (b) inasmuch as the impugned notification issued by the Central Government on December 9, 1976 does not satisfy the aforesaid requirements of Section 10, it is quashed but we do so prospectively i.e. from the date of this judgment and subject to the clarification that on the basis of this judgment no order passed or no action taken giving effect to the said notification on or before the date of this judgment, shall be called in question in any tribunal or court including a High Court if it has otherwise attained finality and/or it has been implemented.
(3) Neither section 10 of the CLRA Act nor any other provision in the Act, whether expressly or by necessary implication, provides for automatic absorption of contact labourer on issuing a notification by appropriate Government under sub-section (1) of Section 10, prohibiting employment of contract labourer, in any process, operation or other work in any establishment.
Consequently the principal employer cannot be required to order absorption of the contract labourer working in the concerned establishment.
(4) We overrule the judgment of this court in Air India's case (supra) prospectively and declare that any direction issued by any industrial adjudicator/any court including High Court, for absorption of contract labourer following the judgment in Air India's case (supra), shall hold good and that the same shall not be set aside, altered or modified on the basis of this judgment in cases where such a direction has been given effect to and it has become final.
(5) On issuance of prohibition notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act prohibiting employment of contract labourer or otherwise, in an industrial dispute brought before it by any contract labourer in regard to conditions of service, the industrial adjudicator will have to consider the question whether the contractor has been interposed either on the ground of having undertaken to produce any given result for the establishment or for supply of contract labourer for work of the establishment under a genuine contract or is a mere ruse/camouflage to evade compliance of various beneficial legislations so as to deprive the workers of the benefit thereunder.
If the contract is found to be not genuine but a mere camouflage, the so-called contract labourer will have to be treated as employees of the principal employer who shall be directed to regularise the services of the contract labourer in the concerned establishment subject to the conditions as may be specified by it for that purpose in the light of Para 6 hereunder.
(6) If the contract is found to be genuine and prohibition notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act in respect of the concerned establishment has been issued by the appropriate Government, prohibiting employment of contract labourer in any process, operation or other work of any establishment and where in such process, operation or other work of the establishment the principal employee intends to employ regular workmen he shall give preference to the erstwhile contract labourer, if otherwise found suitable and, if necessary, by relaxing the condition as to maximum age appropriately taking into consideration the age of the workers at the time of their initial employment by the contractor and also relaxing the condition as to academic qualifications other than technical qualifications."
11.
The inevitable result of judgment of the Apex Court is that as of today the notification of 1976 as well as the judgment of Air India Statutory Corporations (supra) are non-est and non-existent as they were held to be bad, though prospectively.
The learned counsel for the petitioners fairly conceded that in the light of judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court, the petitioners cannot claim any regularisation in the Food Corporation of India on the concept of deemed employer and employee's relationship between the Food Corporation of India and themselves on the strength of the judgment in the case of Air India Statutory Corporation (supra).
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, during the course of hearing on 24.7.2002 stated before us that he does not question the genuineness of the contract between the respondent-Corporation and respondent No. 3 for the purposes of arguments on the writ petition.
13.
In the light of the above, the petitioners are not entitled to claim regularisation of their services under respondent-Corporation on the strength of judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Air India Statutory Corporation's cse (supra).
14.
The only argument which survives for consideration of this Court is whether the petitioners are entitled to claim benefit of the directions contained in sub-para No. (6) of paragraph No. 121 of the judgment in Steel Authority of India's case (supra).
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the judgment in relation to Food Corporation of India Class IV Employees Union (Regd.)
Sangrur, has attained finality and has been implemented and, thus, would fall under the exception carved out by the Hon'ble Apex Court in clause (2)(b) of paragraph No. 121 and, therefore, the petitioners are entitled to the relief limited to the extent that the corporation would grant them preferential treatment in terms of sub-para (6) of paragraph 121 of the judgment.
According to him, by issuing the letters of 1999 and the judgment of the Letters Patent Bench as well as the Apex Court would make the judgment enforceable in favour of all employees of the Food Corporation of India, irrespective of territory, as the judgment would have to be read as a judgment in rem and not in personam.
In other words, the Food Corporation of India being the respondent in those petitions, is bound to enforce the judgment qua all its employees and particularly those who are working in the State of Punjab.
15.
It is true that the judgment in the case of Food Corporation of India, Class IV Employees Union (Regd).
Sangrur has attained finality as the special leave petition was dismissed in view of the letter of the Union dated 8121999.
In terms of this letter the Food Corporation of India was required to give effect to the notification dated 9.12.1976.
Unfortunately, as of today, the notification has been set aside and is ineffective or even non-existent.
The Court cannot issue a Mandamus to give effect to a notification which stands set aside by the verdict of the highest Court of the land.
In paragraph No. 13 of the written statement, the facts have been admitted to the extent that Central Government had asked the Corporation to implement the said notification.
16.
The expression, "if it has otherwise attained finality and/or it has been implemented" must be read ejusdem generis to the paragraph which immediately precedes these lines.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court while elucidating the concept of the judgment being prospectively effective, declared that no action taken or order passed, giving effect to the said judgment on or before the date of this judgment, would be questioned in any Court, of course, subject to the condition of its having attained finality of being implemented.
This paragraph of the judgment, to us, could only mean one thing that the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court and if the persons of Sangrur Union have been granted benefit cannot be questioned again and particularly when it has attained finality.
17.
Thus, it is clear that where orders have attained finality or have been implemented, there the identically situated persons from the same District under the same respondent would be entitled to the benefit of the observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the Steel Authority of India's case.
18.
As already noticed in reply to paragraph No. 13 of the writ petition, the respondents have clearly stated in their written statement that they have implemented the letter of the Union and the order of the Court.
The order of Division Bench of this Court in the case of Food Corporation of India, Class IV Employees Union (Regd).
Sangrur, had clearly given a directive to the respondents to implement the judgment vis-a-vis at least the Sangrur District.
The direction was two-fold (i) that the notification should be implemented and (ii) second part of the order was in the nature of a prohibition restraining the Corporation from employing contractual labour, Special Leave Petition preferred against this order was dismissed in view of the letter of the Union, which, according to the Corporation, was liable to be implemented.
The Corporation may be able to justify to some extent its submission of not implementing the notification prospectively, as the notification of 1976 has been set aside and no further notification has been issued.
But for the matters in which the rights of the parties have already been settled and have attained finality, the Corporation cannot justify refusing relief to the employees of the same sector of the Corporation, rather same District i.e. Sangrur.
It is not disputed that Sunam is a part of District Sangrur and the petitioners are well within their rights to claim the benefit of a settled right.
It is only implementation of the earlier judgment as the Union itself was a party before the High Court in the other cases.
19.
On the one hand, the workers do not question the genuineness of the agreement, while on the other, the management admits implementation of the notification and it having attained finality as back as in the year 1999.
Once these two ingredients are satisfied in light of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court, denying limited relief in terms of sub-paragraph (6) of paragraph No. 121 of the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court to the petitioners, may not be permissible.
20.
We have granted relief to the petitioners in these petitions as it is only direction in furtherance to the judgment of the Court pending between the parties to the writ and which has attained finality.
While, if we were to deny relief to the petitioners, it would amount to obstructing implementation of the judgment which has attained finality upto the highest Court of the land.
In other words, it would tantamount to denial of a settled relief.
This judgment merely adds to the existing order of the Court particularly in view of the fact that the respondents have admittedly implemented the notification in question.
21.
Consequently, in view of the discussion afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, however, limited to the extent that the petitioners would be entitled to the relief in the light of the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Steel Authority of India (supra).
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.