Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 282002, Annexure P/7 annexed with the writ petition, vide which the petitioners had been reverted to the post of Peon from the posts of Clerks.
2.
It has been stated in the impugned order that as per provisions of Bhakra Beas Management Board Class-III and Class IV Employees (Recruitment and Conditions of Services) Regulation 1994 (hereafter referred to as 1994 Regulation) published in the Gazette of India on 8101994, the Board has to maintain as integrated cadre of similar categories of the posts existing in all the wings of the Board.
According to the Board, there was administrative difficulties and inconvenience resulting from this decision and as such it was decided to make a separate cadre of seniority of the two wings of the Board.
In this regard, proposed amendments to the 1994 Regulation was referred to the Government of India for notification in the official gazette, though the same has not been notified as yet.
On the basis of existing seniority list certain peons were promoted as Clerks on ad hoc basis, vide order of the Chief Engineer dated 2921996.
The promotion order dated 2921996 was challenged by way of 2002(2) SCT 327 (P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No. 13958 of 1999 titled Mehar Chand Peon and others v. Bhakra Beas Management Board and others, decided on 622002.
In that case this Court had directed the respondents to frame a joint seniority list in terms of 1994 Regulation.
The general seniority list was prepared and consequence thereto orders of promotion dated 29th February, 1996 and 1691997 were withdrawn and the petitioners were reverted from the posts of Peon to that post of Clerks.
3.
Challenge to the impugned order dated 282002 is mainly, inter-alia, on the following grounds :-  (a) that the impugned order vests the petitioners with civil consequences as the same has been passed without hearing the petitioners or grating them any opportunity of hearing.
Consequently, the impugned order is violative of principles of natural justice.
In this regard, reliance has been placed upon the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Shri BD Gupta v. State of Haryana, 1972 SLR 845, State of Punjab v. K.R.
Erry and Sobhag Rai Mehta, 1972 S.L.R.
836 and a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Virendra Chawla v. The Chandigarh Administration and another, 1984(1) S.L.R.
452; (b) the Regulations, which are the very foundation of the impugned order are being amended and have already been sent for notification in the official gazette of the Central Government, as such, there was no occasion for the respondents to the pass the impugned order; and (c) the judgment of the High Court in Mehar Chand's case is of no consequence as the High Court has pronounced the judgment with reference to the Regulation of 1994, which are under the process of amendment.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been contended that the petitioners have no right to the post and they could be reverted at any time without assigning any reason.
There was no occasion to grant hearing to the petitioners before passing the impugned order of reversion.
5.
The respondents have prepared the integrated seniority list in compliance to the judgment of the High Court in Mehar Chand's case (supra).
The operative part of the said judgment reads as under :-  "...In these circumstances, I allow this writ petition and give directions to the Board to frame a joint seniority list as per Regulations 3 and 13 within six months from today and after framing of the joint seniority list, consider the case of the petitioners for promotion if they are eligible otherwise.
However, it will always be open to the Board to bifurcate the joint seniority list if it is framed in pursuance of the directions of this Court and thereafter, let the Board may consider what should be the channel of promotion for Class IV employees who are in the Irrigation Wing.
There shall be by (no ?)
order as to costs in the present writ petition.
6.
It is apparent from the bare reading of the judgment and the operative part thereof that the Court had directed preparation of joint seniority list in terms of Regulations 3 and 13 of the 1994 Regulation.
7.
The stand of the respondents is not clear.
On the one hand they claim to have framed an integrated seniority list in compliance to the judgment of this Court, while on the other, they claim to have amended the said regulation.
There is a substantial change in the regulation.
The amendment has been sent to the Central Government for notification.
The Board is expected to deal with the matter and take positive steps in that direction so as to avoid prejudice to its employees.
That in any case would even be in the interest of the Management.
We do not consider it necessary to discuss this aspect of the matter in greater elaboration for the simple reason that the Board has to re- consider the matter, in the light of our observations made hereinafter.
8.
It is conceded case before us that the petitioners were not granted any opportunity of hearing before passing the impugned order.
Finalisation of seniority list as well as consequence orders were passed by the respondents without affording any opportunity much less proper opportunity in accordance with law.
Non-compliance to the principles of audi alteram partem which would be squarely applicable to the present case, as it vests the petitioners with civil consequences (i.e. loss of both pay as well as status), would vitiate the impugned order.
The reliance placed by the petitioners in the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as this Court squarely apply to the facts of the present case.
9.
Consequently, the impugned order dated 282002, Annexure P/7, is set aside.
The writ petition is allowed limited to that extent, with further clarification that the respondents would grant opportunity of hearing to the petitioners and pass appropriate orders in accordance with law.
The respondents are obviously at liberty to examine the matter in the light of the amended rules, if they have come into force as on the date of consideration.
The entire exercise should be completed within a period three months from the date of pronouncement.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.