Ghulam Mohammed, J - The petitioner was selected for the post of E.P.
Operator and was given training at Training Centre, Manuguru, and he was appointed as E.P.
Operator as per the proceedings of the company, dated 27-1- 1997.
His services were confirmed with effect from 22-9-1997.
While so, charge-sheet dated 30-10-1997 was issued against the petitioner alleging that he furnished false information regarding his caste.
He submitted his explanation.
Basing on the report of the Mandal Revenue Officer, Ramagundam, an enquiry was initiated by appointing an Enquiry Officer and on the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer, the impugned proceedings dated 24-11-1998 were issued dismissing the petitioner from service.
Challenging the same the present writ petition has been preferred.
2.
The respondents filed the counter contending inter alia that there has been no violation of any rule or regulation having any statutory force to attract the provisions of Article 226 of the Constitution of India to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court and hence, the writ petition is not maintainable in law.
The petitioner mentioned in his application form that he belongs to Scheduled Tribe and produced the Certificate No. C/566/95.
As a routine exercise, his certificate was sent for verification to the Mandal Revenue Officer who in turn certified that it is not genuine.
In order to give a fair chance to the petitioner, a thorough domestic enquiry was conducted.
Basing on the enquiry report, the impugned proceedings have been passed.
When the principles of natural justice and fair play have been followed and there is a clear and categorical admission, the question of interfering with the order of punishment treating the writ petition as a form of an appeal against the findings of the Enquiry Officer or the Disciplinary Authority, does not arise.
Therefore, this writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
3.
Heard Mr. K Vasudeva Reddy, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. K Srinivasa Murthy, the learned Senior Counsel for the respondents-company.
4.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that, the Mandal Revenue Officer has no jurisdiction to decide the veracity of the caste certificate and the Department has no jurisdiction to enquire into this aspect.
The onus lies on the management to prove the same and the statement given by the petitioner during the course of enquiry, cannot be termed as an admission.
It is further contended that Section 5 of the Andhra Pradesh (Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes and Backward Classes) Regulation of Issue of Community Certificate Act, 1993 obligates the employer to refer the complaint to the District Collector concerned and as such the employer ought not to have referred the complaint to the Mandal Revenue Officer who in turn addressed a letter dated 3-5-1997 stating that it is not genuine and this exercise has been done without affording any opportunity to the petitioner-delinquent.
In support of his contention, he relied on a Division Bench decision of this Court reported in Jalumuru Krushnam Raju v. Commissioner of Tribal Welfare Dept., AP, 2001(6) Andh LT 152 wherein it is held thus :  "In view of section 5 of the Act that the Collector can initiate action for cancellation either suo motu or on application or on a written complaint.
It is always open to any other authority, including the Commissioner of Tribal Welfare, to make a written complaint to the District Collector to enquire into the genuineness of the integrated community certificate produced by a person seeking admission or appointment.
On such complaint being made the District Collector is bound to conduct enquiry having regard to the fact that the writ complaint is made by a no less person than the Head of the Department of Tribal Welfare".
5.
He also relied on an unreported judgment of this Court in W.P. No. 36001 of 1998, dated 9th November, 2001 wherein my learned brother Sri Justice I Venkatanarayana while following the principles laid down in the above Division Bench Judgment, directed the authorities to comply with the exercise as contemplated under section 5 read with rule 8 of the Act and Rules and also reinstate the petitioner therein.
6.
It is further contended that the employer by his proceedings dated 27-5- 1997 directed the petitioner to produce the latest caste certificate, in pursuance of which, the petitioner submitted the latest caste certificate dated 11-6-1997 whereas the impugned order has been passed on 24-11-1998 without considering the same.
Therefore, the action of the management in passing the impugned order, is arbitrary and illegal.
7.
On the order hand, it is contended by the learned Senior Counsel for the Company that, during the course of enquiry, the petitioner admitted the guilt, and that itself is sufficient to issue the impugned proceedings.
It is further contended that the certificate produced by the petitioner has been referred to the concerned Mandal Revenue Officer who in turn by his letter informed that it is not a genuine document and, therefore, it is for the petitioner to summon the Mandal Revenue Officer who has given the clarification, to substantiate the same.
Hence, the impugned order does not suffer from any illegality and the same deserves to be confirmed.
In support of his contention that this Court cannot interfere with the impugned order, but it can be examined whether there is application of mind while passing the impugned order he relied on a decision of the Apex Court reported in Kumari Madhuri Patil v. Addl.
Commissioner, Tribal Development, 1995(1) SCT 261 (SC) : (1994)6 SCC 241 : (AIR 1995 SC 94) wherein it is held thus (Para 14 of AIR) :  "The question then is whether the approach adopted by the High Court in not elaborately considering the case is vitiated by an error of law.
High Court is not a Court of appeal to appreciate the evidence.
The Committee which is empowered to evaluate the evidence placed before it when records a finding of fact, it ought to prevail unless found vitiated by judicial review of any High Court subject to limitations of interference with findings of fact.
The Committee when considers all the material facts and records a finding, though another view, as a Court of appeal may be possible, it is not a ground to reverse the findings.
The Court has to see whether the Committee considered all the relevant material placed before it or has not applied its mind to relevant facts, which have led the Committee ultimately record the finding.
Each case must be considered in the backdrop of its own facts".
8.
On the rival contentions of the parties the question arises for consideration, is whether the impugned order suffers from any legal infirmity in the light of the provisions under section 5 of the Act ?
9.
In this background of the facts and circumstances of the case, it is not out of place to refer to section 5 of the Act, which reads as under :  "5 Cancellation of the false community certificate :- (1) Where, before or after the commencement of this Act a person not belonging to any of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes has obtained a false community certificate to the effect that either himself or his children belongs to such castes, tribes or classes, the District Collector may either suo motu or on a written complaint by any person, call for the record and enquire into the correctness of such certificate and if he is of the opinion that the certificate was obtained fraudulently, he shall, by notification, cancel the certificate after giving the person concerned an opportunity of making a representation."
10.
I have also perused Rule 18 of the AP (Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes) Issue of Community, Nativity and Date of Birth Certificate Rules, 1997 which reads as under :  "18.
Complaints : Whenever complaints are received regarding the community claim of any employee/prospective employee/student claiming to belong to a scheduled caste/scheduled tribe or backward class, the appointing authority/employer/educational institution must refer the case only to the District Collector of the District from where the Competent Authority has issued the certificate.
The District Collector shall in turn get it verified by the Scrutiny Committee constituted at the District level as per rule 8.
The District Collector would inform the final action to the appointing authority/employer/educational institution within a period of 90 days from the date of the receipt of the complaint by him/her from the appointing authority/employer/educational Institution."
11.
The above provisions have laid a set of procedure, which is mandate, while dealing with the complaints regarding the community claim of any employee or prospective employee.
But, this exercise has not been complied with in the instant case while passing the impugned order.
In this context, the legal propositions relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner, lends support to the contention of the petitioner that the provisions of section 5 of the Act vitiate the impugned proceedings.
With due respect to the principles laid down by the Apex Court, the legal proposition relied on by the learned Senior Counsel has no bearing on the facts of the case on hand.
12.
Without expressing any opinion on the facts of the case but on the legality of the impugned proceedings, in my considered opinion, the respondents have not followed the procedure as contemplated under section 5 of A P (SC, ST and BCs) Regulation of Issue of Community Certificates Act, 1993 read with Rules 8 and 18 of the Rules, 1997 framed thereunder, and, therefore, the impugned order suffers from legal infirmity, and the same is liable to be set aside.
13.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner forthwith.
However, this order will not preclude the authorities to proceed against the petitioner under the provisions of section 5 read with Rules 8 and 18 of the Andhra Pradesh (SC, ST and BCs) Regulation of Issue of Community Certificates Act, 1993 and Rules, 1997.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.