Amitava Lala, J - The writ petition is made challenging the order passed under Annexures `A' and `E' to the writ petition.
Annexure `A' is charge- sheet and Annexure `E' is the order of dismissal from the service of the petitioner, in Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited, Burnpur Works, Nos. 2 to 6 of Burnpur, District Burdwan.
2.
According to the petitioner, he was charge-sheeted on 31st October, 1983 and suspended from the service subject to domestic enquiry on the basis of the charge of theft of company's good when he was posted as security guard.
It appears that enquiry was proceeded and ultimately on 13th July, 1984, the petitioner was dismissed from service on the ground on negligence of duty.
Parallel departmental proceedings, a criminal proceedings was also initiated before the appropriate Court, wherefrom he was acquitted of the charges as on 22nd January, 1987.
3.
After giving reply to the second show cause notice before the order of dismissal, the writ petition as moved before this Court.
According to the petitioner, he has obtained an interim order on 13th July, 1984 by way of issuance of rule and interim order of stay of dismissal.
According to further to him, the dismissal order was issued by a Security Officer on 24th July, 1986 with retrospective effect from 10th of July, 1984.
However, I find, from the submission of the respondent that the petitioner was dismissed from the service on 13th of July, 1984.
Petitioner contended that he has made a request to the authority for his reinstatement in view of the final report of order of discharge from the criminal case by the police as on 15th January, 1986.
However, on 10th July, 1986, rule was discharged.
On 22nd January, 1987, concerned Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate discharged the petitioner from the criminal case.
The petitioner retired from service on 28th June, 1981.
On 22nd September, 1992 Rule and interim order of stay was restored.
On 27th July, 1994 the Court was directed the appellate authority to pass speaking order after hearing the petitioner.
On 21st September, 1994 the appellate authority passed order conforming the order of dismissal.
On 21st July, 1995, the authority was directed to review the matter.
Review order was passed on 25th January, 1995 confirming the order of dismissal.
4.
According to the respondent, the petitioner was dismissed from the service on 13th July, 1984 on the ground of negligence of duty for which the Indian Iron and Steel Company Ltd lost goods valued at Rs. 15 lakhs which was stolen during the duty hours of the writ petitioner.
Acquittal in criminal proceeding has no bearing on the disciplinary proceeding.
Nature and scope are different from that of a criminal case and acquittal in criminal case cannot therefore conclude the disciplinary proceeding.
The misconduct of the petitioner was proved in domestic enquiry and he was dismissed from service on 13th July, 1984.
On 27th July, 1984, the Single Bench of this Court was pleased to direct to file an appeal in accordance of the provisions of rule 29 of the Standing Order which is applicable in the case of the writ petitioner.
Further direction was given to the appellate authority to consider the same in accordance with law and pass a speaking order.
The petitioner was given opportunity to take all possible pleas while filing the appeal.
The appellate authority passed a reasoned order on 21st September, 1994, holding that the disciplinary authority was justified in dismissing the petitioner from service for the major misconduct committed by him.
On 21st July, 1995 and on 20th September, 1995 another Single Bench of this Court was pleased to direct the appellate authority to hear and dispose of the matter considering the review application after notice to all which was also dismissed by the Reviewing Authority.
No challenge was made before the Court as regards order passed by the appellate authority or reviewing authority since the petitioner was not present at the time of hearing when the same was dismissed by another Single Bench on 16th February, 1998.
Application for recalling of the order and restoration of the matter was also dismissed by such Bench on 9th March, 1998.
Application for recalling of the order and restoration of the matter was also dismissed by such Bench on 9th March, 1998.
An appeal was preferred.
Appeal Court was pleased to restore the matter on 10th July, 1998.
Petitioner wanted to make an application for amendment to introduce subsequent events which was disallowed by this Bench.
Ultimately the matter was heard.
5.
The respondent authority mainly harped on three distinct points such as (a) acquittal in criminal proceeding has no bearing on disciplinary proceeding; (b) Deputy Chief Security Officer, who passed the order of dismissal had the authority by way of power of delegation given to him; (c) non-supply of enquiry report is not fatal in the given situation.
Since the above three points are very vital in considering the petitioner's case in respect of the question of law, I have taken note of the decisions in support of these three points as above at first.
In AIR 1999 SC 1981, Nelson Motis v. Union of India & Ors., whereunder it was held that the nature and scope of a criminal case are very different from those of a departmental disciplinary proceeding and an order of acquittal, therefore, cannot conclude the departmental proceeding.
For the purpose of coming to a conclusion, the Supreme Court observed the following facts situation that besides the Tribunal has pointed out that the acts which led to initiation of the departmental disciplinary proceeding were not exactly the same which were subject matter of the criminal case.
6.
So far the second point is concerned, the respondent has relied upon the judgment reported in 1996(3) SCT 633 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1729, Gopal Ji Khanna v. Allahabad Bank & Ors., whereunder it was held that the post of Chairman-cum-Managing Director was replaced by the Executive Director, therefore, the order cannot be held to be invalid on ground that only Chairman and Managing Director are specified as Reviewing Authority and that thisstatutory power, therefore, could be exercised only by such named authority under the statutory provision and cannot be validly delegated to any subordinate authority.
The Executive Director while exercising the power of review was really discharging the function of Chairman and Managing Director as he was then placed in charge of those answers and he, therefore, was entitled to preform all the duty and function of those answers.
He did not exercise that power on the basis of it was delegated to him.
By referring this part of the judgment, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent contended before this Court that the delegation of power of Indian Iron & Steel Company shows that the then Deputy Chief Security Officer was head of the security department and he passed the dismissal order in the capacity of the Chief Security Department.
Therefore, the order cannot be fatal on the account of not having authority to pass an order of dismissal.
7.
So far the third point is concerned, a further judgment was cited before this Court reported in 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471, Union of India and Ors. v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, whereunder it was held that the disciplinary enquiry is a quasi judicial in nature.
There is a charge and a denial followed by an enquiry at which evidence is led and assessment of the material before conclusion is reached.
These facts it make the matter quasi-judicial and attract the principles of natural justice.
That the 42nd amendment of the Constitution of India, the delinquent officer is not assisted (associated) with the disciplinary enquiry beyond recording evidence and the submissions made on the basis of the material to assist the Enquiry Officer to come to his conclusions.
In case his conclusions are kept away from the delinquent officer an the enquiry officer submits his conclusion with or without recommendation as to punishment, the delinquent is precluded from knowing the contests thereof, though, such material is used against him by the disciplinary authority.
The report is an adverse material if the enquiry officer records the finding of guilt and propose a punishment so far the delinquent is concerned.
In a quasi-judicial matter, if the delinquent is being deprived of knowledge of the material against him though the same is made available to the punishing authority in the matter of reaching his conclusion, rules of natural justice would be affected.
Therefore, it was held therein that the delinquent is entitled to copy of the enquiry report conducted by the enquiry officer but not when conducted by the disciplinary authority himself.
8.
The respondent contended in view of such judgment that the case is prospective in nature and non-supply of enquiry report in this case is not fatal as per that decision.
9.
The petitioner contended before this Court that the whole disciplinary proceeding including the alleged order of dismissal is vitiated for the following reasons:-  (a) No copies of proceeding and recording of alleged theft of good relied on by the respondent and Enquiry Officer during the enquiry were not actually tendered to the petitioner for dealing of the petitioner for cross- examination;  (b) Report of Enquiry Officer was based on mere suspicion, no evidence rather contrary to evidence, therefore, finding is perverse;  (c) A criminal court when acquitted the petitioner on the charge of theft, the respondent authority did not consider the prayer for reinstatement of the petitioner;  (d) Order of suspension and dismissal issued by the Security Officer vitiated the whole proceeding of enquiry;  (e) The respondent discriminated the petitioner with others in coming to conclusion; and  (f) The orders of the appellate authority and Reviewing Authority are bad in nature;  10.
Admittedly in paragraph 13 of the Affidavit-in-Opposition, the authority concerned Sated that the petitioner never asked for a copy of the evidence by the prosecution witness as also the copy of the enquiry report.
Had he asked for the copies from the management which would have considered the matter and could do the needful.
Relying upon a judgment reported in 1998(4) SCT 162 (SC) : 1998(6) SCC 651, State of Uttar Pradesh v. Shatrughanlal & Anr., that if the appellant-State did not intend to give copies of documents to the respondent, it should have been indicated to the respondent in writing that he might inspect those documents.
Merely saying that the respondent could have inspected the documents at the time is not enough.
He has to be informed that the documents, of which copies were asked by him, may be inspected.
Access to records must have been assured to him.
If charged employee is require to submit reply to charge-sheet without having copies of the statements, is deprived of opportunity of effective hearing.
Therefore, supply of copies is also necessary where witnesses making the statements are intended to be examined against him in regular enquiry.
He also relied upon the judgment reported in 1997(2) SCT 52 (SC) : 1997(2) Judgment Today 367 (SC), Indian Oil Corporation Ltd & Anr. v. Ashok Kumar Arora, to establish that the High Court in cases of departmental enquiry and the findings recorded therein does not exercise the power of appellate Court/authority.
The jurisdiction of the High Court in such cases is very limited for instance where it is found that the domestic enquiry is vitiated because of non-observance of principles of natural justice, denial of reasonable opportunity; findings are based on no evidence, and/or punishment is totally disproportionate to the proved misconduct of the employee.
In support of his contention that the conclusion should be based on some evidence and not on mere suspicion.
He also relied upon a judgment reported in AIR 1978 SC 1277, Nanda Kishor Prasad v. State of Bihar & Ors. By citing another judgment reported in AIR 1983 SC 454, Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors., the petitioner contended before this Court that when the finding of the authority is utterly perverse, the court can always interfere with the same, although, the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not function as a Court of appeal over the findings of the disciplinary authority.
On an other point, as aforesaid, he has also stated the power to appoint to include the power of suspend or dismiss is a well settled principles as enunciated under the codified Act i.e.
Section 26 of the General Clauses Act.
In further, he has relied upon a decision on a point of departmental enquiry simultaneously with the criminal proceeding and the effect thereto relying upon a judgment reported in 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC) : 1999(3) SCC 679, Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd & Anr., it was held herein that there is a consensus of judicial opinion on a basic principles that proceeding in a criminal case and departmental proceedings can go on simultaneously except where departmental proceeding and criminal case are based on the same set of facts and the evidence in both the proceedings is common.
Basis of this proposition is that proceeding in a criminal case and departmental proceeding operate in distinct and different jurisdictional areas.
In departmental proceeding, facts operating in the mind of the disciplinary authority may be many such as enforcement of discipline or to investigate level of integrity of delinquent or other staff.
The standard of proof required in those proceedings is also different from that required in the criminal case.
While in departmental proceedings, the stands of proof is one of the preponderance of possibilities, in a criminal case, the charge has to be proved by the prosecution beyond the reasonable doubt.
Conclusions which are deducible from various decisions of the Supreme Court on these points are as follows :-  (i) Departmental proceeding and proceeding in a criminal case can proceed simultaneously as there is no bar in these being conducted simultaneously, though separately.
(ii) If the departmental proceeding and criminal case are based on identical and similar set of facts and the charge in criminal case against the delinquent employee is of a grave nature which involves complicated question of law and fact, it is desirable to say that departmental proceeding till conclusion of the criminal case;  (iii) Where the nature of charge in a criminal case is grave or where complicated question of law and facts are involved, in that case, will depend upon the nature of offence, the nature of the case launched against the employee on the basis of evidence and materials collected against him during investigation or as reflected in the charge-sheet;  (iv) Facts in (ii) and (iii) as above, cannot be considered in isolation to stay the departmental proceeding, but due regard has to be given to the facts that departmental proceeding cannot be unduly delayed; and  (v) if the Criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the departmental proceeding, even if they were stayed on account of pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceed with, so as to conclude that at an early date.
The purpose is that if the employee is found not guilty, his honour may be vindicated and in case he is found guilty, administration may get rid of him at the earliest.
11.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the criminal and departmental proceeding were based on identical set of facts, wherein, departmental authority found him guilty on the basis of the enquiry but the person concerned was acquitted in the criminal case.
In such situation, the Supreme Court held that when the person concerned is acquitted by a judicial pronouncement, it would be unjust, unfair and rather oppressive to allow the findings recorded at the ex parte departmental proceeding to stand.
12.
The aforesaid judgment viz-a-viz judgment as cited by the petitioner in 1990 SC 1981 (supra) have a definite nexus and connection in respect to come to a conclusion by the writ court in Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This is not question of fact finding but this is a question of law and propriety.
Earlier judgment of the Supreme Court as shown by the learned counsel for the respondent, has been duly considered by the subsequent judgment of this Court.
Although, the earlier judgment is delivered by a Three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court while the subsequent judgment is delivered by a Two Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in coming to a conclusion by the Supreme Court in earlier decision factually relied upon the conclusion of the Tribunal that the departmental proceedings were not exactly the same which were the subject matter of the criminal case.
Therefore, I cannot have any embargo in accepting such well considered judgment of the Supreme Court delivered subsequently.
13.
In the instant case, leaving aside the order remaining points, I find that the charge either before the criminal Court or before the disciplinary authority are arising out of theft occurred during the service period of the petitioner.
Therefore, if I go with the principles as laid down by the Supreme Court very recently we shall have to give the effect of propriety in respect of judicial pronouncement by accepting the same, which is based on (proof) beyond the reasonable doubt, unlike the departmental proceedings which is one of preponderance of probabilities.
If the petitioner is acquitted from a charge arising out of theft in a criminal proceeding then there is no question of indiscipline or investigation as to the level of integrity or delinquent.
This being the position, I cannot hold in favour of the authority to the extent that acquittal in criminal proceeding has no bearing on disciplinary proceeding.
Therefore, the position is favouring the petitioner hereunder.
It is needless to mention hereunder that there could be any valid confirmation of the order of dismissal by the appellate authority or by the review authority when original charge similarly placed with the departmental proceeding evaporates, therefore, that is no charge against the petitioner which can be merged with the appellate and review decision in confirming the order of dismissal based on the same.
The further important feature is that the petitioner retired from the service before the order passed by the appellate authority or review authority in spite of the fact that the same was directed to do so by a Single Bench of this Court.
In view of the revival of the Rule and interim order as originally passed after the date of retirement but before the decision of the appellate authority or review authority, it hardly makes any difference.
Other elements of discussion as to technicality are superfluous in view of the situation hereunder.
Therefore, the interim order which was passed on 13th July, 1984 stands confirmed.
Rule is made absolute.
14.
The petitioner will be treated as reinstated in the service from the date of suspension i.e. 31st October, 1983 till the date retirement on 28th June, 1991.
His back wages and other benefits will be calculated by the Payment of Wages Court on being represented by the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order.
However, there is no embargo upon the respondent authority in releasing the petitioner's employee share of contribution in provident funds as well as admitted part of pensionary benefits within a period of one month from the date of communication of this order.
The two periods are fixed by this Court for the purpose of same mandatorily.
According the writ petition is disposed of.
No order is passed as to costs.
Let an urgent xerox certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocate for the parties within a period of two weeks from the date of putting the requisites.
Petition allowed.