RL Ananad, J - Petitioner Veena Kumari is an advocate and she claims herself to be member of Lawyers Initiative c/o High Court Bar Association, High Court Premises, Chandigarh.
In her individual capacity she has filed the present writ petition against respondents No. 1 to 8 in the nature of quo warranto and has prayed for quashment of the selection of respondents No. 2 to 4 since they have been issued appointment letter for the posts of Lecturer/Reader, which, according to the petitioner, was never advertised and that the selection itself was not free from arbitrariness.
It has also been prayed by the petitioner that the appointments of respondents No. 5 to 9, who were recommended by the Selection Committee against the post of Lecturer/Reader be also quashed as those recommendations are violative of the mandatory provisions of the University Regulations.
2.
In para No. 4 of the writ petition it has been averred by the petitioner that she is filing the present writ petition in the nature of quo warranto against the selection of respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 who have since been appointed against the posts which were never advertised.
Their selection is without following the lawful procedure and they have become usurper of the public office of Lecturer of Political Science in the Department of Correspondence Courses.
The material illegality Committed by the University i.e. respondent No. 1 is that respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 have been appointed even though the posts of Lecturers of Political Science in the Department of Correspondence Courses were not advertised.
As per Regulation 4 Chapter 5(A) of the University Calendar Vol.
I, whenever there is a vacancy in the post of a teacher, the post shall be advertised and applications invited before the vacancy is filled.
It has been further averred that four posts of Lecturers of Political Science in the Department of Political Science, Panjab University were advertised vide advertisement No. 4/98.
Last date for submission of application was 20.7.1998 which was extended by few days.
According to the advertisement Annexure P-1 only 4 posts of lecturers in political science were advertised of the Department of Political Science alone.
Vide this advertisement one post of Reader in the Department of Political Science was advertised and 3 posts of Readers were advertised in the Department of Correspondence Studies.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the statutory regulations of the University Calendar i.e.
Regulations 61, 62 and 63 had not been complied with.
We will deal with this aspect of the case in the subsequent portion of this judgment.
But for the moment we would like to continue with the grievance of the petitioner who averred that the Selection Committee had Prof. Ashwani Roy and Prof. Randhir Singh as outside experts.
There is no dispute about Prof. Ashwani Roy being an outside expert.
But there is lot to say about his impartiality and fairness in the selection.
The other outside expert Prof. Randhir Singh has been a visiting Professor in the faculty of the Department of the Political Science, Panjab University, Chandigarh for the last 4 to 5 months prior to his being nominated as a subject expert from outside on the Selection Committee.
He was being remunerated by the Panjab University.
He was also residing in Chandigarh during the said period.
He could not by any stretch of imagination be considered a subject expert outside the territorial jurisdiction of the University as is clearly the requirement of Regulation 61.
The inclusion of Prof. Randhir Singh as an outside subject expert renders the constitution of the Selection Committee illegal, being violative of the mandatory provisions of Regulations 61 and 63 and, therefore, all the recommendations made by the Selection Committee are illegal.
Otherwise, one of the selected candidates namely Pompa Mukherjee had been a student of Prof. Ashwani Roy at JMU.
Shri Ashutosh Kumar was selected as Reader and he was the student of Prof. Randhir Singh.
Smit.
Anupama Roy was appointed as Lecturer and she is the wife of Shri Ujjwal Kumar Singh, Reader in the Department of Political Science.
Shri Deepak Kumar Singh, who was appointed as Lecturer in the Department of Political Science, is a student of Shri Bhupinder Brar, Chairman, Department of Political Science and Member of the Selection Committee.
Navjot was appointed as Lecturer and she is doing Ph.
D. with Smt. Rashmi Sudha Puri, wife of the Vice-Chancellor.
Shri Surinder Shukla, appointed as a Reader, has been a student of Prof. MM Puri, Vice-Chancellor and Chairman of the Selection Committee.
It was further averred by the petitioner by highlighting the second irregularity that specialization given in the advertisement for various posts was given up by the Selection Committee.
As per the advertisement for the post of lecturer in the Department of Political Science, first post was for the subject specialization of Modern Indian Political Thoughts/Political Theory.
The next posts was for the subject specialization of Comparative Politics, the third and fourth posts were subject specialization of International Relation and the selected candidates do not have the advertised subject specialization.
The Selection Committee has given special consideration to non-PhD candidates.
Among the 7 selected to the post of Lecturer, only one candidate had completed his PhD All other were struggling with their PhD  3.
It was further pleaded that the interview was conducted by the Selection Committee on 11121999.
The result was published after the syndicate meeting held in December, 1999.
The selected candidates joined their duties promptly in December, 1999.
Further it was pleaded that 7 members of the Selection Committee were supposed to have attended the meeting, but only 6 have signed the minutes of the meeting.
4.
With these broad allegations the petitioner has made a prayer that the selection/recommendation of respondents No. 2 of 9 be quashed.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Panjab University, respondent No. 1 filed its statement and the very locus-standi of petitioner Ms. Veena Kumari has been challenged.
According to respondent No. 1, this writ has been filed in the guise/garb of public interest litigation which is not maintainable when none of the non-selected candidates suffer from any handicap or disability preventing them from challenging the selections/appointments themselves.
None of the non-selected candidates have approached this Court to challenge the selections/appointments.
It was also pleaded that there is no violation of the University Calendar and the impugned selections/appointments are fully legal and valid.
The factual position is that 4 posts of Lecturers were advertised in the Department of Political Science and 151 candidates had applied for these posts.
50 candidates appeared before the Selection Committee for interview on 11121999.
Respondents No. 5, 6, 7 and 8 were selected as Lecturers in the Department of Political Science and respondents No. 2 and 3 were placed on the waiting list.
The Selection Committee made the following specific recommendations in its proceedings dated 11121999 :-  "In the event of any vacancy in Political Science on the University Campus becoming available, persons placed at the waiting list may be considered for appointment."
6.
Similarly two posts of Readers - one in the Department of Political Science and one in the Department of Evening Studies, were advertised.
10 candidates had applied for the same.
Out of these, three candidates were found eligible and called for interview on the basis of recommendation of the Screening Committee.
The Selection Committee recommended the name of respondent No. 9 for appointment as Reader in the Department of Political Science and respondent No. 4 was placed on the waiting list.
The Selection Committee made the following specific recommendation in its proceedings dated 11121999 :-  "In the event of number 1, viz. Dr. Ashutosh Kumar joining the post, the person on the waiting list may be considered for appointment in the Department of Correspondence Studies, PU, Chandigarh."
7.
The recommendations of the Selection Committee in both the cases were duly approved by the Syndicate on 17121999 and the Senate on 26121999.
Regarding the waiting list, the Senate resolved "that except in cases, where the Select List had specifically been recommended as a one-time measure by the Syndicate, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee in all other cases the Waiting List would apply in the present recommendations and that in future as well only Waiting List be prepared."
It is also the stand of the University that respondents No. 2 and 3 duly applied for the posts of Lecturers in the Department of Political Science vide advertisement No. 4/98.
Their names were not, however, short-listed by the Screening Committee constituted for the purpose.
They represented to the Vice-Chancellor, who allowed them to be called for interview.
The post of a Lecturer in Political Science was filled up in the Department of Correspondence Studies subsequent to respondent No. 5 leaving the Department of Correspondence Studies and joining the Department of Political Science on open selection basis and respondent No. 4 vacating the post of lecturer on joining as Reader in the Department of Correspondence Studies.
Respondent No. 1 categorically denied that respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 were appointed against unadvertised posts.
8.
With regard to the inclusion of Prof. Randhir Singh, it was submitted by the University that he was appointed as BR Ambedkar Chair Professor in Political Science w.e.f.
1681999 to 8.12.1999 on an honorarium of Rs. 15,000/- per month.
Prof. Randhir Singh retired as Professor of Political Science from the University of Delhi.
Regulation 61 is meant only for Readers and Professors and is not applicable for the posts of Lecturers.
There is no violation of Regulation 63 as Prof. Randhir Singh was neither a retired nor a honorary teacher of the Panjab University.
The composition of the Selection Committee, which consisted of Prof. MM Puri, Prof. Randhir Singh, Prof. Ashwini K Ray, Prof. Bhupinder S Brar, Dr. HS Deol and Dr. SK Sharma, shows that it had two outside experts namely Prof. Randhir Singh and Prof. Ashwini Ray.
Both the were outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Panjab University.
Moreover, the petitioner has raised doubts on the fairness and impartiality of the outside experts.
They have not been impleaded as respondents in the writ petition.
Prof. Randhir Singh was holding Dr. BR Ambedkar Chair which was specifically instituted by the Syndicate vide its decision dated 1071997 as part of the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the University.
These chairs were specifically meant to be offered to "adorned by persons of eminence, experience and vision" on invitation.
Prof. Randhir Singh was neither a retired nor a honorary Professor of the Panjab University as per the definition of Section 18 of the Panjab University Act, 1947.
Also there is no violation of Regulation 63 of the University Calendar.
9.
Justifying the appointments and recommendations of the private respondents and by maintaining that no illegality has been Committed by the University in any manner, the University prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
10.
Respondent No. 2 Shri Emanuel Nahar filed a separate written statement and his stand is more or less on the same footing as that of the University.
In addition to it, it was pleaded by respondent No. 2 that public interest litigation can only be filed by public spirited persons for the redressal of grievances of those who either do not know their rights or are unable to enforce the same.
It can also be entertained at the instance of third party only when it is shown that the legal wrong or legal injury or illegal burden is threatened and such person or determined class of persons, by reason of poverty, helplessness or disability or socially or economically disadvantaged position, unable to approach the High Court for relief.
Justifying his recommendation by the Selection Committee, this respondent has also prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
11.
Respondent No. 3 Mrs. Swaranjit Kaur also filed a separate written statement and she has also taken a specific objection that petitioner Ms. Veena Kumari, Advocate has no locus-standi to file the present writ petition and it has been filed under the garb of public interest litigation.
The petitioner has no interest at all in the selection.
She was never a candidate either for the post of Lecturer or Reader and the Public Interest Litigation cannot be allowed to be filed for personal gain or political motive of any oblique consideration.
On merits, the stand of this respondent is the same as that of respondent No. 2 and the University.
12.
Respondent No. 4 Ms. Shukla also filed a separate written statement.
While challenging the locus-standi of the petitioner she justified her recommendation in the light of the relevant regulations of the University Calendar.
A joint written statement was also filed by respondents No. 5 to 9 and they have stated that the present petitioner is guilty of deliberately concealing material facts and the provisions of the law.
The petitioner is impugning the selection of Lecturers and Readers yet only the provisions pertaining to the selection of Readers have been reproduced in the writ petition while provisions with regard to selection of Lecturers which were not convenient to the petitioner have been deliberately concealed.
Though the petitioner alleges that the appointments have been made without there being any advertisement yet she has herself appended the advertisement for the posts against which the answering respondents were selected and appointed.
Moreover, there is no averment in the writ petition that the answering respondents do not possess the requisite qualifications for appointment as Lecturers/Readers in Political Science.
Relying upon Regulation 4 it was averred by these respondents that as per this regulation whenever there is a vacancy in the post of a Teacher, the post shall be advertised and applications invited before the vacancy is filled.
There is a proviso that the Vice-Chancellor has the power to place before the Selection Committee the name of suitable persons for its consideration along with the applications received in response to the advertisement.
Relying upon Regulation 7 it was averred by these respondents that as per this regulation whenever a Lecturer is to be appointed, Syndicate shall appoint an adhoc Committee of five persons of whom at least two shall be experts in the subject concerned.
This Committee shall interview suitable persons and make recommendations to Syndicate.
These respondents also maintained that Prof. Randhir Singh is not a visiting Professor in the faculty of Political Science, Panjab University, Chandigarh and he had not delivered a single lecture or taken any classes in the department.
The University had created different chairs as a one time affair to commensurate (commemorate ?)
the Golden Jubilee Celebration of Panjab University and meritorious Professors were requested to hold periods of four months each for which a honorarium was paid to them.
Prof. Randhir Singh was asked to hold Dr. BR Ambedkar Chair.
He was not a visiting Professor and he did not take any classes or delivered lecture in the department.
There is no averment against Prof. Ashwani Ray as to how he was partial.
The allegations are vague and can not be taken note of in the absence of Dr. Ashwani Ray who has not been even made a party.
Not a single instance has been given how Prof. Randhir Singh dealt in a partial manner.
The members of the Selection Committee were the men of eminence and they had vast experience to their credit in the field of selection.
Relying upon the advertisement itself these respondents also prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
13.
I have heard Shri RS Bains, Advocate for the petitioner, Mr. Anupam Gupta, Advocate for respondent No. 1, Mr. GK Chatrath, Sr. Advocate assisted by Ms. Alka Chatrath, Advocate for respondents No. 2 and 4, Mr. TS Dhindsa, Advocate for respondent No. 3, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Sr. Advocate assisted by Mr. Amit Thukral, Advocate for respondents No. 5 to 9 and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
14.
The present is a writ petition filed by Ms. Veena Kumari, Advocate and the reading of the writ petition would show that it has been filed by her in individual capacity.
The reading of the writ petition would further show that it has been filed in the nature of quo warranto and it has been prayed by the petitioner that this Court should quash the selections/recommendations for the selection of private respondents.
In these circumstances, the point for determination would be whether a writ of quo warranto on the part of an individual is maintainable when she has not made an iota of allegations in her writ petition that the private respondents did not possess the requisite qualifications.
It is the admitted case of the petitioner that she never applied for any post nor she ever qualified.
It is also the common case of the parties that none of the non-selected candidates has questioned the selection of the private respondents.
Since, as already indicated above, the petitioner has nowhere asserted that the respondents are not qualified to hold the post for which they have been selected, a writ in the nature of quo warranto cannot be issued.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that petitioner Ms. Veena Kumari has no locus-standi to file the writ in the nature of quo warranto.
15.
With regard to the public interest litigation, the matter was considered by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court in the famous case of Lawyers initiative through Sh. RS Bains, Advocate and another v. State of Punjab through its Chief Secretary and others, AIR 1996 P&H 1 and the following guidelines were laid down in order to hold the maintainability for public interest litigation :-  "(i) That the impugned action is violative of any of the rights enshrined in Part III of the Constitution of India and relief is sought for its enforcement;  (ii) That the action complained of is palpably illegal or mala fide and affects the group of persons who are not in a position to protect their own interest on account of poverty, incapacity or ignorance;  (iii) That the person or a group of persons were approaching the Court in public interest for redressal of public injury arising from the breach of public duty or from violation of some provision of the Constitutional law;  (iv) That such person or group of persons is not a busy body of meddlesome inter-loper and have not approached with mala fide intention of vindicating their personal vengeance or grievance;  (v) That the process of public interest litigation was not being abused by politicians or other busy bodies for political or unrelated objective.
Every default on the part of the State or Public Authority being not justiciable in such litigation.
(vi) That the litigation initiated in public interest was such that if not remedied or prevented would weaken the faith of the common man in the institution of the judiciary and the democratic set up of the country;  (vii) That the State action was being tried to covered under the carpet and intended to be thrown out on technicalities.
(viii) Public interest litigation may be initiated either upon a petition filed or on the basis of a letter or other information received but upon satisfaction that the information laid before the Court was of such a nature which required examination;  (ix) That the person approaching the Court has come with clean hands, clean heart and clean objectives;  (x) That before taking any action in public interest the Court must be satisfied that its forum was not being misused by any unscrupulous litigant, politicians, busy body or persons or groups with mala fide objective of either for vindication of their personal grievance or by resorting to black-mailing or considerations extraneous to public interest."
Relying upon the observations made by the Hon'ble Division Bench we are of the considered opinion that the present attempt made by Ms. Veena Kumari in her individual capacity is a mala fide one.
She had no locus standi to file the writ in the nature of quo warranto when she has not made any allegation in the writ petition that the selected candidates or the recommendees had not possessed the requisite qualifications.
16.
Now the second point for determination is whether the selections or recommendations are in violation of the mandatory provisions of the University Calendar and whether the constitution of the Selection Committee was against the mandate of the various regulations which we would like to reproduce as under:-  Rule 41 of Chapter V(A) of the Panjab University Calendar - Volume I, 2000, which deals with the University Teachers, runs as follows :-  "41.
In case of direct recruitment, the post shall be advertised and applications invited before the post is filled.
Provided that the Vice- Chancellor shall have power to place before the Selection Committee the name/s of suitable person/s for its consideration alongwith the applications received in response to the advertisement."
17.
The reading of the above would show that in order to fill the post of a teacher, advertisement is necessary for inviting applications.
This is in pursuance of the policy of equality and admittedly in the present case advertisement has been made.
This regulation further gives power to the Vice- Chancellor to place before the Selection Committee the names of suitable persons for its consideration along with the applications received in response to the advertisement.
18.
Reverting to the merits, on going through the documents placed on record, we are of the opinion that there is no violation of Regulation 61.
Regulation 61 runs as follows :  "61.
Save as provided in Regulations 5 and 8 of this Chapter, the Syndicate shall appoint a Selection Committee consisting of 5 to 7 members to recommend persons for appointment as Professors or Readers of whom at least two shall be experts in the subject from outside the territorial jurisdiction of the University.
This Committee shall interview suitable persons and make recommendations which will be placed before the Syndicate.
If the Syndicate does not accept the recommendation of the Selection Committee, it may order readvertisement of the post in case of direct recruitment, or reinvitation of applications in case of in-services promotion or take such other action as may be considered necessary.
The Committee, in recommending a person for appointment as Professor or Reader, shall have regard to (i) his capacity for research, (ii) his ability as a teacher, and (iii) generally his eminence in the subject of his profession."
The reading of Regulation 61 would mean that when a selection of the post of Professor or Reader is to be made, the Selection Committee will consist of 5 to 7 members who shall recommend the candidates for appraisal for the Syndicate and out of those members at least there should be two experts in the subject from outside the territorial jurisdiction of the University.
19.
Regulation 62 talks of the quorum and it lays down that the quorum shall be three if the Committee consists of five members and it will be five if the Committee consists of six or seven members.
Regulation 63 further lays down that no retired or honorary teacher of the University residing outside its territorial jurisdiction shall be nominated as an outside expert on a Selection Committee.
Regulation 7 is again important to us as it deals with the post of Lecturer and it provides as follows :-  "7.
Save as provided in Regulations 5 and 8 whenever a Lecturer is to be appointed, Syndicate shall appoint an Ad hoc Committee of five persons of whom at least two shall be experts in the subject concerned.
This Committee shall interview suitable persons and make recommendations to Syndicate."
20.
We are not to sit over the judgment of the Selection Committee but in a public interest litigation at the most can examine whether the University has Committed such glaring illegality or irregularity so as to vitiate the procedure for the selection of the post.
As we have stated above, two sets of posts were advertised i.e.
Readers and Lecturers.
As per the Regulations, the meeting of the Selection Committee was held on 11121999 and 7 persons attended the meeting namely; Prof. MM Puri, Vice-Chancellor, Professor Randhir Singh, Retired Professor of Political Science, Delhi University, Delhi, Professor Javed Alam, Professor of Political Science, HP University, Shimla, Prof. Ashwini Ray, Professor of Political Studies, Jawahar Lal Nehru University, Delhi, Prof. BS Brar, Chairman and Head of Department of Political Science, Panjab University, Chandigarh, Mr. HS Deol, DPI Colleges, Punjab, Chandigarh and Mr. SK Sharma, Senior Lecturer, Arya College, Ludhiana.
Thus there was a proper constitution of the Selection Committee as per Regulation 61 and there was a proper quorum as per Regulation 62.
21.
Now it is to be seen whether the Selection Committee which interviews the Readers had two experts in the subject or not.
Prof. Randhir Singh and Prof. Ashwini Ray were the two experts.
The only major criticism which has been highlighted during the course of arguments was against Prof. Randhir Singh and it was submitted that this gentleman is the active member of the University being the holder of the Chair of Dr. BR Ambedkar.
In our opinion, he is an expert.
The honour of holding the Chair was the distinction which was conferred upon this man.
He was not the regular employee of this University.
He retired as professor from Delhi University.
If on few occasions he had visited the University in order to deliver a lecture, it does not make him a regular or part time employee of the University though the University might have granted him honorarium for the period when he was the holder of the Chair of Dr. BR Ambedkar.
The Selection Committee also had availed the services of Prof. Javed Alam.
He was an expert.
In these circumstances, we are of the opinion that while making the appointments/recommendations of the posts of Readers, there was no violation much less illegality or irregularity in that selection.
The Selection Committee further recommended that few candidates may be placed on the waiting list in order of merit so that if the person appointed does not join or there is a subsequent vacancy in the department/institution maintained by the University, in the same specialization, the same way be offered to the person(s) on the waiting list according to merit and specialization, upto a period of six months from the date of the Syndicate decision.
We do not see any wrong or mala fide in the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
Rather, these recommendations are in the larger interest of the studies of the institution, these recommendations of the Selection Committee came up for consideration before the Syndicate in its meeting dated 17121999 and those were approved.
Similarly, the Senate also approved the recommendations in its meeting dated 26121999 considering that the Selection Committee had included good, qualified persons and the University should not lose their services.
That was the reason that some persons were placed in the select list instead of waiting list and it was also resolved by the Senate to offer them appointment as and when the positions became available/fell vacant.
The select list was made valid for six months only and it was adopted as one time measure.
We do not see any wrong on the part of the Syndicate in the resolution of this decision.
Our attention was also invited to a very vital document Annexure R-1/7 vide which 5 Golden Jubilee Chairs were created in order to honour some eminent deceased personalities in the country.
Resultantly, 5 Chair Professorships were established and one was established in the name of Dr. BR Ambedkar, which was designated as BR Ambedkar Chair Professor in the field of Political Science which was later on conferred upon Prof. Randhir Singh.
If some benefit has been given to the holder of this distinction, it is neither an employment nor it has created a relationship of master and servant between the holder of the distinction and the University.
22.
Reverting to the appointment of Lecturers, the reading of Regulation 7 would show that an Ad hoc Committee of 5 persons was required to be framed out of those 2 should be experts in the subject concerned.
No wrong has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner with regard to its constitution.
The principal grouse of the learned counsel for the petitioner was with regard to the appointment of Prof. Randhir Singh.
We had already stated above that he was an expert, he was not the employee of the University and he was outside the territorial jurisdiction of the University.
The Selection Committee had made selections, if some of the candidates had been getting education from some of the members of the Selection Committee, it does not make it a ground to conclude that the members of the Selection Committee were biased, partial or they were inclined to favour a particular person.
At the cost of repetition we can say that none of the non-selected candidates had murmur against the selections/recommendations of the private respondents.
23.
It has been observed in Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 SC 434 that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committee and to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject, the Court has no such expertise, the decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc.
It is not disputed that in the instant case the University had constituted the Committee in due compliance with the relevant Statutes.
The Committee consisted of experts and it selected the candidates after going through all the relevant materials before it.
Therefore setting aside the selection on the ground of the so-called comparative merits of the candidates, as assessed by the Court while sitting in appeal over selection so made would not be permissible.
24.
There are further cogent grounds to dismiss this writ petition.
It lacks bona fide on the part of the petitioner.
She never applied for any job.
The present petition has been filed after a period of 8-1/2 months.
It is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
Some of the selectees had been serving in other Universities.
They have now been confirmed against the posts now held by them in the Panjab University.
It would be most unfair on the part of this Court to interfere in the selections after a lapse of more than two years as the selections were made somewhere in the month of December, 1999.
25.
After examining the totality of the circumstances and pros and cons of this case, we are convinced that this writ petition deserves to be dismissed and order accordingly.
We would also like to burden the petitioner with costs of Rs. 2,000/- as she had filed this petition for some oblique motives fully realising that she has no locus-standi to file take same and her action in the garb of the quo warranto was a misconceived one.
In the finality, the writ petition is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.