Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner completed his degree in Bachelor of Laws (Professional) from Panjab University, Chandigarh.
He was enrolled as an advocate with the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana.
Chandigarh on 1691994.
He started practising as an advocate in the Civil Courts at Pathankot.
The petitioner applied to become a member of the Bar Association of Pathankot on 15111994, which was declined by the concerned Bar Association.
It is the averment of the petitioner that he was practising as an advocate in the Subordinate Courts as well as in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh.
A complaint was received by the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana against the petitioner that he was involved in the business of running S.T.D./P.C.O.
and also in photostat business in the name and style of Punjab Call Briquettes.
In the complaint it was averred that the S.T.D./P.C.O.
licence had been issued by the authorities in the name of the petitioner.
The petitioner had not disputed issuance of the licence in his name but had pleaded that under oral agreement his family members were running the business with his consent and the photostat machine was being managed by his father under agreement with the petitioner.
2.
The Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana while exercising its powers under Section 3(5)(d) of the Punjab Advocates Act, 1961, hereinafter referred to as the Act, removed the name of the petitioner from the rolls of advocates.
Against the said order the petitioner preferred an appeal under Section 37 of the Act before the Bar Council of India, New Delhi, which was registered as Appeal No. 18 of the 1996 and was dismissed by the Bar Council of India vide order dated 14111998.
Against the order dated 14111998 the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India under Section 3 of the Act.
The said appeal is stated to be admitted for hearing.
However, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has not stayed the operation of the order dated 14111998 passed by the Bar Council of India.
3.
The Punjab Public Service Commission issued an advertisement on 3062001 for filling up 21 posts in the PCS (Judicial Branch) cadre.
Applications were invited.
Last date for submission of the said applications was 1772001.
The essential qualifications providing the eligibility for taking the PCS (Judicial) Examination, 2001, were as under :-  "A candidate should possess the degree of Bachelor of Laws of any University incorporated by law in India or the Degree of Bachelor of Laws of the (undivided) Panjab University, the Dacca University, the Tribhuwan University, Nepal, the Sind University or of the Rangoon or Mandalay University in Burma or a Barrister of England or Ireland or member of the faculty of Advocate of Scotland and has three years practice at the Bar on the last date of the submission of application forms, i.e. July 17, 2001.
Note : Only those candidates will be admitted to the examination who had obtained the degree of Bachelor of Laws and are qualified to be enrolled as Advocate on the rolls of the bar council of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
The expression "Degree of Bachelor of Laws" means a degree entitling a candidate to be enrolled as an advocate under the Advocates Act, 1961, and the rules made thereunder.
AGE : (a) A candidate should not be below 24 years and above 35 years on July 17, 2001.
(b) The upper age limit for a candidate belonging to Scheduled Castes/Tribes of all States and Backward Classes of Punjab only shall be 40.
(c) An ex-serviceman of Punjab Domicile shall be allowed to deduct the period of his service in the Armed forces of the Union from his actual age and if the resultant age does not exceed the maximum age limit prescribed for direct appointment to such a vacancy in the Service Rules concerned by more than three years, he shall be deemed to satisfy the condition regarding the age limit.
(d) The upper age limit is also relaxable up 40 years for widows, divorcees and certain other categories of women (as per detail given in the Information Sheet).
(e) The upper age limit is also relaxable upto 45 years for physically handicapped Punjab."
4.
The petitioner was desirous of appearing in the PCS (Judicial) under the category of Physically Handicapped Persons of Punjab and he submitted his application to the Secretary of the Commission.
However, on 682001 the petitioner was informed that his candidature for the examination was rejected by the Punjab Public Service Commission for the following reasons :-  "xx xxx xx 3.
You do not have the required Three Years practice as an Advocate as per advertisement.
xx xx xx 7.
You are not a member of any Bar Association."
5.
According to the petitioner rejection of his candidature by the Commission was totally arbitrary.
Thus, he represented to the Secretary of the Commission on 1882001 to which no response was received and as the examinations were to be commenced from 1682001, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
6.
Upon notice, the respondents put in appearance.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, appearing for the State of Punjab contended that there was no need for them to file any reply as there were no disputed facts in the writ petition and it was only a question of interpretation which required decision by the Court.
It was contended on behalf of the State that the qualification of three years of practice as an advocate continue to exist not only till appointment but during the entire career of the judicial officer, who should always be eligible to be enrolled as an advocate.
In the light of the above facts, it is contended by the petitioner that the petitioner having attained the requisite qualifications once, subsequent events cannot render the petitioner ineligible and consequent rejection of the petitioner's candidature is legally unsustainable.
7.
There is no challenge to the advertisement and particularly the essential qualifications prescribed there-under.
According to the essential qualifications an applicant should have three years practice at the Bar on the last date of submission of application form (which in the present case was 1772001).
Secondly, only those candidates were entitled to be admitted to the examination who have obtained degree of Bachelor of Laws and are qualified to be enrolled as an advocate on the rolls of Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana.
These are conditions precedent for eligibility of the applicant to take the examination in question.
These essential qualifications must co-exist at all relevant times.
8.
Under Section 2(1)(a) of the Advocates Act, 1961, the term "advocate" has been defined.
It means an advocate entered in any rolls under the provisions of the Act.
Every law-graduate within the expression of Clause (h) of the same section necessarily would not mean an advocate.
A law graduate means a person who has obtained a Bachelor's degree in Laws from the University established by law, in India.
Under Section 17 of the Act it is obligatory for every State Bar Council to maintain roll of advocates.
The conduct of every advocate whose name is maintained on the rolls of the State Bar Council is subject to the control and powers vested in the Bar Council of the State under the provisions of this Act.
The conditions of eligibility, thus, specify that an applicant, should be holder of a degree in Bachelor of Laws, must also be qualified to be enrolled as an advocate.
In other words, these twin eligibility conditions must be satisfied at all relevant times.
If a person loses the basic essential eligibility i.e. qualified to be enrolled as an advocate, he cannot claim any benefit for his previous practice as on the date of the application or at any subsequent relevant period he cannot claim benefit of his earlier experience to earn eligibility.
9.
It is not in dispute that the name of the petitioner was removed or struck off from the rolls of State Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana prior to the date of advertisement and his appeal was dismissed by the Bar Council of India vide order dated 14111998.
The effect of such order is that the petitioner is neither an advocate nor he is qualified to be enrolled as an advocate, as on the date of advertisement or even on the last date for submission of applications.
The petitioner has earned a disqualification as a result of his carrying on business of P.C.O./S.T.D.
and photostating and the Bar Counsel of the State, exercising its powers under Section 35(3)(d) has removed the name of the petitioner from the State rolls of advocates and such order has not been set aside as yet.
The matter is admittedly pending before the Hon'ble Apex Court, but operation of the judgment has not been stayed.
The cumulative effect of these circumstances is that the petitioner at the relevant time and even today is not eligible to take the PCS (Judicial) Examination for being appointed to the Judicial Service of the Sate as he is not an advocate presently, though holding a degree of Bachelor of Laws (Professional).
10.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the correct interpretation in the advertisement is that if the petitioner had been an advocate and had practised for three years, no subsequent disqualification within the four corners of law can render him ineligible.
If such an interpretation is accepted, it is bound to be destructive not only of the advertisement but would even offend the statutory provisions of the Advocates Act.
The expression "...qualified to be enrolled as an advocate on the rolls of the Bar Council" is indicative of continuing eligibility.
The period of three years indicates the minimum period required for making a candidate eligible for taking the examination.
It is the beginning of eligibility and not the end.
11.
There is a presumption that words are used in an Act correctly and exactly and not loosely and inexactly (Pritpal Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 Supreme Court 1413).
The conditions of essential qualifications should be construed to convey their exact meaning.
They cannot be interpreted so as to offend the legislative intent.
The ordinary meaning of the word normally should be the exact meaning unless the context clearly directs otherwise.
12.
Somewhat strict interpretation must be given to these prescribed essential qualifications.
The expression "essential" itself conveys the intention of the authorities to make the qualifications mandatory and not permit them to be rendered ineffective by incorrect reasoning.
A candidate has to be qualified to be enrolled as an advocate on the State Bar Council rolls and should have an experience of three years as practising lawyer to satisfy the essential conditions.
The respondents have indicated vide their memo dated 682001 that the petitioner does not have three years practice as an advocate as per advertisement, which obviously means that he ceased to be an advocate much before the issuance of the advertisement and as such was not qualified to take the examination.
13.
We are not able to see any error in this approach of the respondents.
Admittedly, the petitioner ceased to be an advocate within the meaning and scope of Section 2(1) of the Advocates Act even prior to the year 1996.
The entire emphasis on the expression "qualified to be enrolled as an advocate on the rolls of the Bar Council" is legally as well as professionally well founded.
This is a Nobel profession which requires adherence to higher professional values and standards.
Where the advocates are nuncio of country's judicial system, there they operate as linch-pin between the public and administration of justice by Court.
The central function which the legal profession must perform is nothing less than administration of justice.
A glance at the functions of the Bar Council will make it apparent that public utility duties including legal aid to the poor, is casted on these bodies of the Bar Councils.
Such is the service the members of this monopoly profession are to render to the society and keep to the canons of ethics befitting an honourable order.
14.
Viewed from any settled precepts of law we are unable to hold that objections raised by the respondents are coram non judice.
The interpretation put forward by the petitioner before the Court, if accepted, would not only be contra legem but could also be opposed to public policy.
The public policy required of this Nobel profession maintains of higher ethical and professional standards and professional conduct of one must be above board to maintain his name on the rolls of the State Bar Council.
When such person actually earns a disqualification by operation of law or by specific order of the concerned authority and ceases to be an advocate, then the doors of entry into judicial services are obviously shut for the individual.
The Court would have to sustain such an objection not only on the basis of law and public policy but even to ostracise the possibility of professional degeneration.
(Books referred - Law Lexicon-cum-Digest by NM Mulchandani and Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice GP Singh).
15.
Therefore, we are of the considered view that the essential qualifications as prescribed, make it mandatory for a candidate that he ought to be qualified to be enrolled as an advocate on the rolls of the Bar Council of the State even on the date of application.
It is continuing essential qualification, as de hors this qualification a candidate would obviously be not entitled to take the examination and even may not be eligible to be appointed to the PCS (Judicial) services.
16.
The contention of the petitioner is that the second objection raised by the respondents is beyond the advertisement and is not the requirement of any law in force for the time being.
The learned counsel appearing for the State has not been able to bring any such law which requires a candidate intending to take examination to be member of any Bar Association.
It is correct that the advertisement does not prescribe any such requirement and the provisions of the Advocates Act also do not make it mandatory for an advocate to be member of a Bar Association.
17.
In view of the conclusions on the first objection raised by the respondents, we consider it unnecessary to discuss this issue in any further elucidation in law or otherwise.
We would leave the matter at that while expressing the pious hope that it is always better and desirable that an advocate is a member of a Bar Association which facilities maintenance of high ethical professional values of this demanding profession.
18.
For the reasons afore-recorded, we dismiss this writ petition, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.