Swatanter Kumar, J - On 18122001, after hearing learned counsel for the parties, we had allowed the prayer of the petitioner No. 2 made in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for the reasons to be recorded later.
The prayer made in the petition is that the reservation made by the respondent-Institute for the sons/daughters of teachers of the respondent institute be quashed as it has no reasonable nexus with the object sought to be achieved and is apparently violative of Articles 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Before we proceed to record the reasons, it will be appropriate to refer to the basic facts giving rise to this petition.
The petition was filed by two petitioners namely Mandeep Kaur and Sabhrup Kaur challenging the reservation for the wards of teachers of the respondent institute in regard to admission to MBBS Course.
During the pendency of the petition, the petitioner No. 1 was assured seat in the course but she was required to withdraw the writ petition.
Thus, she made a statement before the court for withdrawal of her name from the writ petition.
3.
Resultantly, the learned counsel appearing for the said petitioner made a statement that qua said petitioner, the writ petition be dismissed and her name be deleted from the array of parties.
Request was allowed, vide order dated 12th October 2001.
However, subsequently, an application was filed under Order 47 Rule 1 read with section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure for review of the order dated 12th October, 2001, on the ground that the respondents are not granting seat to the petitioner, despite a clear assurance and representation which was made to her.
4.
During the pendency of the petition, in regard to petitioner No. 2 and the review application, a seat in MBBS was given to petitioner No. l and thus petitioner No. 1 through her counsel, during the course of arguments of the petition and the review application, made a statement that the review application may be dismissed as withdrawn, in view of the above narrated facts.
We allowed the petitioner No. 1 to withdraw the review application dated 5112001 and the order dated 12th October, 2001 shall stand unaltered.
5.
This petition, therefore, survives only on behalf of petitioner No. 2.
The petitioner No. 2 being desirous of pursuing her MBBS/BDS courses, after completing her schooling, took Entrance Test held by Sri Guru Ram Dass Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Amritsar, on 22.7.2001.
The result of the Entrance Test was declared on 22.7.2001.
The petitioner No. 2, who had applied in the general category was declared successful and she appeared at serial No. 12 on the merit list.
She secured 155 marks out of 200 marks.
A copy of the result card is annexed to the petition as Annexure P/1.
On 26th July, 2001, a letter was issued to the petitioner that she should appear for counselling to be held on 6th August, 2001 at 10 AM at the respondent institute.
The date of counselling was postponed on 582001 and intimation to this effect was duly published in the newspaper "The Tribune".
Again the petitioner received a letter dated 20.8.2001 that she should appear for counselling on 2982001 to be held at respondent institute.
On that date, the petitioner was not given seat as she was lower in merit.
However, last candidate admitted to MBBS course was at serial No. 11 of the merit list.
The petitioner was kept in the waiting list.
6.
According to the petitioner, two seats were reserved for sons/daughters of the Medical/Dental Teachers of the Institute run by the SGPC offends Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Further grievance of the petitioner is that daughter of Dr. Baljeet Singh, a teacher of the Institute was admitted to the course despite the fact that her father was no longer in employment of the Institute and his services had been dispensed with and he had filed a writ petition in this Court.
This candidate had secured only 94 marks out of 200.
Other seat was given to the daughter of the Principal of the Institute, who had only secured 121 marks out of 200 marks.
Thus, both these candidates were much lower in merit than the petitioner.
According to petitioner, such reservation, besides being impermissible, also offends the rule of merit within the reserved category.
7.
As per report of the Registry, all the respondents were served.
However, despite service nobody appeared on behalf of respondents No. 3 and 4.
Written Statement on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 was filed.
According to these respondents, the Institute is an unaided Minority Institute and has been declared as Sikh Minority Community Educational Institution by the notification of the Government of Punjab dated 3rd April, 2001.
As per this notification, the respondent-Institute has been permitted to make reservation within 50% seats for furtherance of the interest of the Sikh community.
Out of this quota the Institute has reserved two seats for the wards of employees of the Institute.
The Institute does not receive any aid from the government and being a minority institution, such reservation is permissible and it does not offend Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
According to the respondents, they are protected under Article 30 of the Constitution of India.
In the reply emphasis has been made on the fact that the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, also provide for such reservation and, therefore, the writ petition should be dismissed.
8.
At the very outset, we may notice that facts in the present case are hardly in dispute.
The eligibility of the petitioner for grant of seat under 50% reserved seats for Sikh community is also not disputed.
The fact remains that the petitioner is eligible for the seat in question and has admittedly cleared the Entrance Test by obtaining much higher merit than the respondents No. 3 and 4 in this petition.
The respondent-Institute is a minority Institution as per notification issued by the Government of Punjab and 50% seats are exclusively reserved for Sikh Community students for furtherance of the interest of the Sikh Community.
The respondent Institution is being run by the Shrimoni Guru (Gurudara ?)
Prabandhak Committee, Amritsar.
The controversy in law before us falls within a very narrow compass.
The notification dated 262001 permitted 50% of the seats to be reserved for the Sikh Community and amongst other permissible reservation two seats were reserved for the Sikh Teachers of Medical/Dental Teachers of the Institute run by the Shrimoni Guru Prabandhak Committee, Amritsar.
The challenge in this writ petition is limited to the reservation of above said two seats for the Awards of the Teachers of Medical/Dental Institutes.
As per notification, the object sought to be achieved by such reservation is to attract talented teachers for the best interest of the student community.
Reference in the notification is also made to Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India.
In nutshell, the question that falls for determination is:; whether it is permissible for the Minority Institute to provide reservation to the wards of teachers of the Institute to professional courses ?
9.
Article 14 of the Constitution of India guarantees principles of equality to all and without reference to their caste and creeds.
The exceptions to this paramount rule are specifically provided in the Constitution itself.
Protection to minority Institute is one of such exceptions which have been accepted by the courts.
There is no challenge before us nor any occasion arises for us to devolve in this controversy.
50% of the total seats are reserved for the students of Sikh Community and that fully caters to the need and demand of the Minority Institution.
Final aspect of the matter is whether out of these seats, the government of Punjab or Institution was justified and had acted in consonance with the Constitutional mandate for reserving two seats for the sons/daughters of the teachers in the institution run by the Shrimoni Guru (Gurdwara ?)
Prabandhak Committee, Amritsar ?
10.
It may be appropriate to refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court, where question of reservation came up for consideration of the court in the case of Chairman/Director, Combined Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das and others, 1993(4) Recent Services Judgments 261.
The Court held as under :-  ".....Any instrumentality of the State cannot give preferential treatment to a class of persons without there being any justification for the same.
The reservation of seats for admission to the BTech.
Course in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University is violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution.
There is no rationale for the reservation of the seats in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University nor any such reservation has any reasonable nexus with the object which is sought to be achieved by the University.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Once admission to an institution or a course of study is determined on merit on the basis of evaluation of marks at the Entrance Examination, no student securing lower marks has any legal right for admission much less a right enforceable in a Court of law.
Since the reservation of seats in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University was apparently violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, no court could issue directions for the enforcement of any such reservation.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the High Court was not justified in issuing the impugned interim orders.
We, accordingly, allow these appeals and set aside the order of the High Court."
11.
The above judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court was considered with approval by a Larger Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology v. State of Punjab and another, 1998(1) Recent Services Judgment 533 : 1997(4) SCT 824 (SC), wherein the Court held as under :-  "......It is no doubt true that the four additional seats for which reservation was made for the wards of the college and mill/school staff of the TIT and S are in addition to 90 seats and admission is made on the basis of marks obtained in the Entrance Examination conducted by the respondent- University.
But for the purpose of admission to these four seats a separate merit list is drawn in respect of the candidates who are eligible for these seats and admission is not made according to the merit as reflected in the common merit list.
Such reservation in favour of wards of the college and mill/school staff of the TIT and S does not satisfy the test of admission being given strictly on the basis of merit as laid down by this Court and has been rightly held to be impermissible by the High Court.
The said appeal is, therefore, liable to be dismissed".
12.
The question of similar reservation by the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, was challenged before this Court which came up for consideration before a Division Bench.
Not only such reservation was quashed but it was also held in the judgment that the two seats reserved for the College sponsorship was also bad.
Even in this regard, the Division Bench relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and allowed the writ petition with the following observations in the case of Manjot Kaur (Minor) D/o Sohinder Pal Singh Kapur and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 10194 of 1997, decided on 2491997 :  "A bench of seven Judges of the Supreme Court dealt with the issue in TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, AIR 1944 SC.
2372.
Therein also, their Lordships directed the minority educational institutions to fill up 50% of the total seats by candidates selected by the agencies of the State Government on the basis of the competitive examination/test.
The remaining 50% seats were allowed to be regulated by these institutions to admit candidates belonging to those particular religious or linguistic minority.
In the case of the Christian Medical College, Vellore and in the case of St John's Medical College, Bangalore, Karnataka, permission was granted to make selection on the basis of competitive test held by them.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx The question as to whether reservation for wards of the employees of the institution for admission to technical courses came up for consideration before Apex Court in Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology v. State of Punjab, AIR 1997 SC.
793 : 1997(1) SCT 824 (SC).
According to their lordships, reservation in favour of wards of the staff of an institution will not satisfy the test of admission being given strictly on the basis of merit.
Any such reservation is impermissible.
In the light of this decision, we are clear in our mind that the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, is not justified in reserving three seats out of 50 seats, for children of the staff of their institution.
Two seats each from Punjab domicile candidates and non-Punjab domicile candidates, are reserved for college sponsorship.
This type of reservation for the college is frowned upon by the Supreme Court.
Reference may be made to State of Rajasthan v. Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta, AIR 1989 SC.
177.
Therein, their Llordships have categorically stated that college based preference or institutional preference is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Thus, the reservation of seats by categories 3 and 7 are also not sustainable.
The judgment of Division Bench in Manjot Kaur's case (supra) was assailed by way of Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 20211-20212 of 1997 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, which was dismissed, vide order dated 10111997, which reads as under :- "UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following  ORDER "We do not decide in this case whether a writ petition could have been filed against the petitioner College because the question which counsel presses us to consider is already before a Bench of 11 Judges of this Court and the petitioner is appearing in that matter.
The SLP is dismissed".
13.
The reservation for the wards of staff and teachers of the same institution was set aside by the Division Bench of this Court while relying upon the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The matter has attained finality inter-se the parties, though the question of law remains open.
As far as this court is concerned, the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court rendered above are binding and the matter has to be dealt with and disposed of in terms of the principles enunciated by the Apex Court in those judgments.
We have no reason to differ with the view expressed by the Division Bench of this court in Manjot Kaur's case (supra).
14.
Where Article 29 spells out the protection of interest of minorities, there Article 30 talks of the right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.
These protections and rights, as declared by the Constitution, are absolute in terms but are subject to regulatory measures, as held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of St John's T.T.I.
v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1993(2) U.J.SC.
490 : 1993(4) SCT 33 (SC).
The reservation for their students by the minority institutions could not exceed 50% of the annual admission.
Limit on such reservation was held to be more logical and conducive to the growth of integrated society.
In this case, the court is concerned with somewhat more finer question on right of the minority institutions to make reservation for the wards of their teachers and staff.
The expression minority remains undefined in Article 30 of the Constitution of India.
But this expression has to be given a connotation or a meaning keeping in mind and with reference to any community, which is numerical less than 50% of the population of a State as a whole.
(A.I.R. 1958 Supreme Court 956 titled In re The Kerala Education Bill, 1957 Special Ref.
No. 1 of 1958).
The right conferred on minority to establish educational institutions of their choice is, thus, subject to the condition that they are not entitled to have educational institutions exclusively for their own benefit.
A preferential reservation for the wards of teaching staff of the institutions within this reservation does not stand the test of any rationality and does not flow from any right available to the minority institutions.
Such an approach is not consistent with the spirit of the above noticed Constitutional provisions.
There are grey areas left unarticulated in the Constitution, which are supplied by the judicial pronouncements.
15.
Minority Institutions, while taking complete advantage of the protections enshrined in Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution have to act guardedly so that such institutions do not frustrate or deny the right to equality of every member of their clause in light of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Whatever the extent of protection, these institutions cannot prescribe impermissible reservation and create a microcosm class of preferential reservation within the minority reservation itself.
The result of allowing such reservations would certainly be permitting the minority institutions to create an inequality within equals i.e. students belonging to the minority class, who are otherwise equal in all respects.
Thus, to grant special reservation within that class to the wards of the teachers would offend the basic principle of equality and obviously there is no nexus between such preferential reservations and the object sought to be achieved.
The constitutional goal in furtherance to the Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution of India, still have to be achieved without defying the constitutional mandate the equality and purposeful achievement of the objects.
Any kind of preferential reservations should be permissible in law and must be in comity to the principle of equality.
All the students belong to a section of society i.e. minority and thus, must enjoy the protection of granted equally.
The common weal of the minority community lies in disbursement of the benefit or protection equally to all its members or at best within the permissible reservation.
Once a preferential reservation is held to be impermissible in law, the minority institutions are expected to see that such equality was not denied to its members within 50% seats.
The reasons for such preferential reservations has been stated in Annexure R1/1 annexed to the reply.
It has been stated that these seats are being reserved to attract talented teachers for the best interest of the student community admitted in the institution and ultimately it is stated to be for the purpose of better management and development of such institution.
This reason besides being devoid of any merit has already been repelled by the highest court of the land.
To attract better teachers by providing such impermissible reservations at the face of it is unreasonable and offend the very purpose of protection and right enshrined under Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution of India.
Clause (3) of the notification is intended to give benefit or preference of two seats out of the 50% seats reserved for minority community students for the members of its staff.
Curio may be the chances but it cannot be ruled out completely that the staff member of the institute or college may not belong to the minority community.
As such the benefits of the seats reserved for minority community students may go to non-minority students, which will be in complete contradiction to the object of such reservation.
It was for the respondents to show that such preferential reservation his reasonable nexus and it does not offend the principle of equality.
We have no hesitation in concluding that the respondents have not been able to satisfy any of these two basic ingredients.
16.
Reference can also be made to the judgment of this court in the case of Parveen Hans v. The Registrar Punjab University, Chandigarh and another, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 405, where reservations for the wards of the employees and their wards in LL.B.
course even under the general category was held to be bad and improper.
17.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition.
The obvious result thereof is that the preferential reservation within the reservation for the minority community students, being impermissible in law, is set aside and the respondents are directed to grant admission to the petitioner in order of her merit.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.