RL Anand, J - This is a defendants appeal and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1641996 passed by Additional District Judge, Sangrur, who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 3151995 passed by Sub Judge 1st Class, Sangrur, who decreed the suit of Nazar Singh plaintiff for declaration as prayed for.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Nazar Singh is working as Head Constable in the Police Department of the Punjab Government.
He filed a suit for declaration that the orders dated 441990 and 26.11.1990 passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Sangrur dismissing his representation and appeal and the orders not confirming him as Head Constable are illegal, null and void.
The case set up by the plaintiff in the trial Court was that he joined the Police Department as Constable on 25.8.1977 and was promoted as Head Constable on 141982, after passing the Lower School Course by dint of his hard and honest working.
The service record of the plaintiff did not carry any adverse entry except the impugned adverse confidential report for the period from 141988 to 31121988.
The other Head Constables, who were deputed for training at Phillaur and who also passed the Lower School Course along with the plaintiff have been confirmed.
The plaintiff was senior to those Head Constables.
The orders of confirmation were passed on 1691989 and 31101999 but the confirmation of the plaintiff was stopped by defendant No. 2 illegally w.e.f.
171989 and 111991.
The other Constables who had passed the Lower School Course at Phillaur along with the plaintiff were confirmed vide orders stated 1691989, 3181990 and 26101990.
The plaintiff was not confirmed because of the adverse entry for the period from 141988 to 31121988 against which he made the representation.
The grouse of the plaintiff is that his case was shelved by Senior Superintendent of Police, Sangrur because of the adverse entry for the period from 141988 to 31131988 and the authorities have committed grave illegality.
As per the plaintiff, he could be kept on probation only for two years which ended on 141984.
The entry for the period from 141988 to 31121988 could not be taken into consideration when the orders of confirmation of his junior employees were passed on 1691989 and 31101991.
Otherwise also, when these orders were passed, his representation against the adverse remarks was pending.
His appeal was also pending.
The order rejecting his representation is totally cryptic and, therefore, such cryptic orders could not be taken into consideration by the authorities to ignore the plaintiff from confirmation.
It was also pleaded by the plaintiff that RS Brar, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sunam also gave good reports to him regarding his work and conduct.
There was no complaint against him from the public or from the senior officers.
His representation was rejected arbitrarily on 441990.
He filed an appeal before the DIG, Patiala through proper channel and the same was not sent of DIG, Patiala by the defendant No. 2 on the plea that the same is not legally maintainable and it was rejected on 26.11.1990.
As stated above, the case of the plaintiff is that when his representation and statutory appeal were pending, the adverse entry for the period from 141988 to 31121988 could not be taken into consideration.
The plaintiff was not heard before passing the orders dated 441990, 1691989, 3181990, 26101990 and 1101991 by defendant No. 2.
It was also pleaded by the plaintiff that as per Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules (here-in-after referred `the Rules'), on the expiry of two years, the plaintiff would be deemed to have been completed the probation and, therefore, he was entitled to confirmation on the expiry of two years or within a reasonable time, but the orders of confirmation were passed in the year 1989 when his juniors were confirmed and he was ignored.
With this background the plaintiff filed the suit for declaration and made a prayer as stated above.
3.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendants.
Who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the defendants, the plaintiff was promoted as Head Constable on 1561982 and he could not be confirmed due to bad service record and adverse A.C.R.
for the period from 141988 to 9121988.
The defendants admitted the rejection of the representation of the plaintiff.
According to the defendants the adverse remarks were recorded by Shri BPS Brar, DSP as there was a complaint of corruption against the plaintiff and the plaintiff took less interest in the investigation.
The plaintiff was rightly ignored on account of his bad ACR  4.
From the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  "1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration, as prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to mandatory injunction, as prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD 5.
Relief."
5.
The parties led evidence in support of their respective cases and vide judgment and decree dated 3151995 the trial Court decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
The defendants filed the first appeal before the Addl.
District Judge, Sangrur, who dismissed the same for the following reasons as given in paras 5 to 8 of the impugned judgment dated 1641996 :-  "5.
The learned Govt. Pleader for the appellant-defendant has contended that the trial Court has wrongly interpreted the rules 1318 of Punjab Police Rules, Vol. II.
Mere completion of probation period of two years would not entitle the respondent-plaintiff for confirmation.
He relief upon the instructions dated 22.5.1964 issued from the Inspector General of Police, Punjab, laying down the guiding principles governing the case in which it is desired to confirm the officiating officer in their ranks by counting their officiating service towards the probation on the basis of said instructions.
He contends that where an officer has been officiating for at least three years and has an outstanding record of service, he may be confirmed straightaway, where an officer has a good record of service he may also be confirmed without being placed on probation, if he has put in four years of officiating service.
Similarly, an officer with average record of service may be confirmed without being placed on probation if he has out in five years of officiating service.
The officiating officers whose honesty or moral character is suspected even once during officiating period should, if at all considered for confirmation be placed on two years probation.
The learned counsel for the respondent-plaintiff, on the other hand, has contended that the adverse report for the period from 141988 to 31121988 is advisory in nature and not adverse and cannot prejudice the right of confirmation of the respondent-plaintiff.
The respondent-plaintiff was ignored on basis of A.C.R.
when his representation was still pending.
The order (Ex.P3) dated 441990 is illegal and the order of rejection of appeal (Ex.P5) being cryptic is bad in law and the respondent-plaintiff is entitled for confirmation w.e.f.
561984 and the respondent-plaintiff was entitled to confirmation as per his turn.
6.
I have considered the arguments of the learned GP for the appellant- defendant State and the learned counsel for the respondent- plaintiff and have gone through the pleadings and evidence of the parties and the entire documentary evidence on the file.
7.
The date of promotion of the respondent-plaintiff as Head Constable admittedly is 141982.
The rule reading confirmation of police officials promoted as Head Constable is Rule 1318, which is as follows :- "All police officers promoted in rank shall be on probation for two years; provided that the appointing authority may by a special order in each case, permit periods of officiating service to count towards the period of probation.
On the conclusion of the probationary period a report shall be rendered to the authority empowered to confirm the promotion who shall either confirm the officer or revert him.
In no case shall the period of probation be extended beyond two years and the confirming authority must arrive at a definite decision within a reasonable time soon after the expiry of that period whether the officer should be confirmed or reverted.
While on probation officers may be reverted without departmental proceedings.
Such reversion shall not be considered reduction for the purposes of Rule 164.
The only interpretation of the above said Rule is that the probation period is two years and after expiry of said period of two years, the officiating officials is either to be confirmed or reversed and the probation period cannot be extended beyond two years.
Even if the guidelines, as referred to by the Govt. Pleader, are considered for confirmation, even then the right of the respondent-plaintiff for confirmation does not stand prejudiced in any manner as the completed the period of two years on probation.
No complaint or adverse remark was given to the respondent- plaintiff for the said period.
As per rule 1318, he was either to be confirmed or reverted on the expiry of period of probation.
The question that arise for determination in the present case is as to whether in the light of Rule 1318, the A.C.R.
for the period from 141988 to 9121988, the copy of which is Ex.D1, can be an obstacle for the confirmation of the respondent- plaintiff.
Rule 1318 of Punjab Police rules came up for consideration and scrutiny before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a number of cases.
It has been laid down that if the conduct of an official during probation was satisfactory and there is nothing on the record against him for the said period, he would be deemed to have been confirmed on the completion of statutory period of two years of probation.
A reference in this concern can be made to the judgment reported as 1994(2) SCT 556 (SC) : 1994(2) Judgments Today Supreme Court page 157 (Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana).
In the said case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in reference to Rule 138(2) has held that promotion of constable to the post of Head Constable under rule 138(2) is on regular basis though in the promotation order it may have been specifically mentioned to be on temporary on adhoc basis.
Following the ratio of the said judgment, the Hon'ble High Court in a case reported as 1995(1) SCT 199 (P&H) : 1995(2) Recent Service Judgments page 229 (Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana) has held that a Head Constable who has completed more than two years probation period and there is nothing on the record that his conduct during probation was not satisfactory was entitled for confirmation on the post in question on completion of two years probation.
Similar is the ratio of judgment in 1995(1) SCT 289 (P&H) : 1995(2) Recent Service Judgments, page 282 (Hardev Singh v. State of Haryana).
8.
The learned counsel for the respondent-plaintiff has also relied upon 1990(2) CLJ, (Civil, Criminal and Revenue) page 556 (Mohinder Singh v. Punjab State Electricity Board) to contend that when adverse remarks are of advisory nature, these cannot be treated to be adverse and the employee is entitled to be considered for promotion as per eligibility.
Applying the ratio of judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rishal Singh's case and also Hardev Singh's and Mohinder Singh's case to the case of the respondent- plaintiff, I find that the respondent-plaintiff had completed the period of probation in the year 1984 on 1561984 and the confirmation has been denied to him on the basis of Ex.D1, which is the A.C.R.
for the period from 141988 to 9121988.
The right of confirmation and accrued to the respondent- plaintiff after the expiry of period of two years of probation.
Thus, the respondent-plaintiff had been wrongly denied the confirmation on the basis of Ex.D1.
In view of the law laid down in the above-noted judgments, it is not necessary to go into the nature of the A.C.R.
(Ex.D1) to be of advisory nature of adverse, besides this, the representation of the respondent-plaintiff has not been decided by speaking order, it is also a fact that while the representation against the adverse A.C.R.
was pending, the adverse A.C.Rs.
were acted upon in contravention to the law laid down in 1993(3) S.L.R.
125, 1994(3) S.L.R.
407 and 1991(4) S.L.R.
132.
The respondent-plaintiff was ignored his confirmation when his representation was pending.
The representation (Ex.P2) sent to the SSP was decided vide two lines order (Ex.P3) which cannot be termed as speaking order."
6.
Not satisfied with the decision of the Courts below, the present regular second appeal by the State of Punjab.
7.
I have heard Mr. SK Sharma, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab for the appellants, Shri Surinder Garg, Advocate for the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the records of this case.
8.
Some facts are not much in dispute with regard to the promotion of the plaintiff as Head Constable.
Whereas the case of the plaintiff is that he was promoted as Head Constable on 141982.
On the contrary, the case of the defendants is that the plaintiff was promoted on 1561982.
This discrepancy in date will not make much difference because we have to interpret Rule 1318 of the Rules.
It is the common case of the parties that one adverse entry was recorded against the plaintiff for the period from 141988 to 31121988.
Also, it is the common case of the parties that for the first time the case of confirmation was considered on 1691989 and thereafter on 31101991 and so on and the plaintiff was ignored for confirmation on account of adverse entry for the period from 141988 to 31121988.
It is also the admitted case of the parties that plaintiff Nazar Singh made a representation against the adverse entry on 261989 and the same was rejected by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Sangrur on 441990 with the following order :-  "The representation of Head Constable Nazar Singh No. 545/SGR against the adverse remarks for the period from 141988 to 9121988 is considered and rejected being devoid of any force.
He may be informed accordingly.
Sd/-  Sr Superintendent of Police, Sangrur"  9.
It is also the admitted case of the parties that the plaintiff filed an appeal before the DIG, Patiala on 571990 which was forwarded to the said authorities by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Sangrur on the same day.
10.
Now let us examine the effect of the relevant provisions of Rule 1318, which run as follows :-  "All police officers promoted in rank shall be on probation for two years; provided that the appointing authority may by a special order in each case, permit periods of officiating service to count towards the period of probation.
On the conclusion of the probationary period a report shall be rendered to the authority empowered to confirm the promotion who shall either confirm the officer or revert him.
In no case shall the period of probation be extended beyond two years and the confirming authority must arrive at a definite decision within a reasonable time soon after the expiry of that period whether the officer should be confirmed or reverted.
While on probation officers may be reverted without departmental proceedings.
Such reversion shall not be considered reduction for the purposes of Rule 164.
This rule shall not apply to constables and Sub-Inspectors promoted to the selection grade, whose case is governed by rules 135. and 1314."
Thus, the reading of the above statutory rule gives the following conclusion :-  (1) The probation period will be for two years and for the special reasons the Punishing Authority has the power to permit the period of officiating service to count towards the period of probation.
(2) On the completion of probation period a report has to be made to the appointing authority for the confirmation of such police officers in rank.
(3) On receipt of that report it is for the authority to confirm the promotion or the officer can be reverted to his substantive rank.
(4) In no case the period of probation is to be extended beyond two years and the confirming authority is to arrive at a definite decision within a reasonable time soon after the expiry of the period of probation i.e. two years.
(5) If any officer is to be reverted, such reversion shall not be considered as reduction in the rank.
11.
Thus, the reading of the above rule will show that the period of probation would be two years and after two years and after the expiry of reasonable time the competent authority is to take a definite decision whether the employee should be confirmed or reverted.
The rule also gives the mandate that beyond two years the period of probation cannot be extended and the confirming authority must come to a definite conclusion on the expiry of two years within a reasonable time whether the official is to be confirmed or not to be confirmed.
This rule has been inducted in the rules with a purpose.
The fate of a public servant cannot be allowed to hang in balance.
The police department is a department of efficiency.
Therefore, a power has been given to the Government to put an employee on probation and that is the reason that period of two years for confirmation has been mentioned.
The rule further states that beyond two years there is no scope of extension.
The decision has to be taken by the authority to confirm a promoted employee or to send him back.
This decision has to be taken within a reasonable time after the expiry of two years.
If no such decision is taken what is the effect is a point for adjudication.
Similar point came up for consideration before this High Court in Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(2) RSJ 229 when Rule 138(2) was considered.
The facts of the case were that the employee was promoted as Head Constable on 1101982 and he had completed more than two years or probation period.
There was nothing on the record that his conduct during the period of probation was not satisfactory.
In these circumstances, it was observed by the High Court that the petitioner would be deemed to have been confirmed on the post in question on the completion of two years probation.
The reliance was placed upon Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana, JT 1994(2) SC 157.
Admittedly, after the expiry of two years, the authorities did not pass any order either to confirm the plaintiff or to revert him to the substantive rank of Constable.
In other words, on the expiry of reasonable time after 141984 or 1561984 the plaintiff will be deemed to have been confirmed as Head Constable.
Why the plaintiff should be asked to suffer if the authorities are sitting tight over the matter for a period of four of five years after 1984.
They took the first decision to confirm or not to confirm in the year 1989 and an employee, who has not heard anything from the department for a period of five years can always take into his head that he has been confirmed.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants relied upon a judgment of Hon'ble Full Bench Raj Kumar, ASI v. The State of Punjab and others, 1980(3) SLR 779 and submitted that there is no automatic confirmation.
With the expiry of the period the probation cannot be ripen into confirmation until and unless a specific order is passed to that effect.
In the present case the plaintiff and other similarly situated employees could not be confirmed in the year 1984 as there was no post available for confirmation.
The case for confirmation was considered in the year 1989 and by that time the plaintiff had already earned adverse entry for the period from 141988 to 31121988 and there was no part on the part of the authorities to consider that entry.
In the light of that adverse entry the plaintiff was ignored for the purpose of confirmation.
I have considered this aspect of the case and in my opinion this judgment is not helpful to the counsel for the appellants.
The point for determination before the Hon'ble Full Bench was what is the meaning attached to the words "officiation" and "probation".
It was observed by the Hon'ble Full Bench that mere officiation even against a permanent post cannot be deemed to be one on probation against the said post.
An express order for putting an officiating official on probation is necessary.
This ratio is clear from the following observations made by the Full Bench as contained in para 27 of the said judgment :-  "27.
I would conclude, therefore, that in the relevant rules the terms "officiation" and being placed on probation have been advisedly used as distinct and separate concepts.
They cannot, therefore be either treated or deemed to be synonymous.
Consequently a mere officiation even against a permanent post of an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police cannot be deemed to be one on probation against the said post.
Rule 1318 of the Rules in my view envisages an express order for putting an officiating official on probation and vests a discretion in the authority to permit periods of officiating service to count towards the period of probation.
Till such an order is passed the official continues only to officiate against such post.
The answer to the question formulated the opening part of the judgment is rendered as above."
12.
If I revert again to Rule 1318, the reading of the same would show that a power has been given to the appointing authority to permit the period of "officiation" to be counted towards the period or probation, provided a special order is passed in this behalf.
Here, we are not dealing a case of "officiation" or "probation".
We are dealing a case of an employee who was promoted to the post of Head Constable and was put on probation which probation period cannot be extended more than two years at any cost.
After the expiry of two years within a reasonable time the authority has to take a decision one way or the other to confirm that employee or to revert him to the substantive rank.
The Government took the decision to confirm Head Constables for the first time in the year 1989 much after the upper ceiling i.e. 1984.
It is not a reasonable time.
Therefore, I am inclined to hold that the plaintiff will be deemed to have been confirmed at least from the date when his junior was confirmed.
While confirming the plaintiff only the service record of the plaintiff has to be viewed which falls within the period of probation or few months thereafter.
In the present case the service record of the plaintiff for the period from 141988 to 31121988 has been taken note of, it is not a legal or valid action on the part of the appellants.
13.
Now I have to see whether the adverse entry for the period from 141988 to 31121988 could be taken into consideration by the authorities in not confirming the plaintiff.
I do not dispute with the proposition of law that the department has no power to take adverse entry into consideration at the time of passing of the order of promotion.
The entire service record of the employee is supposed to be taken into consideration for the period of promotion up to the date when the promotional vacancy arose to the employee.
But in the present case that record has been considered which, it my opinion, could not and should not have been considered for the simple reason that against this adverse entry the plaintiff had already made a representation, which was statutory and when the order was passed ignoring the plaintiff, the representation had not disposed of.
The SSP rejected the representation on 441990, whereas the first order was passed in the year 1989.
Against this order the plaintiff filed the appeal on 571990.
A prejudice has been caused to the plaintiff when the report has been relied upon against which the representation or appeal was pending.
Moreover, let us see what was the adverse remark and how the representation has been dealt with.
Against the column of "Reputation for honesty" the Recording Officer has written "Complaints of corruption".
It has been remarked against the column "Has he been employed on Investigation, detective or watch duties, if so his efficiency and competency in those job also mention outstanding work done by him" that "Remained as IO in PS Sanam.
Detective work is less.
Should take more interest in the investigation field".
Against general remarks it has been recorded that "He has taken more interest in the corruption side and less interest in the investigation field during his tenure as IO in PS Sunam."
In such a situation the recording officer should have given specific instance of corruption so that the delinquent official may have the right to defend himself.
It is true that the recording of A.C.R.
is the subjective satisfaction on the part of the Recording Officer, but once you are doubting the integrity of a person, then the responsibility of the officer who records the A.C.R.
becomes more.
Be that as it may, let us see how the representation of the plaintiff has been dealt with.
The order passed but the SSP is not only cryptic but it suffers from vagueness.
The order simply mentions considered and rejected being devoid of any force.
It is not a speaking order.
The punishing authority ought to have realised that the order rejecting the representation of the plaintiff is likely to affect his career adversely.
The department has not proceeded against the plaintiff as per the departmental rules as required under Rule 1639 and 1640.
It preferred to straightaway rely the entry against which the representation was pending.
The entire exercise was to jeopardise the career of the plaintiff.
In this view of the matter, I am inclined to affirm the judgments and decrees of the Courts below as there is no illegality in the same.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this appeal and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.