Ashim Kumar Banerjee, J - The writ petitioner suffered an order of removal just on the eve of his retirement.
The order of removal has been impugned before me principally on three grounds - (i) the official who had issued the charge-sheet himself was a witness on behalf of the prosecution; (ii) the officer who had issued the order of removal was not the appointing Authority and, in fact, was a person being designated much lower than the appointing Authority; and (iii) the proceeding which had resulted in the order of removal was done in a hasty manner.
2.
Mr. Jawharlal Dey, learned Advocate appearing for the writ petitioner, submits that since the-official who has issued the charge-sheet himself was a witness for the prosecution, he should not have issued the charge-sheet as there is, prima facie, an element of bias which vitiates the entire proceedings.
With regard to the second ground, Mr. Dey submits that in accordance with the Standing Order, no person lower than the appointing Authority is entitled to issue the order of removal or any penalty and hence, the impugned order is violative of the Standing Order applicable in the case of the writ petitioner.
With regard to the third ground, Mr. Dey submits that the incident for which the proceeding was initiated took place on 25th February, 1988 and the charge-sheet was issued on 2nd March, 1988.
As he was due to retire on 30th April, 1988, the entire proceedings were conducted by the Authority in a hasty manner only to victimise the writ petitioner.
3.
Mr. Manas Kundu, learned Advocate appearing for the-Respondent-authority, submits that the writ petition itself is not maintainable in view of the fact that there has been alternative remedy available to the writ petitioner under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In support of his contention, Mr. Kundu has cited the decisions reported in AIR 1964 SC 1260 and (2000) 2 Cal LJ 283.
4.
In the Supreme Court case, particularly, in paragraph 7, the Apex Court after recording the contention of the employer was pleased to observe to the following effect :  "It is true that the powers conferred on the High Courts under Article 226 are very wide, but it is not suggested by Mr. Chatterjee that even these powers can take in within their sweep industrial disputes of the kind which this contention seeks to raise.
Therefore, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the contention, we would confirm the finding of the High Court that the proper remedy which is available to the appellants to ventilate their grievances in respect of the said notices and circulars is to take recourse to Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, or seek relief, if possible, under Sections 74 and 75 of the Act."
It would appear from the aforesaid passage that the Apex Court did not go into that question and ultimately, however, the Apex Court upheld order of the High Court.
In the Division Bench judgment of this Court cited by Mr. Kundu reported in (2000)2 Cal LJ 283 (supra), it was held that where the petitioner is a workman within the meaning of Industrial Disputes Act and the order impugned is one relating to dismissal or discharge the-appropriate Authority is not by invoking the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India but under Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Division Bench, however, in the said case was also pleased to observe to the extent that they are not inclined to relegate the petitioner to avail the remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and remitted the said matter back to the Disciplinary Authority for reasons.
5.
With due respect to the Apex Court judgment I feel that the Apex Court did not lay down the law in the said judgment that per-se the workman is debarred from approaching the writ Court irrespective of the facts of any particular case.
The said Apex Court judgment is not a proposition of law that even if it is found by the writ Court that the proceeding is vitiated by the procedural irregularity and/or violation of the principles of natural justice or is, otherwise, ex-facie bad and illegal, the writ Court is powerless to entertain writ petition challenging the said proceeding or order resulted therefrom.
6.
The Division Bench of this Court in the second case ultimately remitted the matter back to the Disciplinary Authority as the order of dismissal was devoid of reasons.
Hence, by implication the Division Bench entertained the said proceedings and gave ultimate relief to the concerned workman.
Hence, it can be clearly inferred that the Division Bench also did not lay down the law that there has been an ouster of jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by any of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In the instant case, I find that the proceeding itself is ex-facie bad and illegal, the reasons for which I will discuss hereinafter.
I hold that the writ petition is maintainable and the workman should not be relegated to suffer a long-standing litigation in the Labour Tribunal when I find that the proceeding is ex-facie bad and illegal.
7.
On merits with regard to the first point raised by Mr. Dey, Mr. Kundu submits that by mistake the name of the official who had issued the charge- sheet figured in the list of witnesses.
In fact, the said official did not participate in the enquiry.
Whether or not the said official had adduced any evidence, in my view, is not a relevant factor for consideration to decide this question.
The charge-sheet itself shows that the person concerned who had issued the charge-sheet had been named as witness.
The element of bias is apparent.
Whether or not the said person would adduce evidence is, therefore, not material.
Hence, I accept the contention of Mr. Dey on the said score.
8.
With regard to the second ground Mr. Kundu submits that the appointing Authority had delegated its power to the person who had issued the order of removal.
In support of his contention, Mr. Kundu has relied on a circular dated 4th August, 1967 wherein it appears that the Director-in-Charge by virtue of the powers delegated to him by the Chairman of Hindustan Steel Limited re-delegated his power to the officers mentioned in the said circular.
It is well-settled principle of law that a delegatee cannot sub-delegate his power.
That would create a disastrous situation.
The said circular dated 4th August, 1967, in my view, is patently illegal, and, since the order of removal has been passed by the Authority exercising the power derived from the said circular dated 4th August, 1967, the same is bad, illegal and liable to be quashed and set aside and I think that Mr. Deys's contention on that score is of substance.
9.
With regard to the third ground, I do not agree with Mr. Dey.
The incident took place on 25th February, 1988.
The charge-sheet was issued immediately thereafter.
It is not in dispute that the writ petitioner was afforded an opportunity to participate in the said proceedings.
At least I do not find any complaint with regard thereto.
Hence, it cannot be said that the proceeding has been conducted in a hasty manner and I reject the contention of Mr. Dey on that score.
10.
Since I have held that the very issuance of charge-sheet as well as the order of removal is bad and illegal, the order of removal dated 26th April, 1988 being Annexure "J" to the writ petition is set aside.
The writ petitioner is, thus, entitled to all retiral benefits available to him and such benefits should be released as early as possible preferably within 6 (six) weeks from the date of communication of this order.
11.
I am told by Kundu that part of his retiral benefits have already been released.
However, the balance sum payable to him must be released in terms of this order, as directed hereinbefore.
12.
Rule nisi issued earlier is accordingly made absolute.
13.
In the facts and circumstances, however, there would be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.