Gorachand De, J - The main question involved in this writ petition is whether a mandate can be issued upon the respondents to accord approval of service of the present petitioner who is in the post of an unapproved assistant teacher in the primary section of a Government aided School serving continuously for few years.
2.
The writ petitioner was appointed as an assistant teacher in the primary section of the Kamala Chatterjee School, Calcutta on the basis of an appointment letter dated 2321988 on purely temporary basis at a consolidated salary of Rs. 175/- per month and she joined the said post on 131988.
The said appointment letter was issued after an interview taken on 2021988 and finding the writ petitioner suitable for the post having obtained requisite qualification of BA along with Senior Teacher's Training and holding Registration Card of Employment Exchange.
3.
The writ petitioner worked as an unapproved assistant teacher since the date of her joining, and whenever the post of an approved teacher fell vacant in the said School, the petitioner prayed for her appointment in the said vacant post and each time, the petitioner was given a consolation that her case would be favourably considered whenever a next vacancy of an approved teacher occurred in the said School.
In this way the case of the petitioner is deliberately ignored and she was denied an opportunity to be heard and also the pay scale of the approved teacher.
4.
Subsequently, it was ascertained that the School authority duly sent the names of three unapproved teacher in the said School including the writ petitioner to the District Inspector of Schools for grant of permanent post to them by way of approval to their temporary post.
On being advised the writ petitioner also made a written representation to the District Inspector of Schools, Primary Circle on 10121993 setting out her case in details with a prayer for approval of her appointment as an assistant teacher in the said School.
But as no heed was paid to the said representation the present writ petition was filed praying for the following reliefs :-  (a) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to take necessary steps to accord approval of service of the writ petitioner who is in the post of an unapproved Assistant Teacher in the School serving continuously for about 6 years; (b) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to pay to the petitioner her regular salary in the pay scales at the rate available to as Assistant Teacher with BA and Senior Teachers Training qualification and further to command the respondents to afford to the petitioner the revised scales of pay with effect from the 1st March, 1988 as recommended by the Pay Commission; (c) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents 1 to 5 to direct the Secretary and the Head Teacher of the School to recognise the petitioner as an approved Assistant Teacher of the School eligible to the pay scales of an approved Assistant Teacher with BA and Senior Teachers Training qualification; (d) A writ of or in the nature of Certiorari directing the respondents 1 to 5 to quash, annal and/or set aside all orders which are now standing in the way of the petitioner's claim to an approved Assistant Teacher in the School; (e) Order calling for the records of the case from the respondents; (f) Rule Nisi in terms of prayer (a) to (c) above; (g) An interim Order restraining the respondents from giving appointment to any approved Assistant Teacher other than your petitioner in the said School; (h) Any other Writ or Order or Direction as your Lordships may seem (deem ?)
fit and proper.
5.
The respondent No. 4-the Chairman, District Primary School Council opposed the application after using an Affidavt-in-Opposition alleging that the post in which the writ petitioner was appointed was not a sanctioned post, that the Managing Committee had no authority to appoint a teacher in the school and that the writ petitioner was also not empanelled to be appointed as a Primary Teacher.
Hence it was alleged that there is no scope for regularisation of the appointment of the writ petitioner in violation of the statutory provision.
6.
The respondents No. 6 and 7 entered appearance and supported the case of the writ petitioner without filing any affidavit.
However the writ petitioner also filed an affidavit-in-reply.
7.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner tried to argue that the writ petitioner having all requisite qualifications of a Primary Teacher applied to the School for the post in response to the Circular issued by the School Authority and hung up in the notice board of School.
She was called in an interview by the School Selection Committee on 2021988 and thereafter the appointment Letter was issued in her favour finding her suitable for the post.
The writ petitioner was joined as an Assistant Teacher on and from 131988 and since, then, she has been working as the full-time Assistant Teacher of the School within the knowledge of all the respondents.
It was further urged that though approved posts in the School fell vacant, the writ petitioner was not absorbed in those post and in this way, the legitimate claim of the writ petitioner was ignored by the authority concerned for years together and the writ petitioner was forced to work at a paultry monthly salary of Rs. 175/-, that was raised to Rs. 200/- per month subsequently.
It is further argued that though the approved teachers of the School were getting salary at a much higher scale, the writ petitioner was never considered for that scale.
It is also argued that on the basis of the ratio of one teacher for every forty students, there is requirement of about twelve teachers calculated on the basis of the present strength of students in the said School, but there are only nine approved teachers.
Accordingly, the necessity of deploying three unapproved teachers was there.
It was argued that for rendering a service of such a long period, the case of the present writ petitioner should not be ignored and it is necessary to regularise the service of the writ petitioner by issuing a mandate upon the respondents for taking necessary steps as regards approval of her service as an approved teacher.
8.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents No. 6 and 7, while supporting the case of the writ petitioner made a forceful argument that there is necessity of trained teachers for running the School and as the strength of approved trained teachers falls short of required strength, necessity was felt for appointment of teachers in anticipation of getting approval from the authority.
In fact, keeping in view the students strength in the primary section, there was necessity to engage the present writ petitioner as an Assistant Teacher on the basis of an open advertisement.
It is further argued that the name of the present petitioner along with other unapproved teachers were sent to the appropriate authority for approval.
Hence, the learned Counsel concluded that there is necessity to regularise the long service of the present writ petitioner specially when she was been rendering capable service since 131988.
9.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4 pointed out that the Managing Committee of a Primary Teacher had no authority to create any post nor it had any authority to appoint any teacher in urban area violating the normal procedure for appointment of teachers in recognised primary school as laid down in Government Order No. 1614/EDN-(P) dated 8th November, 1974.
It is also argued that Rule and Order for preparation of panel under Rural (Bengal) Primary Education Act, 1930 is to be applied in such cases, and the cases of untrained teachers appointed prior to 1st April, 1974 were considered at the time of preparation of panel.
It is further argued that the Managing Committee of the recognised Primary or Junior Basis school was authorised to give appointment to the teachers only from the approved panel after the names of candidates are formerly communicated by the District Inspector of Schools (Primary Education).
The Government Order was in force from 1st April, 1975.
Since the said provision is a mandatory provision the writ petitioner could not be appointed by the Managing Committee of the School in any normal vacancy or in any additional post in the School without taking permission from the Director of School Education (Primary Education), West Bengal.
Hence the learned Counsel concluded that the Managing Committee having not been vested with any independent power of appointment of any primary teacher, no right accrued in favour of the writ petitioner on the basis of the letter of appointment issued in her favour.
Finally, the learned Counsel for the respondent No. 4 placing reliance on several decisions of the Apex Court and also of this Court, submitted that the entry of the writ petitioner in the service being opposed to and in total disregard of Recruitment Rules, she has no case for regularisation.
10.
Admittedly, the School is situated in an urban area and the writ petitioner is appointed in an unapproved post as Assistant Teacher with effect from 131988 without obtaining any permission from the authority.
The name of the writ petitioner was also to empanelled in terms of Rule and order framed under Rural (Bengal) Education Act, 1930.
Of course, after the codification of West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973, the entire recruitment procedure is vested in the respondent No. 4 Council.
The rules under the Act have been framed in the year 1991.
Rules 8 and 9 of the said Rules, framed by the State of West Bengal in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 105 of the Act clearly lay down the procedure of recruitment of Teacher.
So on the basis of the previous Orders or Circulars, the writ petitioner cannot be asked to be regularised by the respondent No. 4 Council.
Such a situation fell for consideration before a Division Bench presided over by Mr. Satyabrata Sinha, J (as His Lordship then was) of this Court in an unreported decision dated 3131998 being FMA No. 434 of 1997, Administrator, Baidyapara Girls' High School v. Smt. Rina Chatterjee (Nee Mukherjee) and others and also another unreported decision of the said Bench of the same date in MAT No. 167 of 1998, The Chairman, Ad hoc Committee, Howrah District School Council v. Bina Mahesh and others when a decision was taken placing reliance on several judgments of the Apex Court and of this Court that after coming into force of the Statutory Rules, there was no way in which the court could issue any direction in violation or in deviation of the mandatory provisions thereof.
Their Lordships further took the view that sympathy by itself cannot be a ground to grant relief when a person is not otherwise entitled thereto.
11.
In Biman Ch.
Karmakar and others v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1998(1) CLJ 374, the above mentioned Division Bench of this Court further observed that when valid Statutory Rules are in operation, recruitment of Primary Teachers must be made by the respective District Primary School Councils who are the creature of the Statute, in terms of the said Rules.
In West Bengal of Board of Secondary Education v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1997(1) CLJ 165, another Division Bench of this Court viewed that teachers appointed without conforming statutory provision cannot claim any legal right to be absorbed.
Similar view was also expressed in Calcutta District Primary School Council and another v. Smt. Anuva Roy, 1996 Lab.IC 1990.
12.
The Apex Court also in 1997(1) SCT 573 (SC) : AIR 1997 Supreme Court 1628, Ashwani Kumar and others v. State of Bihar and others, took the view that procedure laid down by the Government for recruitment is to be followed even if the appointment is not to the State Services.
In that context, it was also viewed that the employee whose entry in service is illegal being in total disregard of Recruitment Rules or being not on existing vacancy cannot claim for regularisation.
A similar view was also taken in an earlier decision of the Supreme Court in 1994(4) SCT 398 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 962, Dr. Arundhuti Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra.
13.
From the materials on record it appears that the appointment of the writ petitioner was not in accordance with the Recruitment Rules and hence, her service cannot be regularised.
Moreover, the respondent No. 4 Council has also no statutory authority to regularise the service of the present petitioner.
Keeping in view the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Director of Public Instructions of West Bengal and others v. Ashis Pal and others, 1998(II) CHN 241, it is to be concluded that so long there is a mode of recruitment, the High Court has no jurisdiction to issue an Order directing regularisation of service contrary to mandatory provisions of relevant statute and that an appointment made in violation of Recruitment Rules is illegal and is violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
14.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition is dismissed and the interim order is vacated.
There will be no order as to costs.
15.
However, keeping in view the long and continuous service rendered by the writ petitioner in the School during which she has crossed the upper age-limit indicated in Rule 6(a)(II) of Notification No. 768-EDN(P) dated 22nd November, 1991 issued by the Primary Branch of the Education Department of the Government of West Bengal, and at present is incapable of getting any other service, the respondent No. 5, namely the State of West Bengal represented by the Secretary, Education Department (Primary Section), shall be at liberty to issue necessary notification for relaxation of the upper age-limit of such cases so that the Staff Selection Committee, as provided under Section 67 of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 read with Rule 7 indicated hereinabove, can consider the case of such teachers like the writ petitioner for the purpose of selection of eligible candidates and for preparation of panel of such candidates for appointment to the post of teachers in Primary Schools on priority basis under the jurisdiction of the Council.
Liberty is also given to the writ petition to make such a representation before the respondent No. 5 within one month from this date.
16.
Xerox certified copies, if applied for, be supplied promptly to the parties on observance of usual terms and conditions.
Petition dismissed.