M.S.A.
Siddiqui, J - By this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioner seeks quashing of the appointment of respondents 2 and 3 to the post of Under Secretary and for a direction to respondent No. 1 to consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Under Secretary.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant in the Rajya Sabha Secretariat (for short `the Secretariat') on 30th March, 1973 and was confirmed on the said post w.e.f.
13th December, 1976.
He was placed below Mr. Tapan Das Gupta and Mr. Hukum Singh, who were at serial Nos. 1 and 2 respectively in the Gradation list of the Secretariat notified on 1st February, 1972.
Mr. Hukum Singh retied from service in July, 1974.
Resultantly, the petitioner was placed below Mr. Tapan Das Gupta.
Pursuant to the recommendations of the first Parliamentary Pay Committee, the Secretariat was re-orgnised on functional basis w.e.f.
1st December, 1974 and there services, namely (i) Legislative service, (ii) Executive and Administrative Service, and (iii) Printing, Publication and Distribution service were created.
These services were treated as separate entities for the purpose of promotion, recruitment and seniority.
All the personnel borne on the strength of the Secretariat, as on 1st December, 1974 were allocated to different services according to the nature of work handled by them.
Upon re-organisation of the Secretariat, the petitioner was placed in the Executive and Administrative Wing.
Out of 60 posts of Assistants, 41 postS including five Committee Assistants were upgraded as Legislative Committee Assistants/Executive Assistants.
On 17th April, 1978, the petitioner was promoted to the grade of Senior Assistant on completion of five years of service as Assistant.
In 1976, a competitive examination limited to the staff to the Secretariat, was held to fill up posts of Senior Assistants in the legislative wing.
Respondents 2 to 6, who were declared successful in the said examination, were appointed as Senior Assistants w.e.f.
March 1977.
The aforesaid re-organisatiton of the Secretariat did not last long and by the order dated 13th June, 1980 of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, the three services created earlier were merged into a single united service to be known as the Legislative, Executive and Administrative Service.
On 13th April, 1984 the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha issued a circular directing that in future confirmations and promotions in the said service will be made on the basis of seniority of officers as it obtained before the division of the Secretariat on 1st December, 1974, subject to such necessary changes due to service-wise confirmations, which shall be taken into account irrespective of any promotions made in the three distinctive services between 1st December, 1974 and the actual date of merger, i.e., 10th June, 1980.
3.
The petitioner's main grievance is that his seniority had not been fixed in accordance with the aforesaid circular dated 13th April, 1984 and respondents 2 to 6, who were junior to him, had been placed above him in the seniority list.
Being aggrieved by the wrong fixation of his seniority, the petitioner submitted a representation to the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha, which was rejected vide orders dated 30th November, 1992.
According to the petitioner, the respondent No. 1 had unjustifiably superseded him and promoted the respondents 2 and 3 to the posts of Under Secretary and thus their promotions are liable to be quashed.
4.
In reply to the writ petition, a counter-affidavit has been filed by Shri Vanaja N Sarna, Director (Administration) of the Secretariat on behalf of respondent No. 1.
The case of the respondent No. 1, as disclosed in that affidavit, is that after re-organisation of the Secretariat, a new cadre of Senior Assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 550-900 in between the grades of Assistants (Rs. 425-800) and Section Officer (Rs. 650-1200) was created in pursuance of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Pay Committee.
The new recruitment rules, framed on the basis of the said committee's recommendations, provided for (i) 100% direct recruitment for the post of Senior Assistants (Rs. 550-900) in the legislative wing of the service and 100% promotion as the mode of recruitment in the grade of Senior Assistants in the executive and administrative wings of the service.
Upon re-organisation of the Section w.e.f.
1st December, 1974, the petitioner opted for being posted as an Assistant in the Executive and Administrative Wing of the Secretariat and on 17th April, 1978, he was promoted to the post of Senior Assistant (Rs. 550-900).
In 1976, a competitive examination, limited to the staff of Secretariat, was held to fill up the posts of Senior Assistants (Rs. 550-900) in the Legislative Wing of the Secretariat.
Respondents No. 2 to 6, who fulfilled the eligibility criteria prescribed under the Recruitment Rules, qualified in the said departmental examination and were appointed to the post of Senior Assistants in March, 1977.
The petitioner did not appear in the departmental examination.
Thus, the respondents 2 to 6 were duly appointed to the post of Senior Assistants in March, 1977 whereas the petitioner was promoted to the post of Senior Assistant on 17th April, 1978.
Consequently, the petitioner became junior to the respondents No. 2 to 6, who were appointed to the post of Senior Assistants by direct recruitment and so the petitioner's claim of seniority over the respondents 2 to 6 is not sustainable.
According to the respondent No. 1, the petitioner's seniority, as shown in the seniority list dated 1st April, 1985, is based upon the date of his promotion in the grade of Senior Assistant, and he, therefore, cannot be permitted to unsettle the settled position at this distance of time.
5.
Learned Counsel for the respondent No. 1 has raised a preliminary objection regarding maintainability of the petition on the ground of laches and delay.
We may point out here that there is no period of limitation prescribed by any law for filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It is in fact doubtful whether any such period of limitation can be prescribed by any law.
In every case, it would have to be decided on the facts and circumstances, whether the petitioner is guilty of laches and delay.
However, it is well settled that this Court in the exercise of its extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution does not ordinarily assist the tardy, acquiescent or lethargic petitioner.
The evolution of this rule of delay and laches is premised upon a number of factors.
In service matters, the High Court does not permit a belated resort to the extra-ordinary remedy under the writ jurisdiction because it is likely to unsettle the settled matters and bring in its train new injustices.
We do not think it necessary to burden this judgment with reference to various decisions of the Apex Court where it has been emphasised time and again that where there is inordinate and unexplained delay and third party rights are created in the intervening period, the High Court would decline to interfere, even if the State action complained of is illegal.
We may only mention in the passing the decision of the Apex Court in PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 2271, where it was held that it would be a sound and wise exercise of discretion for the High Court to refuse to exercise its extra- ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief and who stand by and allow things to happen and then approach the Court to put forward stale claim and try to unsettle settled matters.
6.
It is beyond the pale of controversy that the petitioner and the respondents No. 2, 3, 4 and 6 were appointed as Assistants in the Secretariat on the dates mentioned below :-  "Names Dates from which appointed Sh. SC Agarwal 3031973 Sh. Shamsher Singh (R-4) 28.9.1974 Sh. Tapan Chatterjee (R-3) 5.10.1974 Sh. GC Miglani (R-6) 21.10.1974 Smt. Vandana Garg (R-2) 1.9.1975" 7.
On 1st September, 1975, the respondent No. 2 was appointed in the Secretariat as lower division clerk.
It is also undisputed that on 1st December, 1974, the Secretariat was re-organised on functional basis and the following three services were created in pursuance of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Pay Committee :-  (i) Legislative Service; (ii) Executive and Administrative Service; (iii) Printing, Publication and Distribution Service.
8.
It is also undisputed that the petitioner opted for Executive and Administrative Wing of the Secretariat.
In 1977, five vacancies arose for the posts of Senior Assistants in the legislative wing of the Secretariat and it was decided to fill up the said vacancies by holding departmental examination.
The petitioner did not appear in the said department examination but the respondents 2 to 6, who cleared the departmental test, were appointed as Senior Assistants in the Legislative Wing on the dates mentioned below :-  "Name Date from which appointed Ms. Vandana Gupta 1.3.1977 Sh. Tapan Chatterjee 2.3.1977 Sh. Shamsher Singh 4.3.1977 Sh. Syed Ausaf Hussain 531977 Smt. GC Miglani 731977" 9.
The petitioner was promoted as Senior Assistant on 17th April, 1978.
Thus, respondents 2 to 6 became senior to the petitioner because they were appointed as Senior Assistants much before the promotion of the petitioner as Senior Assistant.
The petitioner did not come to the Court questioning the appointment of respondents 2 to 6 as Senior Assistants.
Therafter, on 13th June, 1980, the Secretariat was once again reorganised by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha to correct the promotional imbalances and the three wings of the services were merged into a single unified service.
After reunification of the service, the combined seniority list was notified on 1st April, 1985 wherein the petitioner's name appeared below respondents 2 to 6.
If the petitioner was aggrieved by the said seniority list, he should have approached the Court in the year 1985.
But the petitioner did not come to the Court questioning the said seniority list.
There was a third opportunity for him to have come to the Court when respondents 2 to 6 were confirmed over the head of the petitioner vide notification dated 8th November, 1989.
There was a fourth opportunity for him to come to the Court when respondents 2 to 6 were placed in the seniority list notified in 1991 over the head of the petitioner.
One cannot sleep over the matter and come to the court questioning the seniority of the respondents 2 to 6 after a lapse of sixteen long years.
The petitioner has since been superannuated and the respondents 2 to 6 have been promoted and they have been working on the promoted posts for nearly seven years by then and have also acquired right to seniority on the basis of such promotion and they cannot be deprived of the said right at this distance of time.
By the present petition, the petitioner wants to unscramble a scrambled egg.
The aforesaid long delay is sufficient evidence of laches on the part of the petitioner.
Consequently, the present petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
10.
Even on merit, the petitioner's claim of seniority is not sustainable.
Clause 3 of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat (Methods of Recruitment and Qualifications for Appointment) Order, 1974 (for short `the Order') provides that the recruitment to a post or class of posts mentioned in column 1 of the Schedule shall be made by the method or methods and in the manner specified in the corresponding entry in column 3 of the Schedule, and where more than one such method has been so specified, the proportion of vacancies to be filled by each method shall be such as is specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the Schedule.
The entry relevant in the Schedule for purposes of disposal of the present petition is as under :-  "The Schedule The Legislative, Executive and Administrative Service :- Post Proportion of vacancies to be filled by + + Method of recruitment and qualifications for appointment Remarks Promotion Deputation or transfer Direct recruitment  5.
Senior Assistant 50% .... 50% For promotion  By selection from the grade of Assistant with a minimum of five years' service in the grade(s)."
+ For direct recruitment - + Through open competition from amongst candidates possessing Master's Degree or Bachelor's Degree in Law : + Provided that if a person has been in service in the Secretariat or in the Pay and Accounts Officer on the 1st December 1974 and possesses qualifications prescribed above, he emay be permitted to appear in the competitive test held for the purpose."
+ 11.
The aforesaid entry in the said Schedule makes it clear that 50% of the vacancies in the grade of Senior Assistants are to be filled by Promotion and 50% by direct recruitment.
In this connect, a reference to clause 7 of the order has become indispensable, which is as under :-  "7.
Direct recruitment.
- Where the method of direct recruitment has been prescribed in the Schedule in the case of a post or class of posts - (a) the selection shall be made by a test from among persons who possess the qualifications and satisfy the conditions prescribed by or under this Order for appointment thereto; (b) the Secretary-General shall determine whether the test to be held under clause (a) of this paragraph shall be written, oral or both; (c) the standard of the written test to be held under this paragraph shall be such as the Secretary-General may, from time to time, by order, prescribe; (d) the Secretary-General may, if he so considers necessary, prescribe by order any condition regarding experience, age or physical standard to be fulfilled by the candidates or any class of candidates, for eligibility for direct recruitment to such post or class of posts in addition to the requirements as to the qualifications for appointment prescribed by or under this Order; and  (e) subject to availability of suitable candidates belonging to the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribes possessing the qualifications prescribed for appointment thereto, due regard shall be paid to be the rules relating to reservation of posts for members of such Castes or Tribes in the Central Secretariat."
12.
In the instant case, it is an admitted position that in 1977, five vacancies arose for the post of Senior Assistants and the Secretary-General of the Secretariat decided to fill up the said vacancies by direct recruitment.
The petitioner could have appeared in the departmental examination for being appointed to the post of Senior Assistant but he did not appear in the said examination.
The respondents 2 to 6, who cleared the said departmental examination, were appointed as Senior Assistants in accordance with clause 7 of the Order.
On the contrary, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Senior Assistant on 17th April, 1978 in accordance with Clause 6 of the order.
Clause 6 of the order is as under :-  "6.
Promotion.
- (1) Where the method of recruitment by promotion has been prescribed in the Schedule - (a) it shall be made by selection on merit, irrespective of seniority in service; (b) for purposes of selection under clause (a) of this sub- paragraph, merit in relation to an officer, shall include - (i) his performance at a test, whether oral or written or both, if such a test is ordered by the appointing authority to be held for the purpose of such selection; (ii) the reports on his work and conduct by his superior officers; (iii) the enthusiasm shown by him in the various activities of the Secretariat; (iv) his academic qualifications; (v) his previous experience of the particular type of work which he will be required to perform, if selected; and (vi) any other requirement which the appointing authority may lay down for eligibility for such promotion; and  (c) all officers eligible for promotion to a particular grade shall be considered together and not in the order in which they are shown in the schedule : Provided that where the number of officers eligible for consideration is large, the appointing authority may lay down further criteria, e.g. length of service, academics qualifications etc. in order to reduce the number of officers to be considered to a reasonable figure vis-a- vis the number of vacancies to be filled as a result of such consideration : Provided further that subject to availability of suitable candidates belonging to the Schedule Castes or Schedule Tribes possessing the qualifications prescribed for appointment, due regard shall be paid to the orders issued by the Central Government from time to time relating to promotion of such candidates by `selection'.
(2) For the purpose of calculating the length of service put in by an officer in a grade(s), in cases where a minimum period of service has been prescribed for promotion to the next higher grade(s), the service rendered by the officer concerned before the re-organisation of the Secretariat on the 1st day of December, 1974, in the corresponding post(s)/grade(s) in the Secretariat, may also be taken into account.
Explanation I - For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that for the purposes of this sub-paragraph for promotion to the post/grade of Legislative Officer, Protocol Officer, Executive Officer and Committee Officer, the service rendered by an officer in the post/grade of Senior Assistant and Assistant before the re-organisation of the Secretariat on the 1st day of December, 1974, may be taken into account and in making such promotion the seniority of the officer in the grade of Assistant before such re-organisation shall be taken into consideration in accordance with the relevant order in force before such re- organisation and in conformity with the practice followed in the Secretariat before such re- organisation.
Explanation II.
- Where for promotion to a post, a minimum service in a particular grade or grades from which promotion is to be made, has been prescribed, the service rendered by an officer in the corresponding grade or grades in the Pay and Accounts Office, Rajya Sabha, immediately prior to its merger with the Secretariat with effect from 1st March, 1984, shall also be taken into account in computing the requisite service.
(43) The Secretary-General may, in exceptional cases, relax the period of service prescribed for promotion to a higher grade."
13.
In this context, reference may also be made to the order dated 15th January, 1958 made by the Chairman Rajya Sabha for regulation of seniority of the officers of the Secretariat, which is as under :-  "Rajya Sabha Secretariat O R D E R Subject :- Regulation of seniority of officers of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
In exercise of the powers conferred by rule 9 of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1957, the Chairman hereby directs that the seniority of officers in the Secretariat shall be determined in accordance with the following provisions, namely :- Seniority of officers 1.
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraphs (2) and (3), the seniority of an officer in a particular grade in the Secretariat shall, unless the Chairman on good and reasonable grounds otherwise directs, be determined on the basis of the length of his continuous service in the grade from the date of his joining a post in that grade in the Secretariat, whether his appointment to that grade is by direct recruitment or by promotion or by transfer or deputation from a post or service in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
(2) The services rendered by an officer in a post in a particular grade in the Secretariat shall, unless the Chairman otherwise directs, count for seniority in a post in an equivalent grade in the Secretariat.
(3) In the case of officers appointed to posts in a grade on the results of a competitive examination conducted by the Secretariat, their seniority inter se shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-paragraphs, be determined in the order of their position in the examination if they join their duties within one month from the date of the offer of appointment, and the seniority of such officers who join their duties after the expiry of the said period of one month shall, unless the Secretary on good and reasonable grounds otherwise directs, be determined from the date of the respective dates of so joining, irrespective of their position in the examination or their previous service, if any, in a post in an equivalent grade in the Secretariat.
Explanation - The question as to which of the posts are for the purposes of this paragraph to be treated as posts in an equivalent grade shall be determined by the Secretary, by order, from time to time.
Seniority of permanent officers 2(1) Permanent officers in a grade in the Secretariat shall rank higher than the temporary or officiating officers in that grade.
(2) If the length of service of two or more officers for the purpose of determination of their seniority in a grade be the same, their seniority inter se shall be fixed on the basis of the total length of their service in this Secretariat, but where their total length of such service is also the same, the orders of the Secretary shall be obtained for determining their seniority.
Gradation List 3.
(1) A gradation list consisting of officers borne on each grade and arranged in the order of seniority in accordance with the provisions of this order shall be prepared.
(2) Such list shall be prepared in such form and at such intervals as the Secretary may from time to time by order prescribe.
Sd/- New Delhi the 15th SN Mukherjee January, 1958,  Secretary."
14.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner joined the Secretariat on 30th March, 1974 as an Assistant and the respondents 2, 4, 5 and 6 were appointed later in the same grade, and so the petitioner, on the basis of total length of service, is entitled to claim seniority over the said respondents in accordance with Clause 2(2) of the afore-quoted order.
He further contended that since the respondents 2 to 6 were promoted to the post of Senior Assistants, the petitioner's seniority over the respondents 2 to 6 remains intact by virtue of the explanation I of Clause 6 of the order.
In our opinion, this argument suffers from two fallacies.
In the first place, there is a confusion underlying this argument between promotion and direct recruitment.
The second fallacy underlying the learned Counsel's argument is that he fails to take into account the basic distinction between a permanent and temporary employee.
As mentioned earlier, in the month of March, 1977 the respondents 2 to 6 were appointed to the posts of Senior Assistant by direct recruitment in accordance with Clause 7 of the order, whereas the petitioner was promoted to the post of Senior Assistant on 17th April, 1978 in accordance with clause 6 of the order.
Explanation 1 to Clause 6 provides that for promotion to the post/grade of Legislative Officer Protocol Officer, Executive Officer and Committee Officer, the service rendered by an officer in the post/grade of Senior Assistant and Assistant before the re-organisation of the Secretariat on 1st December, 1974 may be taken into account and in making such promotion the seniority of the officer in the grade of Assistant before such re-organisation shall be taken into consideration in accordance with the relevant order in force before such re-organisation.
This explanation does not regulate the inter se seniority between a promotee and a direct recruit.
It has to be borne in mind that the petitioner and respondents 2 to 6 were appointed to the post of Senior Assistants by two different modes prescribed by Clauses 6 and 7 of the Order.
Consequently, the explanation 1 to Clause 6 of the order does not help the petitioner to claim seniority over the respondents 2 to 6, who were appointed by direct recruitment.
15.
Similarly, Clause 2(2) of the order dated 15th January, 1958 also does not help the petitioner to claim seniority over respondents 2 to 6.
Clause 2 of the said order deals with the seniority of permanent officers of the Secretariat.
Sub-Clause (2) of the said clause provides that if the length of service of two or more officers for the purpose of determination of their seniority in a grade be the same, their seniority inter se shall be fixed on the basis of the total length of their service in the Secretariat.
As demonstrated earlier, the respondents 2 to 6 were directly recruited for the post of Senior Assistants in the month of March, 1977 and the petitioner was promoted to the said post on 17th April, 1978.
That being so, the length of service of the respondents 2 to 6 and the petitioner in the grade of Senior Assistant was not the same.
Consequently, the petitioner cannot claim seniority over the respondents 2 to 6.
16.
For the reasons, the petition must fail and is dismissed but keeping in view the entire circumstances, we direct the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.