VS Aggarwal, J - By this common judgment Civil Writ Petition Nos 14584, 15181, 15360 and 16620 of 1999 can conveniently be disposed of together.
It is not disputed that question in controversy is identical and, therefore, keeping in view that fact, for purposes of convenience the facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 14584 of 1999, Puneet Chopra and other v. Central Board of Secondary Education and another.
2.
Prayer has been made seeking quashing of paragraph 2 of the instructions of Central Board of Secondary Education (respondent No. 1) by which the petitioners had been denied continuation of studies in 10+1 class in the school for having failed to qualify in the first chance of compartment in class 10th held in August, 1999 being illegal, unlawful, arbitrary and discriminatory.
It has been further prayed that the said instructions are in violation of natural justice and the respondent-school should be directed to permit the petitioners to continue their studies and appear in 10+1 examination.
3.
The facts alleged are that the petitioners had appeared in All India Secondary School Examination Class 10 as a regular student.
Petitioners Puneet Chopra and Vikrant Kashyap were placed under compartment in Mathematics while Ankur Arora was placed under compartment in Social Studies.
Under the Examination Bye-Law No. 42 a candidate placed in compartment may appear in the compartmental examination to be held in July/August and he could avail a second chance in March/April next year.
The petitioners had sought admission in the school where they were studying.
The appeared in the first supplementary examination held in July/August 1999 but could not qualify.
They intend to take the second chance to clear the compartment examination to be held in March/April, 2000.
Respondent No. 1 had issued a letter to all the Heads of the Departments whereby it had disallowed continuation of studies by the petitioners in Class 11 and directed parents to withdraw their wards.
It was pointed that those students who failed in first supplementary examination, their admission can be cancelled.
4.
The grievance of the petitioners is that there is no such provision in the Examination Bye-Laws of respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 1 has issued Examination Bye-Laws of Central Board of Secondary Education.
They were made effective from 3111995 in accordance with law.
They have not been amended or changed so far.
In addition to that it has been asserted that petitioners had not made any representation when they took admissions in Class 11.
Thus, no fault can be found with them.
They are continuing their studies regularly and should not be debarred.
5.
In the written statement filed, respondent No. 1 had contested the petitions.
It was pointed that petitioners were in compartment category in one subject in class 10 examination.
They could not clear the compartment examination in the first supplementary chance.
As per Examination Bye-Law No. 42 which was amended in 1998, the petitioners were not entitled to admission in class 11 in any affiliated school of the Board.
The amended rules were circulated to all the affiliated schools.
The petitioners had not passed Class 10 examination and consequently the contention raised has been that petitioners could not continue their studies in class 11.
It has further been alleged that date of passing of examination is taken as the date and the year in which the candidate passes the examination including the compartmental examination.
Since the petitioners had not passed class 10 examination, they cannot take examination of class 11.
6.
Before appreciating the question in controversy, it would be appropriate to refer to the relevant Rules.
Bye-Law No. 42(vi) of Examination Bye-Laws has been amended in 1998.
Presently, it reads :-  "Rules 42(vi).
A candidate who is placed in Compartment and fails to pass the Secondary School Examination (Class X) at the first compartmental examination held in July/August of that year shall not NOT be admitted to class XI."
The instructions have also been issued in this regard which have been challenged and the same reads :-  "It is also brought to the notice of the Head of the Institution that those candidates who appear for the Secondary School Examination and are placed in compartment and in case such students fail to qualify the examination at the 1st Chance Compartment Examination they are not eligible to continue provisionally in Class XI.
If such students have been granted provisional admission to Class XI, the admission may be cancelled forthwith as they cannot appear simultaneously for Class XI as well as 2nd Chance Comptt.
examination in next year."
Admission to Class 11 is open to only those students who have passed Class 10 examination.
Rule 7.4 is relevant and unfolds itself in the following words :-  "7.4 Admission to Class XI in a school be open only to such a student who has passed -  (a) Secondary School Examination (Class X Examination) conducted by this Board; or (b) an equivalent examination conducted by any recognised Board of Secondary Education/Indian University and recognised by this Board as equivalent to its secondary examination."
Rule 42 has laid the definition of `Pass' and clarifies that a candidate would be declared passed if he/she has passed the compartment examination in which he/she has failed.
It reads :-  "42.
Compartment Examination Secondary/Senior School Certificate Examination.
(i) A candidate placed in compartment may reappear at the Compartmental Examination to be conducted in July/August and may avail himself/herself of the second chance in March/April next year.
The candidate will be declared "passed" provided he/she qualifies the Compartmental subject in which he/she had failed.
(ii) A candidate who does not appear or fails at one or both the chances of compartment shall be treated to have failed in the examination and shall be required to reappear in all the subjects including practical examination at the subsequent Annual Examination of the Board as per Syllabi and Courses laid down for the examination concerned in order to pass the examination.
(iii) Syllabi and Courses for the March Examination will be the same as applicable to the candidates of full subjects appeared at the examination.
(iv) A candidates placed in compartment shall be allowed to appear only in one subject at the Second Chance Compartmental Examination to be held in March/April next year.
(v) For subjects involving practical work, in case the candidate has passed in practical at the main examination he/she shall appear only in theory part and previous practical marks will be carried forward and account for.
In case a candidate has failed in practical he/she shall have to appear in theory and practical both irrespective of the fact that he/she has already cleared the theory examination."
Bare reading of the above said provision clearly shows that at the time when the petitioner took admission in Class 11, as per relevant rules they must pass the compartmental examination to be held in July/August, 1999.
The rule continues.
They would only be taken to have passed Class 10 examination when they passed all the subjects stated above.
This is in accordance with the fact that before they can taken Class 12 examination, there should be a gap of two years in passing Class 10 examination.
A person only passes 10th class examination, when he clears all the subjects.
It is, therefore, rightly thought that only one chance should be given to pass the examination in the month of July/August, 1999.
Admittedly, the petitioners failed to pass their examination in the first attempt.
They still remained compartmental candidates.
Thus, they cannot make any grievance in this regard.
7.
On behalf of the petitioner it was submitted that these rules will not apply to the petitioners because at that time they were studying in Class 10.
The said argument is fallacious.
The amendment was effected in the year 1998.
It would apply to all the candidates who passed Class 10.
The petitioners only took the examination in Class 10 in March/April, 1999.
The rules were already enforced.
It would, therefore, apply with all its vigour to the petitioners.
8.
The attention of the Court has been drawn to certain writ petitions that have been filed in this Court.
But it becomes unnecessary to ponder with those cases because they pertain to the period before the rules were amended.
This Court in the present bunch of writ petitions is only concerned with the amended rules.
Consequently, even this plea must fail.
9.
Confronted with that position it had been pointed that since petitioners have almost studied for one year in Class 11, their academic session should not be disturbed.
In this regard the plea is totally devoid of any merit.
The reason being that if a person does not have a right, then misplaced compassion will not meet the ends of justice.
It would only be defeated.
The Supreme Court in the case of Guru Nanak Dev University v. Parminder Kr.
Bansal, AIR 1993 SC 2412, in this regard held :-  "From the series of orders that keep coming before us in academic matters, we find that loose, ill-conceived sympathy masquerades as interlocutory justice exposing judicial discretion to the criticism of degenerating into private benevolence.
This is subversive of academic discipline, or whatever is left of it, leading to serious impasse into academic life.
Admission cannot be ordered without regard to the eligibility of the candidates.
Decisions on matters relevant to be taken into account at the interlocutory stage cannot be deferred or decided later when serious complications might ensue from the interim order itself.
In the present case the High Court was apparently moved by sympathy for the candidates than by an accurate assessment of even the prima facie legal position.
Such orders cannot be allowed to stand.
The Courts should not embarrass academic authorities by itself taking over their functions."
Same was the view expressed subsequently in the case of Central Board of Secondary Education v. Nikhil Gulati, AIR 1988 SC 1205.
It was stated :-  "Occasional aberrations such as these, whereby ineligible students are permitted, under Court orders, to undertake Board and/or University examinations, have caught the attention of this Court many a time.
To add it further, the Courts have almost always observed that the instance of such aberrations should not be treated as a precedent in future.
Such casual discretion by the Court is nothing but an abuse of the process; more so when the High Court at its level itself becomes conscious that the decision was wrong and was not worth repeating as a precedent.
And yet it is repeated time and again.
Having said this much, we hope and trust that unless the High Court can justify its decision on principle and precept, it should better desist from passing such orders for it puts the `Rule of Law' to a mockery, and promotes rather the 'Rule of Man'."
As pointed and referred to above, the petitioners did not have a legal right.
Since they did not have the legal right, the above said argument based on compassion must lose significance.
10.
For these reasons, the writ petitions being without merit must fail and are dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.