RL Anand, J - The State of Punjab has filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 981999, passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Ludhiana who dismissed the first appeal of the State with the observation that the punishing authority would be at liberty to pass fresh order in accordance with law on the same inquiry proceedings and that the directions given by the trial Court that the department will be at liberty to conduct a fresh inquiry were erroneous.
2.
The brief facts of the case are as follows.
Jagtar Singh plaintiff- respondent filed a suit for declaration that the impugned order No. 2563-58/B dated 521993 termining his services was illegal, null and void and violative of principles of natural justice and the plaintiff would be deemed to be in continuous service and would be entitled to all arrears and all other consequential benefits.
According to the plaintiff, he joined the Police Department on 19.10.1971 and he was posted at Faridkot as Head Constable.
Due to extreme mental tension, he could not discharge his duty from 3041991 to 2671991.
He joined his duty on 2771991.
However, defendant No. 2, Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot, vide order dated 521993 terminated the services of the plaintiff.
According to the plaintiff, the order of termination was illegal, null and void.
He was not served with any charge sheet nor he was afforded any opportunity of being heard.
No departmental inquiry was conducted against him in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
The charge against the plaintiff was with regard to the absence of duty for 87 days, 13 hours and 15 minutes and it is against Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules.
The plaintiff had given the reply to the show cause notice but it was not considered.
The plaintiff was not granted any personal hearing.
Resultantly, the plaintiff prayed for the decree of the suit.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendants.
Apart from taking legal pleas, it was contended on merits, that plaintiff remained absent from duty with effect from 3041991 to 2671991 and his absence was recorded in D.D.R.
No. 29 dated 3041991 in the roznamcha.
The departmental inquiry was initiated against the plaintiff vide No. 16273-76/B dated 2381991 as per police Rules applicable to the State of Punjab.
The plaintiff did not participate in the inquiry proceedings inspite of due service.
The Inquiry Officer was appointed by the punishing authority to conduct ex parte proceedings against the plaintiff.
The plaintiff failed to join the inquiry despite issuance of many notices.
The inquiry officer conducted the inquiry in accordance with rules.
Defendant No. 2 agreed with the finding of the Inquiry Officer and issued show cause notice to the plaintiff and it was proposed to dismiss him from service on 26.10.19992.
The plaintiff even did not submit any reply to the show cause notice and again notice dated 21121992 was issued to the plaintiff for reply and requiring him to appear in person before the punishing authority up to 10.12.1992 and 12121992.
This notice was received by the plaintiff on 8.12.1992.
The plaintiff submitted his reply to the notice but did not appear before defendant No. 2.
The reply of the plaintiff was duly considered by the punishing authority and subsequently the order of dismissal of the plaintiff from service was passed.
4.
The plaintiff filed a rejoinder to the written statement of the defendant in which he reiterated the allegations made in the plaint while denying those of the written statement.
5.
From the above pleadings of the parties the trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the order dated 521993 whereby service of the plaintiff was terminated is illegal, null and void ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 4.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus-standi to file the present suit ?
OPD 5.
Whether the suit is premature ?
If so, its effect ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
6.
The parties led evidence in support of their case and vide judgment and decree dated 3111997, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed and plaintiff was granted declaration to the continuity of service.
The Civil Judge also made the observation that defendant authority shall be at liberty to hold "de novo inquiry" within three months from the date of the judgment, if so desired.
7.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the defendant filed the first appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Ludhiana who affirmed the judgment and decree of the trial Court with the modification that instead of de novo inquiry the punishing authority would be at liberty to pass fresh order in accordance with law on the same inquiry proceedings and the observations made by the trial Court of de novo inquiry were set aside.
It may be mentioned here that plaintiff Shri Jagtar Singh also filed an appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge against the finding on issue No. 6 recorded by the trial Court and his appeal was also dismissed vide the impugned judgment and decree dated 981999.
8.
With the dismissal of its first appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Ludhiana, the present Regular Second Appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab.
9.
I have heard Mrs. SK Bhatia, learned Deputy Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the appellant and with her assistance have gone through the record of this case.
10.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that both the Courts below have held that there was intentional and wilful absence on the part of the plaintiff from his duty with effect from 3041991 to 2671991 as the plaintiff did not apply for the leave and further that the inquiry which was conducted by the department was in accordance with the Rules.
The counsel further submitted that wilful absence from duty and that too for a long period of 87 days, is a gravest act of misconduct and it is within the domain of the punishing authority to award any appropriate punishment including the punishment of dismissal and the Courts below wrongfully decreed the suit of the plaintiff on the ground that absence from duty is not the gravest act of misconduct for the purpose of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable to the State of Punjab.
11.
So far as the first aspect of the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is concerned, I am in concurrence with the learned counsel for the appellant that proper departmental inquiry has been conducted and no violation of the Rules of natural justice has been committed.
12.
Whether wilful absence from duty is a misconduct and whether this misconduct is of gravest nature or not, is a question of fact depending on facts of each case.
In the given circumstances, even the absence, from duty for one day can amount a gravest act of misconduct if with the absence of that one day a great damage has been caused to the interest of the State.
Supposing if the SHO of a particular Police-Station leaves the Police-Station without making proper application and in his absence the huge law and order problem takes place in the beat of his police-station, resulting to mammoth loss, it will be considered as the gravest act of misconduct on the part of that SHO because by virtue of his dereliction in duty, he has not only aggravated the law and order situation but also caused huge loss to the public property.
He will also be responsible indirectly for the huge loss which might occurring to the public property.
In a given situation, even a delay of 87 days or 3 months may not be considered as the gravest act of misconduct if the circumstances so justified.
Supposing a constable receives an urgent message from his house that his wife is in a critical condition.
He could not make a proper application for leave.
On account of urgency, he might not have been able to get the leave sanctioned prior in time before proceeding to his house on account of given circumstances, in such a situation his absence may be long but it may not be considered as the gravest act of misconduct.
Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules lays down that dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
Punishment must be in proportion to the offence proved.
This is the basic law that if the punishment awarded to a delinquent official has no basis of rationality, it will be considered arbitrary.
It is true that plaintiff remained absent from duty for 87 days but he had a cause to be explained.
According to the plaintiff, he could not discharge his duty on account of mental depression.
This explanation did not find favour with the authorities.
The learned counsel for the appellant relied upon a judgment of this Court reported as 1997(1) RSJ 535 : 1996(4) SCT 592 (P&H), Krishan Lal Ex-constable v. State of Punjab and submitted that in this judgment it was observed by the High Court that absence from duty amounts to misconduct and when a constable remains absent from duty for 48 days it amounts to gravest misconduct and the punishment of dismissal was not held to be disproportionate.
13.
The counsel for the appellant also invited my attention to 1997(3) RSJ 353 : 1996(4) SCT 130 (P&H), Ex-Constable Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab and submitted that absence from duty for 73 days was held to be the gravest misconduct.
It was also observed that if the authorities in their wisdom and in the interest of justice have passed the impugned order which does not suffer from any legal infirmity and once it is established that the inquiry has been properly held and it has satisfied the principles of natural justice, it is within the domain of the punishing authority to give the punishment and that the Court will not interfere in such punishments except in rare of the rarest cases.
14.
I have gone through both the above cited judgments and these can be distinguished safely.
Even the Hon'ble D.B.
in Satnam's case (supra) has left the scope to the punishing authority to pass any other sentence than the highest punishment of dismissal.
This aspect of the case was properly looked into by the first appellate Court in Para No. 7 of the judgment which is reproduced as follows :-  "The next contention raised before this Court is that the order of dismissal of service has been passed arbitrarily and hence is no order in the eye of law.
Reliance was placed on the law laid down in State of Punjab v. Darshan Singh, reported in 1989(1) All India Service Law Journal page 191 and State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand constable, reported in 1992(1) Service Law Reporter page 174 : 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) by Jagtar Singh plaintiff.
Parkash Chand constable's case (supra) is by a Division Bench of our own High Court.
It has been observed in para No. 11 of the judgment that absence without leave by the police official under Punjab Police Rules 1934, rule 162 does not amount to gravest act of misconduct.
The defendants placed reliance on State of Punjab v. Karnail Singh, reported in 1993(1) P.L.R.
page 317 : 1993(2) SCT 697 (P&H).
This is a single Bench judgment and the law laid down by the Division Bench of our own High Court shall prevail.
It is thus, evident on perusal of Parkash Chand constable's case (supra), that absence without leave does not amount to gravest act of misconduct.
The finding recorded by the trial Court under these issues that the order of dismissal of service of the plaintiff is not a legal one is affirmed as held in the above referred case.
The plaintiff is entitled to the declaration that the impugned order dismissing him from service is unsustainable in the eye of law.
The State has relied upon the law in State of Orissa v. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra, reported in AIR 1963 Supreme Court page 679.
This authority is not under the Punjab Police Rules and, as such, is distinguishable from the case in hand.
Issues No. 1 and 2 have been correctly decided by the trial Court while placing reliance upon Parkash Chander Constable's case (supra).
The impugned order of dismissal of service is unsustainable on the mere ground that absence from duty does not amount to gravest act of misconduct as contemplated under Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
The finding of the trial Court under issues No. 1 and 2 is affirmed."
15.
In view of the case law relied upon by the plaintiff before the Courts below it can be safely held that in peculiar facts and circumstances, the absence from duty of the plaintiff in the present case did not amount to the gravest act of misconduct and secondly the highest punishment of dismissal was un-called for and in awarding this punishment the punishing authority had acted in an arbitrary manner.
Further the order of the punishing authority cannot be sustained, in my view, because the punishing authority had not taken care of the fact that a pensionary right has accrued to the plaintiff.
There is a clear mandate in Rule 162 given to the punishing authority that in making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
The legislature's intent while drafting the Rules, were very clear that if a civil servant has incurred a right of pension he should not be deprived of it so easily.
The right of pension should not be jeopardised at the sweet whims of the punishing authority.
16.
In the present case, it is the case of the plaintiff that he joined the Department in the year 1971.
The impugned order was passed on 521993, meaning thereby by that time the plaintiff had more than 20 years of service to his credit which service could not be washed away with one stroke of the pen without applying the mind to the mandatory provision of Rule 162.
If this type of power is given to the punishing authority to ignore the length of service of delinquent official, it will not only put a great hardship to the delinquent official but also it gives a punishment to his family members as they would also be deprived of the dependency benefits.
17.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that this part of the case was never put up by the plaintiff before the Courts below that while awarding the punishment of dismissal, the punishing authority did not take into consideration his right to pension.
It is true that a specific pleading has not been made by the plaintiff in this regard but the plaintiff has challenged the impugned order of dismissal by specifically alleging that it is illegal, unlawful, null and void and against the principles of natural justice.
In the face of this challenge, it was for the punishing authority and the State to satisfy the Court that the impugned order of dismissal is in consonance with the provisions of law.
18.
Consequently, the appeal of the State is hereby dismissed in limine by afirming the observations made by the first appellate Court only.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.