OP Sharma, J - Sher-e-Kahmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology (SKUAST) vide advertisement Notice No. 1 of 1991, invited applications for various teaching position in the University.
The petitioner, who was already working as Associate Professor on ad hoc basis had applied for the post.
The respondents selected four candidates including the petitioner but only two could be appointed because of the limited number of vacancies.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that respondents acted illegally while appointing respondent-5 who did not possess the qualification prescribed for the post in the advertisement notice.
Since one of the selectees did not accept the appointment, had respondent-5 not been appointed, the petitioner would have been the obvious choice.
But the appointment, according to the petitioner, was denied to him only to benefit the private respondent to confer upon him undue benefit when he was due for retirement from the Government service on attaining 58 years of age.
The order of his appointment, it is further averred, was bad being arbitrary as the qualification could not have been relaxed unless he had more than six years service.
The same was, however, relaxed when he had less than three years service at his disposal.
3.
In the Counter filed on behalf of the official respondents, it is pleaded that eligibility on the basis of qualification prescribed is to be determined by the Selection Committee.
Since respondent-5 was found eligible for the post, the same cannot be challenged by the petitioner, after he has also taken chance for the selection by appearing before the same Interview Committee.
It is further pleaded that eligibility for the post is to be decided by the expert of the Selection Committee and, therefore, the Writ Petition is not maintainable on this ground.
4.
Mr. Bhardwaj, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that the arbitrary manner in which the private respondent came to be appointed is writ large in the order dated 3151994 issued by the University.
According to him, there can be no better evidence of bias and mala fides or official nepotism than the manner in which private respondent came to be appointed.
5.
Mr. Raina, on the other hand, justified the order on the ground that the private respondent possessed requisite experience prescribed in the advertisement notice and, therefore, he was not appointed in relaxation of rules.
6.
Ordinarily the Court would not have embarked upon to decide the legality of the selection and appointment of the private respondent because he has already superannuated some time in the year 1997 but the interim direction of this Court dated 28111994, restraining the official respondents not to regularise the services of the selected candidates persuades me to pronounce the Judgment on merits.
The qualifications prescribed for the post of Associate Professor/Senior Scientist are as under:  "QUALIFICATION AND EXPERIENCE : a) Essential : (i) Doctorate Degree in the concerned subject (ii) Seven years experience in teaching and/or research of which four years should be in the rank of Assistant Professor or equivalent,  b) Desirable: Research experience as evidenced by publications.
c) Relaxation: In the discipline of Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry, Agricultural Engineering and Forestry, the Doctorate Degree is relaxable.
Candidates selected and appointed without Doctorate Degree will, however, be required to obtain Ph.D within six years of their joining, failing which increments will be stopped."
While the petitioner, admittedly, possessed these qualifications as he has already been appointed on the post though on ad hoc basis, the private respondent was a Poultry Geneticist in the Animal Husbandry Department.
The official position held by the private respondent in the Government is disclosed in the Government order No. 126-ASH of 1994 dated 581994 which reads as under:  "Sanction is accorded to the deputation of Dr. MA Malik, Poultry Geneticist, Hariparbath, Animal Husbandry Department, Srinagar to Sher-i-Kashmir University of Agriculture Sciences and Technology, Srinagar on his appointment as Associate Professor-cum-Senior Scientist for a period of two years on standard terms of deputation.
He will hand over charge of his post to Dr. MS Mukhdomi, Manager, Hatchery Srinagar, who will hold the charge in addition to his own duties.
By order of the Government of J&K" The post of Poultry Geneticist is admittedly, not a teaching post.
So the private respondent did not possess seven years experience in teaching.
However, contention of Mr. Raina is that it is not the teaching alone but any equivalent qualification which is relevant.
Equivalent qualification, according to him, has to be assessed and determined only by the Selection Committee who have the best experts.
This argument is devoid of any logic because the essential qualifications are (i) Doctorate Degree in the subject, and (ii) seven years experience in teaching and/or research of four years in the rank of Assistant Professor or equivalent.
So the private respondent ought to have either seven years experience in teaching or he should have seven years experience in research of which at least four years in the rank of Assistant Professor or equivalent.
So the word `equivalent' is only referable to the rank of Assistant Professor.
If he has four years research as Poultry Geneticist, it must be equivalent to the rank of Assistant Professor to make him eligible.
It is admitted that the private respondent did not have Doctorate at the time of his selection but the respondents had the power to relax the same and they did relax but even this relaxation was a fraud committed only to benefit the private respondent because a selected candidate is required to obtain Ph.
D within six years of his joining the service.
It means, the selected candidate must have more than six years service so that the University is benefited by his experience and knowledge.
In the Counter, it is admitted that the private respondent has superannuated in the year 1997.
Since it is not denied that he was to retire in June 1995, had he not been appointed in the University, it means, he had barely three years service at the time of his appointment in case the age of superannuation in the University is sixty years.
Appointment of the private respondent was thus a favour to him to help him to get two years and also enjoy the benefit of higher pay sale.
The method and manner in which the offer was made to him leads to the only conclusion that the official respondents were determined to appoint him as Associate Professor even though he did not possess the requisite qualification.
This is evident from the letter dated 3151994 written to him by the University which reads as under:  "You are posted as Probationary Associate professor-cum-Senior Scientist (Animal Reproduction & Gynaecology) in the Division of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Clinics Faculty of Veterinary Sciences) and AH Shushama, in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700 plus allowances as admissible under rules.
The probationary posting shall last for a period of two years which may be, however, extended as per provisions of SKUAST.
Your posting during the period shall be governed by SKUAST Statutes as in vogue or with any amendments that may come into force during the period.
You will be required to obtain Ph.D Degree within six years of your joining failing which your future increments in the pay sale of Rs. 3700-5700 shall be stopped.
You are required to join within a period of 21 days of the issuance of this communication.
No request for extension in the joining time shall be entertained.
By order."
7.
Since the advertisement notice was for the post of Associate Professor, the question of appointing him as probationary Associate Professor-cum-Senior Scientist did not arise.
The Government was also quite favourable to him because sanctioning his deputation means to retain his lien in the Department though he had been selected and appointed in the University against a clear vacancy.
But this is how the clout in the Government helps one, no matter, how much is the sufferance of the other.
8.
In the Counter, it is admitted that private respondent did not possess teaching experience but he according to the respondent, was occupying the post which was of a research nature.
This plea reads as under:  "6.7....... Respondent-5 may not be holding the teaching experience but definitely he had undergone research-oriented assignments of Animal Husbandry Deptt.
The Govt. order 126-ASH of 1994 dated 581994 itself elucidates from the designation of the respondent No. 5 as "POULTRY GENETICIST" which post is of research nature........." The plea is self-defeating because it amounts to admission that he did not possess research experience in terms of the qualification prescribed because as noticed above, research experience must be evidenced by publications about which there is not even a whisper in the Counter.
Merely because the post held by him was of a research nature, it did not make him eligible unless the research experience is evidenced by publication which is not the case.
Moreover, there is not even a whisper that respondent-5 was holding an equivalent rank of Assistant Professor as Poultry Geneticist.
So the fact that private respondent did not possess requisite qualifications and experience, remains unontroverted.
9.
Mr. Raina, next argued that the eligibility has to be determined by the Selection Committee which includes an expert and the same cannot be interfered in exercise of powers of Judicial review.
However, there is nothing in the Counter to suggest who out of respondents 1 to 4 was the expert.
It is admitted that selection was made by the respondents-1 to 4, who are officers of the University.
So no outside expert was involved in the selection process.
Respondents-1 to 4 appears to have acted more in the capacity as Board of Directors of a Private Limited Company rather than office-bearers of a Statutory body of the University created by the Act of legislature namely, Sher-i-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology Act, 1982.
10.
If that be so as it really is, the selection made by the respondents will not be at par with the selection made with the help of the experts.
So, the respondents cannot draw any support from the law laid down in Km.
Neelima Misra v. Harinder Kaur Paintal, AIR 1990 SC 1402 which reads as under :  "32.
It is not unimportant to point out that in matters of appointment in the academic field the Court generally does not interfere.
In the University of Mysore v. C.D Govinda Rao, 1964(4) SCR 575, this Court observed that the Courts should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed by the experts in the absence of mala fide alleged against the experts.
When appointments are based on recommendations of experts nominated by the Universities, the High Court has got only to see whether the appointment had controverted any statutory or binding rule or ordinance.
The High Court should show due regard to the opinion expressed by the experts constituting the Selection Committee and its recommendation on which Chancellor has acted......" Since no expert was associated for the Selection process, the violation of the qualification is not subject to the same limitation while exercising powers of judicial review as in cases where selection is made by the experts.
This distinction has to be drawn in view of the law laid down in Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, AIR 1990 SC 434 holding that :  "9........
It is needless to emphasise that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The Court has no such expertise.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc.
It is not disputed that in the present case the University had constituted the Committee in due compliance with the relevant statutes.
The Committee consisted of experts and it selected the candidates after going through all the relevant material before it.
In sitting in appeal over the selection so made and in setting it aside on the ground of the so-called comparative merits of the candidates as assessed by the Court, the High Court went wrong and exceeded its jurisdiction."
In the present case, the Committee does not consist of experts and, therefore, whole seelection process was a transaction undertaken only to confer undue benefit on the private respondent.
11.
In view of the above, it is held that the private respondent was not eligible for the post of Associate Professor and his appointment was thus void ab initio.
However, since he has already retired, therefore, benefit drawn by him cannot be recovered but a serious prejudice has been caused to the petitioner who though selected was not given appointment because the official respondents acted arbitrarily and the whole selection process was tailored by them.
So, while the petitioner has lost a very valuable right because of the delay in the disposal of the petition.
But on the principle of Actus curiae neminem gravabit, the petitioner is entitled to the appointment without quashing the appointment of the private respondent who has since retired and the post is lying vacant.
Since the petitioner has been appointed on ad hoc basis, the ends of justice would be met by directing his regularisation as Associate Professor from the date of superannuation of the private respondent with all the consequential benefits.
12.
So, this petition is allowed and the post vacated by the private respondent shall be offered to the petitioner and he shall be deemed to have been appointed with effect from the date of his superannuation.
Petition allowed.