GS Singhvi, J - The question as to whether a litigant can maintain successive petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for grant of the same relief was considered and answered in the negative by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Daryao and others v. State of UP and others, AIR 1961 SC 1457.
Some of the observations made in that decision, which are quite instructive but which are often forgotten by the litigants and the lawyers, are :  "The rule of res judicata as indicated S. 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure has no doubt some technical aspects, for instance the rule of constructive res judicata may be said to be technical, but the basis on which the said rule rests is founded on considerations of public policy.
It is in the interest of the public at large that a finality should attach to the binding decisions pronounced by Courts of competent jurisdiction and it is also in the public interest that individuals should not be vexed twice over with the same kind of litigation ..........................
If a writ petition filed by a party under Art 226 is considered on the merits as a contested matter and is dismissed the decision thus pronounced would continue to bind the parties unless it is otherwise modified or reversed by appeal or other appropriate proceedings permissible under the Constitution."
The present case is illustrative of the attempted mis-use of the process of the court by the petitioners who have on two previous occasions failed to convince this Court and at least on one occasion the Hon'ble Supreme Court to direct the respondents to absorb them in the State services.
The prayer made in this petition has been cleverly articulated to give an impression that the petitioners are mainly seeking nullification of the memo dated 1281998 (Annexure P.22) vide which the Director of Public Instructions (S), Punjab informed the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Education Department that the petitioners cannot be absorbed in the Education Department at the level of the Directorate but a careful reading of the petition as a whole leaves no room for doubt that the petitioners are seeking the same relief which has already been declined to them by this Court and the Apex Court.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioners were appointed as part-time Supervisors, Adult Education between 661986 and 30.5.1988 under a scheme which was sponsored by the Central Government.
They filed C.W.P.
No. 4495 of 1989 for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant them salary in the regular pay scale in accordance with the doctrine of `equal pay for equal work'.
During the pendency of that petition, the scheme under which they were employed was abolished by the government w.e.f.
3061991.
Therefore, while deciding the writ petition and granting them the relief prayed for, the learned Single Judge also directed that the government shall make an attempt to adjust the petitioners in some suitable employment as expeditiously as possible.
This was reversed by the Division Bench while deciding L.P.A. No. 275 of 1992 filed by the State of Punjab.
In its order dated 1131996, the Division Bench observed and held as under :  "The learned counsel for the appellant has, however, argued that in view of the fact that the Scheme under which the writ petitioners were employed had been abolished, the learned Single Judge was not justified in issuing direction to the appellant-State to adjust them in some other suitable employment.
It has rightly been contended that by appointment in a scheme, no right had been conferred upon the writ petitioners which could be enforced in a Court of law and directions issued as has been done by the learned Single Judge.
The implementation of such a direction may amount to taking away the rights of some deserving citizens who may be more qualified and suitable for regular appointment or adjustment in the future.
The directions of the learned Single Judge otherwise appears to be advisory and not mandatory.
It is, however, made clear that the appellant-State shall not be under any legal obligation to provide job to the writ petitioners or adjust them in any other employment unless they otherwise apply and are found fit and suitable by the competent authority in accordance with the Rules.
The appeal is accordingly partly allowed by upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge in so far as the manner and direction regarding equal pay for equal work is concerned.
The appellants are held not obliged to adjust the writ petitioners in any other employment unless the writ petitioners apply for the post and they are found fit for the same in accordance with the law applicable at the relevant time.
No costs.
1131996 Sd/- RP Sethi, Judge, Sd/- RL Anand, Judge."
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 2736 of 1997 filed by the State of Punjab against the grant of the benefit of `equal pay for equal work' was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 5.5.1997.
Thereafter, the petitioners were granted regular pay scale of Rs. 1640-2925.
3.
More than one year after the reversal of the direction given by the learned Single Judge to the State to make an attempt to adjust them in some suitable employment, the petitioners instituted C.W.P.
No. 16563 of 1997 for directing the respondents to absorb them in State Services keeping in view their qualifications.
By an order dated 7111997, a Division Bench dismissed the writ petition by holding that it was barred by res judicata.
The relevant extract of that order is reproduced below :-  "Petitioners in this writ petition were also the petitioners in the previous writ petition.
They have now filed the petition seeking a direction to the respondents to extend them the benefit of the judgment rendered by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 4495 of 1989 as well as by the Supreme Court in different cases.
They have also prayed for their absorption in State Services keeping in view the qualifications possessed by them, on priority basis, they being retrenched employees.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioners and perusing the record, we are of the opinion that this writ petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
A bare perusal of the writ petition goes to show that the petitioners are claiming the same relief now by filing the present petition as was claimed by them in the earlier writ petition and which was considered by the learned Single Judge and the learned Letters Patent Bench.
While considering petitioners' claim for the grant of same pay scale as was being given to the regular Supervisors of the Education Department, the Division Bench also considered the claim of the petitioners for appointment on priority basis in terms of the instructions of the State Government and declined the same.
As a matter of fact, the direction of the learned Single Judge that petitioners' case shall be considered on priority basis, was set aside by LPA Bench by passing the orders reproduced above.
The petitioners thus in our view are again agitating the matter and the same is barred by the principle of res judicata.
In other words, the petitioners are trying through the writ petition to take up the issue which already stands settled.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed in limine."
The petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 1746 of 1998 filed against the order of the High Court dated 7111997 was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 921998.
The substantive part of the order passed by the Apex Court reads as under :  "Upon hearing counsel the Court made the following ORDER It will be open to the petitioners to make appropriate representation indicating the policy decision of the government, if any.
The SLP stands dismissed with the above observation."
4.
Thereafter, the petitioners submitted representation Annexure P19 and served notices Annexures P.20 and P.21 upon the respondent for their absorption in the State services.
The Director of Public Instructions (S) Punjab, who is one of the persons to whom the representation was addressed and upon whom notices issued by the learned counsel for the petitioners were served, wrote the impugned letter indicating therein that the petitioners, who were engaged as part-time Supervisors against the scheme, cannot be absorbed in view of the rejection of their claim by the High Court in L.P.A. No. 275 of 1992.
5.
Shri RK Chopra argued that notwithstanding the fact that the direction given by the learned Single Judge to the respondents to make an attempt to absorb the petitioners in some suitable employment in the State Services was expressly reversed by the Division Bench in L.P.A. No. 275 of 1992 and C.W.P.
No. 16563 of 1997 filed by them for issuance of a mandamus directing the respondents to absorb them in the State Services has been dismissed by the Division Bench and that order will be deemed to have become final in view of the dismissal of their Special Leave Petition, the impugned letter written by the Director, Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab should be quashed because it is devoid of cogent reasons.
He submitted that the order passed in L.P.A. No. 275 of 1992 could not have been made the sole basis for rejecting the petitioners' claim for absorption in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide circular letters dated 24.4.1986 (Annexures P.6), 1451991 (Annexure P.7), 531993 (Annexure P.8) and the letters Annexures P10 and P11 dated 3071991 and 24.12.1992 written by the Director, Public Instructions (Primary), Punjab.
He further submitted that there is no rhyme or reason to deny the benefit of absorption to the petitioners because similarly situated employees have already been absorbed by the Government of Haryana in compliance of the directions given by the Supreme Court on 17111992 in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 503 of 1992 (Annexure P14).
Learned counsel also placed reliance on the order Annexure P16 dated 17101996 passed by a Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 17266 of 1995 and three connected petitions and submitted that the petitioners are also entitled to be absorbed in the State services in view of the policy decisions taken by the government.
6.
After giving serious thought to the submissions of the learned counsel, we are convinced that this petition can appropriately be treated as a piece of frivolous litigation and it deserves nothing but summary dismissal.
As per the petitioner's own showing, the direction given by the learned Single to the government to make an attempt to adjust them in some suitable employment was expressly reversed by the Division Bench consisting of RP Sethi, J (as his Lordship then was) and RL Anand, J while deciding L.P.A. No. 275 of 1992.
The petitioners did not challenge the order of the Division Bench by filing petition for Special Leave to Appeal before the Supreme Court.
Instead, they instituted C.W.P.
No. 16563 of 1997 for directing the respondents to absorb them in the State services.
That petition was dismissed by a Division Bench on 7111997 by a speaking order.
SLP No. 1746 of 1998 filed by the petitioners was dismissed by the Apex Court on 921998 with the observation that it will be open to the petitioners to make appropriate representation indicating the policy decision of the government, if any.
Thereafter the petitioners made representation and served notices of demand for justice leading to the sending of the impugned communication by respondent No. 2.
Shri RK Chopra made strenuous efforts to convince us not to invoke the doctrine of res judicata by arguing that in the previous litigation the Court did not have the occasion to examine the legality of the memo dated 1281998.
According to him, the observations made by the Apex Court giving liberty to the petitioners to make representation gave fresh cause of action to the petitioners.
In our opinion, the submission of the learned counsel is wholly devoid of substance.
A bare reading of the order dated 921998 passed by the Apex Court shows that their Lordships did not find any merit in the petitioners' plea for issuance of a direction to the respondents to absorb them in the State services.
This must have been the reason for dismissal of the Special Leave Petition.
The observations made in the order dated 921998 were only meant for giving an opportunity to the petitioners to persuade the departmental authorities to give them relief in accordance with the policy, if any, framed by the government.
However, the same cannot be read as conferring a right upon the petitioners to file fresh petition for grant of the relief which was expressly declined by the High Court on two previous occasions.
In our considered opinion, the prayer made by the petitioners to direct the respondents to absorb them in the State services deserved to be rejected as barred by res judicata.
7.
We also do not find any valid reason to accept the petitioners' prayer to quash the memo dated 1281998 or to direct the respondents to absorb them in the services of the State keeping in view their qualifications.
The reasons for this conclusion are that the petitioners who were engaged as part-time Supervisors, Adult Education have neither pleaded nor any document has been produced by them before the Court to show that they were appointed as part- time Supervisors, Adult Education by the competent authority after issuing advertisement in the newspapers inviting applications from eligible candidates or by sending requisition to the employment exchange.
Therefore, on the basis of their fortuitous appointment in the scheme sponsored by the Central Government, the petitioners cannot claim absorption in the State Services and we cannot be better than reiterating the observation made by the Division Bench wild deciding L.P.A. No. 275 of 1992 that the implementation of the direction by the learned Single Judge for absorption of the petitioners may amount to taking away the rights of some deserving citizens who may be more qualified and suitable for regular appointment.
8.
A careful reading of the circulars and the letters annexed with the writ petition shows that none of them deals with the issue of absorption of part- time Supervisors appointed in the scheme sponsored by the Central Government.
Therefore, on the basis of those circulars/letters the petitioners cannot claim to have acquired an enforceable right to be absorbed in the State services.
9.
The order passed by the Supreme Court on 17111992 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 503 of 1992 Karamvir Singh v. State of Haryana, on which reliance has been placed by Shri Chopra, reads as under :  "In the facts and circumstances of this case we direct the State of Haryana to consider these petitioners and all other similarly situated for absorption in the State-service to the posts to which they are eligible and can be considered in accordance with the Rules and the instructions.
The said consideration shall be done as and when the vacancies for these petitioners are made available.
While complying with the directions issued by us the State of Haryana shall keep into consideration similar directions issued by this Court in earlier cases.
The State may also take into consideration the administrative exigencies which may arise.
The petitioners shall be entitled to age relaxation as and when they are absorbed in the Government service.
The writ petition is disposed with the above directions.
No costs."
A bare reading of the above extracted order shows that the direction given by the Apex Court for absorption of Karamvir Singh etc. is not based on any rule or policy decision taken by the government.
Therefore, that order cannot be treated as a precedent for directing the respondents to absorb the petitioners because their prayer has already been rejected by two co-ordinate Benches of this Court.
10.
The order dated 17101996 passed in C.W.P.
No. 17266 of 1995, Devinder Kumar v. State of Punjab and others : 1996(2) SCT 823 (P&H) (Annexure P16) relied upon by the petitioners does not have any bearing on their case.
In those cases, the Court had issued direction to the respondents to absorb the petitioners in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab.
However, as no such instruction has been issued for absorption of the persons like the petitioners, we do not find any justification to issue similar direction in the case of the petitioners.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.