Satyabrata Sinha, Actg.
CJ.
- Both these appeals are directed against the Judgment and order dated 27.3.98 passed by single Judge of his Court in Civil Order No. 9704(W) of 1995 whereby the writ petition was disposed of with the following directions :-  "Considering the aforesaid, the impugned Order/Notification stands quashed and is hereby set aside.
The pay scale of the Laboratory Instructors should be refixed so that the petitioner's pay scale is not reduced below that of the Teaching Staff and/of the Demonstrator.
Accordingly, it is ordered that such refixation should be made by the concerned respondents after hearing the writ petitioners within six weeks from the date of communications of the order."
2.
The members of the West Bengal College Graduate Laboratory Instructors Association filed a writ petition before the learned trial Judge praying, inter alia for following reliefs :-  "(a) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to forthwith rescind, revoke, cancel and withdraw the impugned order being No. 931-Edn.
(C.S.)/5S-16/89 dated December 26, 1994 issued under the signature of the Deputy Secretary, Higher Education Department, Government of West Bengal.
(b) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondent authorities to grant the petitioners and other incumbents of the post of "Laboratory Instructors" the pay scale of the physical Instructors notionally with effect from August 10, 1983 and thereafter again from January 1, 1986.
(c) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondent authorities to forthwith grant the petitioners and other incumbents of the post of "Laboratory Instructors with effect from Aug 1, 1987 the benefits of career advancement prescribed for the Physical Instructors vide the order issued under the signature of the Deputy Secretary, Govt. of West Bengal being GO No. 352-Edn.
(C.S.)/5P-22/88 dt. March 12, 1991."
3.
The learned trial Judge allowed to the writ petition by the impugned order as a sequel to which the instant appeal has been preferred.
4.
Admittedly, the respondents No. 1 to 4 herein are all science graduates of different universities and have been originally appointed as Laboratory Assistants in different non-Government colleges on diverse dates.
Before the instant writ petition they filed another writ petition being marked Civil Rule No. 2665(W) of 1985 claiming the status and pay scale of Teaching Staff and also to the scale equivalent to that of Physical Instructors.
The writ petition was allowed by the single Judge whose judgment was affirmed on appeal upto Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court passed the following order :-  "We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
We see no ground to interfere with the reasoning and the conclusions reached by the learned single Judge as upheld by the Division Bench of the High Court.
We are, however, of the view that the respondent petitioners be paid the revised scale of pay as directed by the High Court, with effect from August 1, 1987 instead of August 10, 1983.
Mr. AK Ganguli, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has very fairly stated that his clients are not asking for the pay-scale of Lecturer.
According to him, the pay-scale of Physical Instructors is equivalent to that of Demonstrators and that is the pay-scale to which his clients are entitled to in terms of the judgment of the High Court."
(vide order dated 26794 passed in Civil Appeal No. 2530 of 1993).
5.
It is, therefore, clear that the respondents herein are entitled to get recognition as Teaching Staff and the pay-scale of Physical Instructor or Demonstrator.
After the aforesaid Judgment of the Supreme Court the appellant has issued Circular on 26.12.1994 (Annexure 'G') which states,  "In the circumstances, the Governor is pleased to order that the scale of pay in respect of all the graduate Laboratory Instructors of Non-Government Colleges may be revised to Rs. 1300-45-1615-55-2445-2970/- with effect from 1st August, 1987 and the arrears involved on account of revision of their scale of pay paid in the manner as indicated above.
The Governor is further pleased to order that the Graduate Laboratory Instructors of Non-Govt.
Colleges shall continue to enjoy teaching status as given to them in GO No. 1030-Edn.
(CS), dated 2771988."
6.
The respondent Nos. 1 to 4 challenged the circular before the learned trial Judge who was pleased to quash the same accepting the contention of the writ petitioners.
7.
According to the learned trial Judge the petitioners who were Graduate Laboratory Instructors has been placed by the impugned Govt. Order dt. 26.12.199 4 in the pay scale meant for Group B category of non-teaching staff.
The said pay scale in any event cannot apply to a teaching staff and as such is contrary to the order passed by this Court in CR No. 2665(W)/95 confirmed by the Division Bench of the Supreme Court.
The learned trial Judge has further stated.
"The petitioners being all Graduate Laboratory Instructors, there is no scope for further classifying them on the basis of their educational qualification.
Moreover, the annual report of the Higher Education Deptt.
of WB itself makes it clear that the pay scale sought to be introduced for the petitioners by the impugned Govt. order dated 241294 relates to non-teaching staff and there is no scope for the said pay scale to be applicable to the Physical Instructors."
8.
According to the appellants, the impugned circular dated 26.12.1994 substantially complies with the direction of the Supreme Court inasmuch as under the said Government order the writ petitioner have been given the pay scale of Physical Instructors as prescribed under the scheme of UGC which recognises two scale of Physical Instructors by classifying under the following heads :-  (i) Physical Instructor with UGC prescribed academic qualifications that is post ......2200-4000 graduate diploma or certificate or decree in physical education.
(ii) Physical Instructor having B.A./B.Sc.
......1390-2970/B.Com.
(pass) decree only.
9.
According to the learned counsel for the appellant, without violation of UGC prescribed scale the petitioners cannot be given the scale of Rs.2200-4000/- which is only granted to the Physical Instructor having Post Graduate Diploma or UGC prescribed qualifications.
He has further contended that the writ petitioners should not have any further grievance after being granted teaching status and the scales of Physical Instructors to which their qualifications recommended.
10.
It is to be noted that the impugned government order dated 26.12.1994 following the UGC scheme prescribing the pay scaled of Physical Instructors on classification, Annual Report of the department of Higher Education 1994-95 published by the Higher Education Department, Government of West Bengal (at pages 302, 305 and 306 of the paper book), the submissions of the learned counsel for the respondents before Supreme Court recorded in the Judgment and also the judgment of the trial court under appeal, if considered together, will not lead anybody to a consistent conclusion.
(i) According to the submission of Sri AK Ganguly, the Ld.
counsel for the respondents before the Supreme Court, the Laboratory Instructors are not asking for the pay scale of Lecturer, are they entitled to pay scale of Physical Instructor which is equivalent to that of Demonstrators.
That fact is that pay scales of the Demonstrators even in Government College is Rs. 1740/- 3,000/- and Physical Instructor Rs. 2200/- .. 4,000/-.
There is nothing on record to show that the scales of these two categories are equal.
(ii) That submission of Mr. AK Ganguly, Ld.
counsel appearing for the respondent before the Supreme Court has been appreciated by Their Lordships for not asking the pay scale of Lecturer as the said submission is not without significance.
It will appear from the Annual Report (page 304 of the paper book) that Lecturers and Physical Instructors enjoy the same scale and they may attain higher scale of Rs. 3,000/-...5000/- and Rs. 3700/-....5700/- "with a definite period of time through the process of career advancement."
If the ordinary science graduate Laboratory Instructors are given the scale of Physical Instructors to the tune of Rs. 2200/-4000/- which is equivalent to that of Lecturer they will also be entitled to attain higher scale of Rs. 3700/-...5700/- is that of Professor/Vice Principal.
In fact, such benefits have already been extended to the Asst.
Librarian and Physical Instructors of non-Govt. College (vide GO No. 352-Edn.
(CS)/5P-22/88 dated 12391 Annexure 'C' at page 51 of Paper Book prepared by the Respondents herein).
The Ld.
trial Judge by disapproving the classification under University Grant Commission Scheme definitely wanted to mean as per claim of the writ petitioners, that the scale of Rs. 2200-4000/- which is equivalent to the Lecturer should be given to the writ petitioners before him but instead of declaring to that effect directed that pay scale should not be less than that of the Teaching Staff or a Demonstrator.
The scale of the Demonstrator does not appear to be the claim of the writ petitioners within the four corners of the prayer portion nor the said scale is equivalent to that of Physical Instructor.
It is to be noted that the Ld.
trial Judge has not spelt out in the judgment as to why the scale of Demonstrator should be granted to the petitioners although the same is less than that of Physical Instructors enjoying the scale of Rs. 2200-4000/- nor any cross objection has been filed against such order.
(iii) While by the impugned Government order dated 26.12.94 the Government has conferred the teaching status upon the writ petitioners, the Annual Report released by the Government shows that the scale of Rs. 1390-2970/- is meant for Group 'B' category which is non-teaching staff.
The Annual Report was issued after the impugned Government Notification dated 26.12.94.
The so- called conferment of teaching status, therefore, appears to be illusory and unreal having the potential of breeding further litigations.
(iv) In the Annual Report released by the Government under Table 816 Teachers of Government Colleges under the heading of Teachers of Government Colleges shows that the scale of Demonstrators in serial No. 5 is Rs. 1740- 3000/- with effect from 111986 and Physical Instructor and Lecturer enjoying the scale of Rs. 2200-4000/-.
It is, therefore, clear that Demonstrator is inferior to that of Physical Instructor but superior to the scale offered by the Government to the writ petitioners.
11.
It is now a well settled principle of law that fixation of different scales of pay on the basis of educational qualification is neither irrational nor arbitrary.
Thus, in such cases, the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India have no application.
12.
In the State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Shri Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors, reported in AIR 1974 SC 1 : 1974(1) SCC 19, it has clearly been held :-  "We are therefore of the opinion that though persons appointed directly and by promotion were integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers, they could, for purposes of promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers, be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
The rule providing that graduates shall be eligible for such promotion to the exclusion of diploma-holders does not violate Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution and must be upheld."
13.
In Gopal Chandra Pal v. State of West Bengal reported in 1995(1) CLJ 7, the abovementioned view has been followed.
The appellants in paragraph 14 of the Supplementary Affidavit took the stand which is to the following effect :-  "(i) Scale of Physical Instructors who do not have requisite qualification as prescribed by UGC was received by impugned memo dated 26th December, 1994.
(ii) The impugned memo was issued on the basis of order of the Supreme Court.
(iii) The impugned memo was issued on the basis of GO No. 33-EDN(B) dated 7th March, 1990."
14.
In the instant case, the learned trial Judge has failed to take into consideration the specific statements made in the supplementary affidavit filed on behalf of the appellant herein to the effect that at all relevant times the scale of pay of the Physical Instructors depended upon possession of the educational qualification of the concerned officers whereby different scales of pay on the basis whereof the scales of pay were fixed.
15.
The learned trial Judge, unfortunately, had not considered this aspect of the matter at all.
16.
It may further be noticed that citing Memo dated 7.9.92, the State had given an instance of one Samar Kumar Mukherjee who had been granted a lesser scale of pay stating :-  "After due consideration of the case the Governor has been pleased to allow Sri Samar Kumar Ghosh, Physical Instructor, Umesh Chandra College, Calcutta, to enjoy the State Scale of pay of Rs. 390-45-1615-55-2055-65-2445-75-2970/- with effect from 1.1.86 subject to the condition that he will exercised within 60 (Sixty) days from the date of issue of this order an option in writing before fixation of his pay in that revised scale, to the effect that he is willing to enjoy the State scale of pay mentioned above."
His pay in the revised scale of pay of Rs. 1390-2970/- may be fixed on the same terms and conditions as laid down in government order No. 33-Edn.
(B) dated 7390."
17.
In a Memo dated 7590 while adopting the recommendations of the pay commission which were fixed inter alia on the basis of educational qualification, even in the Memo dated 30.4.90 as contained in Annexure 'A' upon which strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Paul, the scale of pay of the Physical Instructors was revised Rs. 2200-4000/-, only in respect of those who were getting Rs. 700-1600/- and not in respect of the others.
Despite the same, the State as indicated hereinbefore, had been continuing the practice that those Physical Instructors would be getting the scale of Rs. 2400/- who were holders of post-graduate degree or diploma in education.
18.
Mr. Paul submitted that keeping in view the fact that the Physical Instructors cannot have any other degree as post-graduate degree and the other qualifications which are applicable if the cases of other categories of employee would not be applicable to them and, thus only those who are holders of requisite degree would be entitled to the scale of pay equivalent to a Lecturer of a college.
It has, therefore, been contended that possession of a post-graduate degree or its equivalent was not the condition precedent for grant of scale of pay to the writ petitioners which was admissible to the lecturers.
The said contention cannot be accepted.
19.
In the opinion of this court, service jurisprudence postulates that the persons similarly situated should get a similar scale of pay unless there exists any provision contrary thereto in any Statute or there exists fortuitous circumstances.
If Instructors having only a Bachelor Degree is given the same scale of pay as that of a lecturer of a college who not only possesses a higher qualification but also exercises higher responsibilities, the same would amount to the reverse discrimination and it was in the context admission of the learned Counsel before the Supreme Court of India should be construed.
20.
The Respondents had categorically stated that they were not entitled to the scale of pay admissible to the teachers but they are only entitled to the scale of pay admissible to the demonstrators.
Such a statement before the Supreme Court of India was evidently made keeping in view that the minimum qualification so far as the post of demonstrator vis-a-vis Physical Instructors are concerned who are not holders of a post-graduate degree and do not perform the same nature of duties and functions which are performed by the Lecturers.
For one purpose, the Instructors may be held to be a teaching staff but the same does not mean that they would be, on the same analogy, entitled to the scale of pay admissible to a Lecturer.
Such a reverse discrimination is not contemplated under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The learned trial Judge, in our opinion committed an error insofar as he has failed to take into consideration the backdrop in respect of the said post and in particular the fact that the writ petitioners were initially appointed as Laboratory Assistants, but they were re-designated as Laboratory Instructors.
21.
For the purpose of construing the decision of the Supreme Court, upon which strong reliance has been placed by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents, it is necessary to consider the decision of a judgment dated 26794 passed by the learned single Judge which was upheld by the division bench as well as the Supreme Court.
The division bench of this court had held that the writ petitioners were entitled to a scale of pay of Physical Instructors who are possessed of a post-graduate degree.
22.
G.O.
dated 26.12.94, in our opinion, thus, cannot be said to be wholly arbitrary or contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court inasmuch as it has clearly been stated therein that the graduate laboratory instructors or non- collegiate shall continue to enjoy the status of teaching staff as per GO No. 1039-EDN(CS) 5S 42 dated 27798.
Only because in the said memo the terminology of 'non-teaching employees' of the non-government colleges has been mentioned, the same does ipso facto not mean that the writ petitioners had been denuded of their status of being members of teaching staff.
It is only for the purpose of grant of scale of pay, it had been stated therein that they would be entitled to only that scale of pay which are payable to the non-teaching employees having the same qualification.
23.
It is also not possible for us to agree with the contention of Mr. Paul to the effect that the identical qualification is immaterial.
As indicated hereinbefore, the Supreme Court has clearly held that the same has a bearing in the matter of grant of the scale of pay.
24.
For the reasons aforementioned the appeal of State of West Bengal is allowed and the appeal of the writ petitioner is dismissed and consequently the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.