Dipak Prakas Kundu, J - This appeal is arising out of the judgment and order dated 29th April, 1999 passed by altamas Kabir, J  2.
In the said judgment and order Altamas Kabir, J. inter alia, directed as follows :  "The said order cannot also be sustained on the ground that the Appellate Authority had not been indicated therein, as required under clause 14(6)(b) of the Model Standing Orders, which amounted to denial of the right of appeal conferred by Clause 14(6)(a) thereof.
The impugned order of dismissal from service the direction to deposit Rs. 1,06,27225 are hereby set aside.
The respondent company is directed to re- instate the petitioner in service and pay him all dues as admissible to him from the date of his removal from service.
The Disciplinary Authority will be at liberty to pass a fresh order after complying with the provisions of Clause 14(4)(c) of the Model Standing Orders and in keeping with the observations made hereinabove with particular reference to the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in B Karunakar's case (supra)."
3.
The writ petitioner was an employee of the appellant and was posted as shop-in-charge in one of the appellant's retail shop No. 14 at Ranaghat.
Thereafter, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Manager.
While serving the Manager of the appellant, the writ petitioner was served with a notice dated 2nd December, 1992 requiring him to explain in writing in respect of various allegations indicated in the said notice which were said to attract the provisions of mis-conduct in terms of clauses 14(3)(A), 14(3)(B) and 14(3)(C) of the Model Standing Orders.
4.
It is an admitted case that the company was not having any certified standing orders under the Industrial Employees' Standing Orders Act, 1946 and, therefore, they are guided by the Model Standard Orders as prescribed by the Bengal Industrial Employees (Standing Orders) Rules, 1946.
5.
A charge-sheet was issued against the writ petitioner, wherein, it was alleged that during the period of 1989-90, 1990-91 and 1991-92 he had caused loss to the respondent company to the tune of Rs. 63,991.57 and Rs. 42,381.78 which had been ascertained from the Stock Register which did not tally with the cost of materials in the show room.
6.
An inquiry was conducted against the writ petitioner in connection with the charges levelled against him and, ultimately, the writ petitioner was found guilty by the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer found that the alleged acts committed by the writ petitioner attracted the provisions of mis-conduct in terms of clauses 14(3)(A), 14(3)(B) and 14(3)(C) of the Model Standing Orders.
On the basis of the said inquiry report, the writ petitioner was dismissed from the service.
The writ petitioner in the writ petition questioned the said order of dismissal.
7.
It was argued on behalf of the writ petitioner that the enquiry report was not made available to the writ petitioner before the order of dismissal was passed and for that reason the law laid down by the Supreme Court in B Karunakar's case, AIR 1994 SC 1074 was violated.
It was further argued that under clause 14(4)(C) of the Standard Orders, the writ petitioner was entitled to have a reasonable opportunity of making a representation on the question of quantum of proposed penalty.
It is the case of the writ petitioner that while imposing punishment of dismissal, the appellant did not comply with the requirement of clause 14(4)(C) of the Standing Orders.
The learned advocate appearing for the appellant did not dispute this aspect of the matter.
8.
The learned trial Court arrived at a finding that there is a little doubt that the petitioner has been prejudiced by the impugned order since not only has he been dismissed from service but he along of all the employees in the show room has been directed to deposit the entire value of the goods in respect whereof shortage had been detected.
The learned Judge further stated that applying the standard indicated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in B Karunakar's case (supra) and in the case of Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471 and having specific regard to the provisions of clause 14(4)(C) of the Model Standing Orders, the impugned order of dismissal from service and the directions to deposit the entire value of the goods in respect whereof shortage had been deducted cannot be sustained.
9.
In B Karunakar's case (supra) Supreme Court categorically laid down that if the Disciplinary Authority was not the Inquiry Officer and if on the basis of an inquiry report submitted by an Inquiry Officer, the Disciplinary Authority chooses to impose punishment upon the employee concerned, then a copy of the inquiry report should be made available to the concerned employee to enable the employee to make representation in respect of the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
Supreme Court in B Karunakar's case (supra) also made it clear that violation of such requirements will not render the inquiry proceedings void ab initio.
Supreme Court laid down that it would be the duty of the Court to ask the writ petitioner to show how he was prejudiced due to non-supply of the inquiry report before the order of punishment was passed.
In the instant case, the trial Court came to a specific finding that due to non- supply of the inquiry report to the writ petitioner, the writ petitioner was prejudiced.
10.
There is no dispute that the appellant is a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and, therefore, the employees of the appellant can enforce the rights contained in Part III of the Constitution against the employer in a writ proceeding.
This principle had been laid down by the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia's case which was followed in All India Sainik Schools Employees case, AIR 1989 SC 88.
This benefit is not available to an employee not employed by a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The employee of a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution acquires a status which is not enjoyed by other employees.
It was argued by the learned Counsel for the appellant that the writ petitioner being a workman within the meaning of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ought to have taken recourse to the fora specified under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It is further argued by the learned Counsel for the appellant that had the writ petitioner taken recourse to the fora under Industrial Disputes Act then the appellant could have got an opportunity to prove the charges against the writ petitioner by producing evidence before the Industrial Tribunal.
11.
It is a well settled principle of law that Model Standing Orders or Certified Standing Orders constitute statutory terms and conditions of service though in Rajasthan SRTC's case, AIR 1995 SC 1715 : 1994(1) SCT 23 (SC), (supra) it was held by the Supreme Court that the Standing Orders cannot be elevated to the status of "statutory provisions" within the meaning of the phrase in Sukhdev Singh's case, AIR 1975 SC 1331, so that the same can be enforced in a writ jurisdiction like the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Even then the fact remains that the Model Standing Orders and the Standing Orders still constitute statutory terms and conditions of service and any termination of service in violation such statutory terms and conditions shall amount to deprivation of right to livelihood in violation of the procedure established by law.
Article 21 of the Constitution of India, which is available to the writ petitioner clearly lays down that no person should be deprived of his right of personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
It is well settled that right to livelihood is included within Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
In Olga Tellis, AIR 1986 SC 180, Supreme Court laid down that though Article 21 cannot be enforced for the purpose of securing a new job, but in a case of wrongful deprivation of livelihood the aggrieved person can certainly enforce his fundamental right guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution on the ground that his service has been terminated in violation of the procedures established by law.
12.
As Model Standing Orders constitute statutory terms and conditions of service, therefore, an order of dismissal in violation of the Model Standing Orders, deprives an employee of his livelihood in violation of procedures established by law which is forbidden by Article 21 of the Constitution.
In the instant case admittedly Rule 14(4)(c) of the Model Standing Order was not complied with while dismissing the writ petitioner.
There is no dispute the said Rules 14(4)(c) is mandatory, requiring strict compliance.
Thus the writ petitioner has been deprived of his livelihood in utter violation of Article 21 of the Constitution.
As inferior right sinks in or withers away in superior right, likewise violation in inferior right which results in violation of superior right then violation of inferior right sinks in or withers away in violation of superior right and an aggrieved person can move the court for enforcement of his superior right.
Therefore, in this case also, the writ petitioner could initiate a writ proceedings for enforcement of his fundamental right guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution and Rajasthan SRTC case (supra), will not stand in the way.
13.
The matter may be seen from another angle.
By a Model Standing Order certain clauses and procedures have been laid down which ought to be followed by the employer while imposing penalty on an employee.
Those clauses and procedures should be followed scrupulously.
It is now well settled that "He that lives by the procedural sword shall perish by the sword."
This principle laid down by Mr. Justice Frankfurter was approved and applied in India in International Airport Authority case, AIR 1979 SC 1628, and many other decisions of the Supreme Court including BS Minhas case, AIR 1984 SC 363.
This principle is not confined to Administrative Law only.
This principle also flows form Article 14 of our Constitution Therefore, when the appellant dismissed the writ petitioner from the service in violation of Model Standing Order No. 14(4)(c) the appellant also acted arbitrarily in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India Supreme Court in Whirlpool Corporation case, 1998(8) SCC 1, categorically laid down that where (a) the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental rights, or (b) there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice, or (c) the order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction, or (d) the vires of an Act is challenged alternative remedy is not at all a bar to initiate a proceedings before a High Court.
I am also of the opinion that an inferior right sinks in or withers away in a superior right.
Violation of Model Standing Order No. 14(4)(c) which results in violation of Articles 21 and 14 of the Constitution of India then an employee of a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India can certainly, in my opinion, without moving any forum under Industrial Disputes Act, straightaway move the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for enforcement of his fundamental rights under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
14.
The learned Counsel for the appellant did not dispute that the order of dismissal was bad and liable to be set aside.
His submission was that reinstatement should be for the limited purpose of the inquiry and not for payment of wages etc. Reliance was placed on the observation made in B Karunakar's case (supra) wherein, Supreme Court laid down "hence, in all cases where the Inquiry Officer's report is not furnished to the delinquent employee in the disciplinary proceedings, the Courts and Tribunals should cause the copy of the report to be furnished to the aggrieved employee if he has not already secured it before coming to the Court/Tribunal, and give the employee an opportunity to show how his or her case was prejudiced because of the non-supply of the report.
If after hearing the parties, the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the non-supply of the report would have made no difference to the ultimate findings and the punishment given, the Court/Tribunal should not interfere with the order of punishment.
The Court/Tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is regrettably being done at present.
The Courts should avoid resorting to short-cuts.
Since it is the Courts/Tribunals which will apply their judicial mind to the question and given their reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment, (and not any internal appellate or revisional authority) there would be neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of the reasonable opportunity.
It is only if the Court/Tribunals find that the furnishing of the report would have made a difference to the result in the case that it should set aside the order of punishment.
Where after following the above procedure, the Courts/Tribunals set aside the order of punishment, the proper relief that should be granted is to direct reinstatment of the employee with liberty to the authority/management to proceed with the inquiry, by placing the employee under suspension and continuing the inquiry from the stage of furnishing him with the report.
The question whether the employee would be entitled to the back wages and other benefits from the date of his dismissal to the date of her reinstatement if ultimately ordered should invariably be left to be decided by the authority concerned according to law, after the culmination of the proceedings and depending on the final outcome.
If the employee succeeds in the fresh inquiry and is directed to be reinstated, the authority should be at liberty to decide according to law how it will treat the period from the date of dismissal till the reinstatement and to what benefits, if any and the extend of the benefits he will be entitled.
The reinstatement made as a result of the setting aside of the enquiry for failure to furnish the report should be treated as a reinstatement for the purpose of holding the fresh inquiry from the stage of furnishing the report and no more, where such fresh inquiry is held.
That will also be the correct position in law."
15.
Assuming this to be so, the principle is limited to a situation where the dismissal order is set aside only because of non-suply of inquiry report.
But in the instant case, there is also another ground for setting aside the order of dismissal and that is violation of rule 14(4)(c) of the Model Standing Order.
That being the position the effect of setting aside the order of dismissal would be that the petitioner be put into the service with effect from the date of his dismissal and he would get he benefits that the was getting immediately prior to his date of dismissal.
16.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove, we find that there is no merit in the instant appeal and the appeal is dismissed without any order as to costs.
Interim order, if there is any, is vacated.
Appeal dismissed.