GS Singhvi, J - These petitions have been filed for quashing the selection and appointments of non-official respondents as Ophthalmic Assistants.
2.
The records of these cases show that for filling up 41 posts of Ophthalmic Assistant requisitions were sent to the Employment Exchanges and other sponsoring agencies during November, 1992.
In all 207 candidates were sponsored but only 114 of them appeared for interview held on 22nd and 23rd December, 1992.
However, before the selection could be finalised, the Government of Punjab intervened and directed the respondent No. 2 to hold fresh interviews.
Accordingly, 114 candidates who had appeared in the viva voce test on 22nd and 23rd December, 1992 were again called for interview on 9111993.
Of them, 110 actually appeared in the interview.
In the meantime, government sanctioned 15 more posts of Ophthalmic Assistants.
Therefore, the Departmental Selection Committee recommended 20 General Category, 9 Scheduled Castes, 1 Backward Class, 4 Ex-Servicemen and 21 Sportsmen for appointment against the available vacant posts.
The criteria adopted by the Departmental Selection Committee was :  Total marks : 100  (i) 10% of the marks obtained in the academic qualifications i.e. 10+2 etc.  (ii) 70% of the marks obtained in the professional course i.e. Ophthalmic Assistant Diploma;  (iii) 20% marks for interview.
3.
12 out of the 20 General Category candidates recommended by the Departmental Selection Committee were given appointments but the remaining 8 could not be given appointment because of the stay order dated 8.12.1993 passed by the High Court in CWP No. 15111 of 1993.
That petition was finally decided on 351994.
The relevant portion of the order passed by the High Court reads as under :-  "The petitioners have sought issuance of a direction to respondent No. 2 to conduct their interview for the posts of Ophthalmic Assistants and for a direction to the respondents No. 3 and 4 to send their names to respondent No. 2 for interview.
At the time of notice of motion, it was directed that in case any appointments are made to the posts of Ophthalmic Assistants, the respondents shall keep 8 posts vacant.
It is conceded that all the 8 posts are still lying vacant.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners were not afforded the opportunity of being considered, as names of some of the petitioners could not be sponsored by respondents No. 3 and 4.
In view of the fact that 8 posts of Ophthalmic Assistants are lying vacant, this petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to direct the Employment Exchanges in the State for sending the names of eligible candidates for the posts of Ophthalmic Assistants and consider all such eligible candidates along with the petitioners for the aforesaid 8 posts of Ophthalmic Assistants.
The selection be made according to merit of the persons appearing before respondent No. 2.
The needful be done within two months."
4.
In compliance of the Court's direction, fresh requisition was sent to the Employment Exchanges and 102 candidates were interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee on 1171994 for appointment against 10 posts of Ophthalmic Assistants which included 8 posts which could not be filled due to the stay order of the High Court.
Of the remaining two posts, one was of General Category which remained unfilled due to non-joining of the selected candidate and one post reserved for Ex-Serviceman was left unfilled because the selected candidate could not produce documents to prove his eligibility.
Those recommended by the Departmental Selection Committee were appointed against the available vacant posts of Ophthalmic Assistants.
Of them, only Kusum Lata daughter of Baldev Raj was selected in the previous selection and the remaining 9 candidates are fresh recommendees.
5.
The petitioners have prayed for quashing of the selection and appointment of non-official respondents mainly on the ground of violation of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
They have pleaded that the recommendations made by the Departmental Selection Committee are vitiated due to the inter play of extraneous factors.
They have further pleaded that the Departmental Selection Committee could not have selected new candidates ignoring its earlier recommendations.
The allocation of marks in the viva voce has also been challenged on the ground of arbitrariness, bias and mala fides.
6.
The official as well as non-official respondents have supported the impugned selection.
In separate written statement filed by them, it has been averred that the recommendations made by the Selection Committee do not warrant interference by the Court because no allegation of personal ill-will or mala fide has been levelled against the members of the Committee.
They have also averred that the academic and professional attainments of the candidates and their performance in the viva voce were taken into consideration by the Departmental Selection Committee for assessing their relevant merit and, therefore, its recommendations cannot be declared as arbitrary.
7.
Before considering the respective submission urged by the learned counsel for the parties, we deem it necessary to take notice of the developments which have taken place during the pendency of these cases.
On 1071996, the Court directed respondent No. 2 i.e. Director-cum-Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee to produce the result of selected candidates with minutes details.
In compliance of that order, Dr. Manmohan Kaur filed typed copy of the minutes of the meeting of the Departmental Selection Committee held on 9111993 and 1171994 along with 18 unsigned photostat copies of what were described as the sheets containing the calculation of marks awarded to the candidates in the interviews held on 9111993 and 1171994.
On 9101997, the case was adjourned to 11101996 to enable the learned counsel to produce the related record.
On 11101996, the Court after taking cognizance of the affidavit of Dr. Manmohan Kaur, passed the following order :  "In compliance with the direction by this Court for production of record, the respondents have produced an affidavit of Ms. Manmohan Kaur, Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, wherein the deponent has stated that the record of the selection which has been impugned in this writ petition was with Dr. DS Bakshi, the then Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab and that the record is not available with the present incumbent.
Remarks by Dr. NC Mann, Joint Director (Dental), who is a member of the Selection Committee have also been produced on the letter written by Dr. DS Bakshi to the Director.
Since the Department is not in a position to produce the relevant record, we deem it proper to issue notice to Dr. DS Bakshi, the then Director, Health and Family Welfare, who is residing at House No. 1523, Sector 32-D, Chandigarh to appear and produce the record of impugned selection and/or show to the Court as to whom the record was handed over by the then Selection Committee.
Notice be issued to Dr. DS Bakshi for 18111996.
A copy of the affidavit of Dr. Manmohan Kaur and a copy of the order passed by this Court today shall be sent to Dr. Bakshi along with the notice.
8.
On 1141997, the Court accepted the request made by Dr. DS Bakshi, former Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab for adjournment of the case.
On 1181997, the learned Deputy Advocate General stated before the Court that he does not have the record relating to the selection.
In view of his statement and also in view of the affidavit filed by Dr. DS Bakshi that he does not have the record, the Court directed the concerned officer of the department to lodge first information report regarding loss of the record.
The Investigating Officer was directed to complete the investigation within two months and submit a report to the Court.
On 11111997, Shri Hemant Bassi, appearing on behalf of the Investigating Officer, produced a sealed envelope containing the original record relating to the selection of Ophthalmic Assistants.
The hearing of the case was then adjourned to 12121997 in order to enable the learned counsel for the parties to inspect record made available by the Investing Officer.
On the next date of hearing i.e. 12121997, the learned Deputy Advocate General stated that the record secured by the Investigating Officer is not the only record relating to the selection impugned in these petitions.
He was granted time to file additional affidavit.
Thereafter, affidavit dated 1721998 was filed by Dr. NC Mann, Additional Director (Dental), Director to Health and Family Welfare, Punjab along with notings recorded on the file of the department.
9.
Shri PK Goklaney and Shri Gurcharan Dass, counsel for the petitioners argued that the appointments of non-official respondents should be quashed because record of the Departmental Selection Committee does not contain the marks awarded to the candidates who appeared in the interview.
They submitted that no rational method was adopted by the Departmental Selection Committee for making recommendations in favour of the non-official respondents and as such, the appointments made on its recommendations should be treated as violative of the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that the record produced by the Investigating Officer does not contain any material showing award of marks to the candidates who appeared in the interviews but other counsel pleaded for upholding of the selection by arguing that the petitioners cannot compete with the selected candidates because of their inferior academic record.
They pleaded for upholding the selection by arguing that the selected candidates cannot be made to suffer simply because the departmental authorities have tampered with the record or they have not kept the record intact.
10.
We have given serious thought to the respective submissions and have carefully gone through the record produced by Shri Hemant Bassi.
The proceedings of the Departmental Selection Committee held on 9111993 show that it had recommended 43 candidates of General category including 6 in the waiting list and 1 in the waiting listing of Sports Persons.
Of these, 12 General Category candidates were given appointments.
The proceedings of the meeting of the Departmental Selection Committee held on 1171994 show that names of 10 candidates were recommended.
The total marks awarded to these 10 candidates have been indicated in these minutes.
A perusal of the remaining record shows that there are two sets of sheets showing the determination of percentage of marks of the candidates who appeared in the interviews on 1171994.
A careful study of these sheets reveal the following features :-  (i) There is no column in either set of sheets for award of marks in the viva voce.
(ii) In one of the two sets grades C.B., B+, B++, A have been given to some candidates by lead pencil on pages 2 and 3.
On the remaining pages, no grading has been given in respect of the remaining candidates.
In the second set of sheets, there is no grading on any of the pages; (iii) The sheets have not been signed by the members of the Departmental Selection Committee or by respondent No. 2.
It, is thus, evident that the Departmental Selection Committee did not evaluate the performance of the candidates who appeared in the viva voce.
The learned Deputy Advocate General and counsel appearing for the selected candidates could not explain as to how in the list incorporated in the minutes of the meeting of the Departmental Committee held on 1171994 the aggregate marks have been shown against the names of 10 selected candidates, though there is not even a semblance of evidence on record to show that the Committee assessed all those who appeared before it for interview.
The making of different grades with lead pencil against the names of about 18-20 candidates only is also shrouded with mystery.
All this is sufficient to hold that the entire selection is farcical and total antithesis of the doctrine of equality in the matter of employment.
Therefore, we find ample justification to declare the impugned selection and appointment as violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
11.
In the result, we allow the writ petitions and quash the selection and appointments of non-official respondents on the posts of Ophthalmic Assistants.
For the purpose of fresh recruitment, we direct that :  (i) the respondent No. 2 shall send the list of candidates who had appeared in the interviews held on 1171994 to the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board; (ii) the Board shall get a notice published in the newspapers in January, 1999 inviting for interview 102 candidates who had appeared for viva voce on 1171994; (iii) individual notices shall also be sent to the 102 candidates as per the particulars made available by the respondent No. 2; (iv) the Board shall interview the candidates and finalise the selection within a maximum period of three months; (v) the list of selected candidates be published immediately on the conclusion of interviews; (vi) the respondent No. 2 shall appoint the selected candidates within 15 days of the receipt of the select list from the Board; and (vii) the non-official respondents whose selection and appointments have been quashed shall continue to hold their respective posts till the issuance of fresh orders of appointments on the recommendations of the Board.
If they are found suitable by the Board, then their services shall be treated as continued without interruption, else they shall be replaced by candidates appointed on the recommendations of the Board.
12.
The record made available to the Investigating Officer be put in a sealed cover and be kept with the respondent No. 2.
The case registered under the orders of the Court shall now be treated as closed and the final report be submitted before the appropriate Court.
Attested copy of this order be given to the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab.
Petitions allowed.