GS Singhvi, J - In order to decide whether the award passed by the Labour Court declining the relief of reinstatement to the petitioner-workman suffers from an error of law and requires interference by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, we may notice the relevant facts.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as ad hoc Clerk on 2011987 for a fixed period of 89 days by the Chief Engineer/KAD, Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh.
The tenure of her appointment was extended from time to time by grant of similar fixed term appointments with intermittent gap of 3 days.
She proceeded on maternity leave in January, 1988.
When she reported back for duty on 19.4.1988, the concerned authority refused to allow her to join.
This was challenged by the petitioner in CWP No. 1380 of 1989 which was dismissed on 4111992 in order to enable her to approach the Labour Court.
Thereafter, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh.
3.
In the statement of claim filed by her, the petitioner challenged the legality of the termination of her service on the ground of violation of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the 1947 Act).
She also pleaded that the action of the employer terminating her service amounts to unfair labour practice.
4.
The respondents challenged the jurisdiction of the Labour Court by stating that the Irrigation Department does not fall within the definition of "industry" and that she is not entitled to seek reinstatement on the ground of alleged violation of the provisions of the 1947 Act.
5.
The petitioner appeared as a witness before the Labour Court to support the averments made in the statement of claim.
Shri Rattan Singh, Superintendent in the office of the Chief Engineer, Irrigation, Punjab appeared as the employer's witness.
6.
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court analysed the pleadings and evidence of the parties and held that the case of the workman is covered by Section 2(oo)(bb) of the 1947 Act and, therefore, the termination of her service cannot be invalidated.
7.
Shri NK Nagar argued that the impugned award should be quashed because it suffers from an error of law, inasmuch as the finding recorded by the Labour Court about the nature of petitioner's employment is perverse.
Learned counsel submitted that the post against which the petitioner was appointed was a permanent post and not a temporary or fixed tenure post warranting the automatic termination of service of the petitioner at the end of the tenure or due to abolition of the post and, therefore, the mere fact that she was appointed with intermittent breaks of 3 days cannot be made basis for holding that it is not a case of retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act.
Learned counsel read out the statement of Shri Rattan Singh and submitted that the existence of permanent post against which the petitioner was employed is proved by the categorical admission made by the department's witness.
Shri Nagar further submitted that the failure of the employer to give one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof and retrenchment compensation as required by Section 25-F(a) and (b) of the 1947 Act should be treated as sufficient to invalidate the termination of her service.
The learned Deputy Advocate General supported the impugned award and prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
He argued that the finding recorded by the Labour Court about the nature of petitioner's engagement is a pure finding of fact and this Court should not interfere with such finding.
He relied on the contents of Annexure R1 dated 2011987 to show that the initial appointment of the petitioner was against a temporary vacancy and she did not acquire right to remain in service indefinitely.
8.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and carefully perused the record.
Admittedly, the petitioner was offered appointment as ad hoc Clerk on 2011987 in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 for a period of 89 days without any commitment for regularisation of her service and with a clear stipulation that her services can be dispensed with at any time without assigning any reason.
However, on the expiry of 89 days period, the tenure of her service was extended on 2041987 after a gap of 3 days.
Similar extensions were granted on 2071987 and 19101987.
In the statement made by her before the Labour Court, the petitioner stated that she had worked between 2011987 and 15.1.1988 and she was not given positing order after return from maternity leave and that no notice or compensation was paid at the time of termination of her service.
In his examination-in-chief, Rattan Singh stated that the services of the petitioner were dispensed with because they were no longer required and her term expired on 20.3.1988.
In the cross-examination, he stated as under :  "The worker attended to clerical duties.
Regular vacancies existed at the time worker was offered ad hoc appointment for 89 days.
By the time she was granted the extension the vacancy also existed.
At the time her services were dispensed with I am not sure if vacancy existed.
Her services were however terminated in view of the stipulation in her letter of appointment as the department intended to fill the post through regular selected candidates.
No regular selection was made by the department except on compassionate grounds or on transfer basis.
If the statement of Rattan Singh is read in conjunction with the admitted facts brought on record, there is little difficulty in holding that the petitioner was appointed as a Clerk on ad hoc basis against a clear vacant post and her service was discontinued even though regularly selected candidate had not been made available.
In fact, it is not even the case of the respondents that the services of the petitioner were terminated due to the availability of candidate recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
It is also not their case that the termination of the petitioner's service was necessitated due to the abolition of the post or cessation of work against which she was initially employed.
Rather, it is an admitted position that the posts of Clerk were available at the time of termination of her service.
In view of this, we are inclined to agree with Shri Nagar that the finding recorded by the Labour Court about the nature of the petitioner's employment and the applicability of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the 1947 Act is perverse.
We are also inclined to agree with Shri Nagar that the action of the employer to appoint the petitioner for fixed tenure of 89 days amounts to unfair labour practice resorted by the employer in order to frustrate the rights acquired by the petitioner under the 1947 Act.
9.
The ambit and scope of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the 1947 Act has been considered by this Court in the following decisions :  (i) Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) RSJ 133 : 1996(4) SCT 44 (P&H);  (ii) Nar Singh v. The Presiding Officer and another, 1997(2) RSJ 266;  (iii) Haryana Warehousing Corporation v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Rohtak and another, 1997(1) SCT 258 (P&H);  (vi) Bhikhu Ram v. The Presiding Officer, Industrial-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, 1998(1) RSJ 703; and  (v) Simla Devi v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda and others, 1982(2) RSJ 55.
10.
In first of the above noted decisions, a Division Bench of this Court examined the correctness of the award passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Gurgaon directing the reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service and full back wages.
The facts appearing in the report show that the workman was employed for a fixed tenure and his services were continued with notional breaks.
It was urged on behalf of the employer that the termination of the service of the workman was covered by Section 2(oo)(bb) of the 1947 Act and not by Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act.
While rejecting this contention, the Division Bench held that the action of the employer to employ the workman for fixed tenure amounted to unfair labour practice and as he had worked for more than 240 days in a period of 12 months preceding the termination of his service, the employer was bound to comply with the provisions of Section 25F of the 1947 Act.
11.
In Nar Singh v. The Presiding Officer and another (supra), the court found that the petitioner had worked for 853 days during his service tenure of 2 years, 5 months and 24 days and that his service was terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act.
It was urged on behalf of the employer that the termination of the petitioner's service as a result of non-renewal of the contract of employment falls within the ambit of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the 1947 Act.
Repelling this argument, RL Anand, J held as under :  "The so-called notional breaks were given by the Management so that the petitioner may not take the benefit of provisions of Industrial Disputes Act and such an act has never been encouraged by the law courts being an unfair Labour practice.
The onus was upon the management to establish that his case was squarely covered under the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
No amount of evidence has been led prima facie to establish that the petitioner's appointment was for a specified period.
The extensions given from time to time by the contesting respondent show that it wanted to take the advantage by depriving the petitioner of the benefits of Industrial Disputes Act.
Admittedly, in this case, provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act have not been complied with by the respondent No. 2 before terminating the services of the petitioner and as such the action on the part of the respondent becomes bad.
Similarly, the award Annexure P2 cannot be endorsed as the Labour Court had committed a patent illegality which has to be interfered and remedied in the writ jurisdiction."
12.
In Haryana Warehousing Corporation v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Rohtak and another (supra), the Division Bench held that clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) is in the nature of exception and a person who invokes the said clause for contesting the claim of the workman for reinstatement must prove the existence of conditions for invoking the said provision.
13.
In Bhikhu Ram's case (supra), the Court dealt with a case similar to the present one.
The facts of that case show that the workman was initially appointed for a period of 89 days but he was re-employed after the expiry of the tenure of first appointment and this process continued for a sufficiently long time.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute challenging the termination of his service.
He contended that the action of the employer is violative of Sections 25-F and 25-G of the 1947 Act.
The employer contested the case by asserting that the termination of the petitioner's service is covered by Section 2(oo)(bb) of the 1947 Act.
The Labour Court upheld the employer's plea and answered the reference against the petitioner.
This Court examined the ambit and scope of Section 2(oo) along with its various clauses including clause (bb) of Section 25-F of the Act and after making reference to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. AD Divakar, AIR 1957 SC 121; Anakapalla Co-operative Agricultural and Industrial Society Ltd v. Workmen, 1963 Suppl.
(1) SCR 730; Workmen of Subong Tea Estate v. The outgoing Management of Subong Tea Estate and another, 1964(5) SCR 602; Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhu Nath Mukherjee and others, 1978(1) SCR 591; State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundra Dey, AIR 1976 SC 1111; Hindustan Steel Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1997(1) SCR 586; Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219; Mohan Lal v. Management of M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd, AIR 1981 SC 1253; Surendra Kumar Verma v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, AIR 1981 SC 422; L Robert D Souza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railway and another, AIR 1982 SC 854; Management of Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, Bangalore v. M Boraiah, 1984(1) SCC 244; Gammon India Ltd v. Niranjan Dass, 1984(1) SCC 509; Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and others, JT 1990(2) SC 489 and Sections 2(ra), 25-I, 25-U as well Fifth Schedule (Part-I), the Court held as under :-  "Paragraphs 5 and 10 of the Fifth Schedule show that termination of service of workman by way of discharge or dismissal will be treated as unfair labour practice, if it is established that the same has been brought about by way of victimization or where the employer's action is not in good faith but is in the colourable exercise of the employer's rights or where termination is for patently false reason or where there is an utter disregard of principles of natural justice in the conduct of enquiry or where the misconduct is of minor or technical nature.
Similarly, where the employer engages workmen as "badli", casual of temporary and continues them in the same capacity for years together with the object of depriving them of the status and privileges of permanent workmen, the employer's action would be termed as unfair labour practice.
Therefore, while interpreting and applying various parts of Section 2(oo), the competent Labour Court/Tribunal shall have to keep in mind the provisions of Section 2(ra) read with Section 25-T and U and various paragraphs of the Fifth Schedule and if it is found that the action of the employer to engage a workman on casual basis or as a daily-wager or even on temporary basis for long periods of time with intermittent breaks and subsequent termination of service of such workman on the pretext of non- renewal of contract of employment or termination of contract of employment on the basis of a stipulation contained therein is an act of unfair labour practice, such an action of the employer will have to be nullified and the Court will be fully justified in rejecting the plea of the employer that the termination of service of the workman does not amount to retrenchment but is covered by clause (bb).
In the context of various paragraphs of the Fifth Schedule, clause (bb) which is an exception to the principal section will have to be given a narrow interpretation.
This clause has the effect of taking away a right which was vesting in the workman prior to its insertion.
Therefore, the same cannot be allowed to be used as a tool of exploitation by the employer who, as already observed above, enjoys a position of dominance as against the workman.
The employer is always in a position to dictate the terms of service vis-a-vis the workman or a to be workman.
The employer can unilaterly impose oppressive and unreasonable conditions of service and the workman will be left with little choice but to accept all such conditions.
The employee cannot possibly protest against the incorporation of arbitrary, unreasonable and even unconsciousable conditions of service in the contract of employment.
Any such protest by the employee or a to be employee will cost him job or a chance to enter employment.
In respect of a work of permanent or continuing nature, the employer can always give an employment of fixed term or incorporate condition in the contract of employment/appointment letter that the employment will come to an end automatically after a particular period or on the happening of a particular event.
In such a situation, if the Courts finds that the conditions are arbitrary and unreasonable and the employer has forced these conditions upon a workman with the sole object of avoiding his obligation under the Industrial Disputes Act, a bald plea of the employer that the termination of service is covered by clause (bb) will be liable to be rejected."
The Division Bench also referred to general principles of law relating to ad hoc appointments and after taking note of the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) RSJ 235 : 1992(4) SCC 118 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC); Manager Government Branch Press v. DB Ballippa, AIR 1979 SC 429; EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojonath Ganguly, AIR 1986 SC 1571, it held as under :-  "Though the principle laid down by the Supreme Court in cases relating to public appointment cannot strictly be applied to the cases of workmen, who are governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, it is perfectly legitimate to take view the rationale of the principle laid down in those cases can certainly be applied to the cases arising under the Act.
It is interesting to note that the rule of `last come first go' has been statutorily recognised in the cases of industrial workers by virtue of Section 25-G Likewise, the duty imposed on the employer to make an offer of re- employment to a retrenched employee in terms of Section 25-H of the Act shows that another facet of equality clause has been incorporated in the Act.
By treating the employer's action of dismissal or discharge brought about in colourable exercise of the employer's rights or where there is want of good faith as unfair labour practice of termination of service for patently false reasons or other similar acts of the employer enumerated as acts of unfair labour practice, the legislature has indirectly incorporated the Equality Clause in the Act.
The new dimension given to the provisions of Article 14 by the Apex Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597, and further extension of those principles of Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1991(1) SCT 575 : AIR 1991 SC 537, virtually find their reflection in various paragraphs of the Fifth Schedule.
In fact, what is implicit in the Equality Clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 has been made explicit in the Fifth Schedule.
Therefore, in every case of termination of service of a workman, where the workman claims that he was worked for a period of 240 days in a period of twelve months and termination of his service is void for want of compliance with the requirement of Section 25-F and where the employer pleads that termination of service has been brought about in accordance with the terms of contract of employment or termination is as a result of non-extension of term of employment, the Court will have to carefully scrutinise all the facts and apply the relevant provisions of law.
It will be the duty of the Court to determine the nature of employment with reference to the nature of duties performed by the workman and the type of job for which he was employed.
Once the employee establishes that he was employed for a work of permanent/continuous nature and that employer has arbitrarily terminated his service in order to defeat his rights under the Industrial Disputes Act or other labour legislations, a presumption can appropriately be drawn by the Court that the employer's action amounts to unfair labour practice.
In such a case, burden will lie on the employer to prove that the workman was engaged to do a particular job and even though the employee may have worked for 240 days such employment should be treated as covered by the amended clause because the service was terminated on the completion of the work.
A stipulation in the contract that the employment would be for a specified period or till the completion of a particular job may legitimately bring the termination of service within the ambit of clause (bb).
However, if the employer resorts to methodology of giving fixed term appointment with a view to take it out of the Section 2(oo) and terminate the service despite the continuity of the work and job requirements the Court may be justified to draw an inference that the employer's action lacks bona fide or that he has unfairly resorted to his right to terminate the service of the employee."
The Court also made reference to the judgments of the various High Courts in Shailendra Nath Shukla v. Vice Chancellor, Allahabad University and others, 1987 Lab.
IC 1607; Dilip Hanumantrao Shirke v. Zila Parishad, Yavatmal, 1990 Lab.IC 100; K Rajendran v. Director, P.&E.
Corpn.
of India Ltd, New Delhi, 1992 Lab.IC 909; Jayabharat Printers and Publishers Pvt. Ltd. v. Labour Court, Kozhikode and others, 1994(II) LLJ 373; Balbir Singh v. Kurukshetra Central Coop.
Bank Ltd, 1989(2) RSJ 55 : 1990 LLJ 443; Raj Bahadur v. General Manager, Food Specialities Limited, 1991(1) PLR 631; Haryana State Federation of Consumers Co-op.
Wholesale Stores Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1991(1) SCT 697 : 1992(1) SCT 697 (P&H); Kurukshetra Central Coop.
Bank Ltd v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) RSJ 763 : 1993(1) SCT 109; JJ Shrimali v. District Development Officer, Zilla Panchayat, 1989 Lab.
IC 689; Chakradhar Tripathy v. State of Orissa, 1991 Lab.
IC 1813; Ram Prasad v. State of Rajasthan, 1992 Lab.IC 2139; and M Venugopal v. The Divisional Manager Life Insurance Corporation of India, 1994(2) RSJ 359 : JT 1994(1) SC 281 : 1994(1) SCT 858 (SC).
"From the above, it is clear that termination of service of a workman who has worked under an employer for 240 days in a period of twelve months preceding the date of termination of service will ordinarily be declared as void if it is found that the employer has violated the provisions of Section 25-F(a) and (b).
If the employer resists the claim of the workman and invokes Section 2(oo)(bb), burden lies on the employer to show that though the employee has worked for 240 days in twelve months prior to termination of his service, such termination of service cannot be treated as retrenchment because it is in accordance with the terms of the contract of employment or on account of non- renewal of the contract of employment.
It has also to be shown by the employer that the workman had been employed for a specified work and the job which was being performed by the employee is no more required.
Only a bona fide exercise of right by an employer to terminate the service in terms of the contract of employment or for non-renewal of the contract will be covered by the clause (bb).
If the Court finds that the exercise of rights by the employer is not bona fide or the employer has adopted the methodology of fixed term employment as a conduit or mechanism to frustrate the rights of the workman, the termination of the service will not be covered by the exception contained in clause (bb).
Instead the action the employer will have to be treated as an act of unfair labour practice, as specified in the Fifth Schedule of the Act.
The various judgments rendered by the different High Courts and the Supreme Court clearly bring out the principle that only a bona fide exercise of the powers by the employer in cases where the work is of specified nature or where the temporary employee is replaced by a regular employee the action of the employer will be upheld.
In all other cases, the termination of service will be treated as retrenchment unless they are covered by other exceptions set out hereinabove."
15.
The judgment of Bhikhu Ram's case (supra) has been applied in Simla Devi's case (supra) for holding that the termination of the service of the petitioner amounted to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act.
16.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that the termination of the petitioner's service amounted to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act and the finding recorded by the Labour Court that her case falls within the scope of clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act is patently erroneous.
17.
On the issue of non-compliance of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act, there is no controversy between the parties.
Rather, it is an admitted fact that neither any notice or pay in lieu thereof nor the retrenchment compensation were offered to the petitioner before or at the time of termination of her services.
Therefore, the termination of petitioner's service is liable to be declared as null and void.
18.
The question which remains to be considered is whether the petitioner is entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
Ordinarily, we would have directed the reinstatement of the petitioner with continuity of service leaving her free to make application under Section 33- C(2) of the 1947 Act for relief of back wages.
However, in view of the statement made by Shri Nagar that his client will feel satisfied if only 25% back wages are awarded to her, we do not consider it necessary to relegate her to the remedy under Section 33-C(2) of the 1947 Act.
19.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The award dated 11.4.1996 passed by Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh is set aside.
The official respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner in service with the benefit of continuity.
She shall be paid 25% of the back wages.
Petition allowed.