GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed for quashing the order Annexure P-4 dated 631998 passed by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, declining appointment to the petitioner on the post of Hindi Teacher on the ground that she does not possess the qualifications specified in the advertisement.
2.
A brief statement of the background of the case would enable us to appreciate the grievance of the petitioner in a correct perspective.
On the basis of advertisement issued in November, 1990 for recruitment to the posts of Lecturers, Teachers and Masters in different subjects 5070 candidates were appointed in different categories.
These selections were quashed by the High Court but the order of the High Court was reversed by the Apex Court in Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal filed by the State of Haryana and some of the selected candidates.
On 8101992, their Lordships of the Supreme Court ordered that the appointment of 5070 candidates be treated as regular and the unselected candidates should be interviewed afresh for the purpose of selection and appointment against the posts/vacancies which are available on the date of decision of the SLPs and also on the vacancies becoming available within one year from the date of issuance of the fresh select list.
3.
The exercise undertaken by the department in the purported compliance of the directions given by the Supreme Court led to the institution of a batch of writ petitions in which the petitioners complained that the department has not given appointment to the selected candidates even though vacant posts had become available within the period of one year and that the methodology of pick and choose had been adopted.
While disposing ofCivil Writ Petition No. 6248 of 1994, Ramesh Chander and another v. State of Haryana and others along with other connected petitions on 19111996 : 1997(1) SCT 557 (P&H); a Division Bench of this Court gave the following directions :-  "(1) The respondents shall get published within one month from today the list of selected candidates in The Tribune (Hindi Edition).
(2) They shall also get published the number of vacancies which had occurred during the period of one year as contemplated by the Supreme Court's order and give specific indication regarding unfilled vacancies.
(3) The respondents should also indicate the appropriate number of reserved vacancies meant for Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes/Ex-servicemen/Physically Handicapped persons.
(4) The respondents should also indicate the number of vacancies meant for male and female categories.
(5) Within one month of the publication of the select list, appointment orders should be issued strictly in accordance with the merit position.
(6) In case the candidates who are offered appointment do not join within the stipulated period, the respondent No. 2 should repeat the exercise by giving appointment to those who are lower in merit.
(7) Any person aggrieved by denial of appointment may make representation to respondent No. 2 and such representation shall be disposed of within two months by a speaking order."
4.
In compliance of the High Court's order, the respondent No. 2 published the details of the posts which became available between 8101992 and 921994 and the list of selected candidates.
The petitioner, whose name figured at No. 4 among the general category (female) candidates who were found suitable for appointment as Hindi Teacher in District Bhiwani, made representation for her appointment against one of the three posts in that district by contending that one of the candidates placed above her did not join the post in pursuance of the offer of appointment given by the respondent No. 2.
She also served a notice of demand for justice, in response to which the respondent No. 2 passed the impugned order refusing to appoint her on the ground that she does not possess the requisite qualifications.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the judgment of this Court in Seema Nagpal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(1) RSJ 87 : 1997(4) SCT 605 (P&H); and the circular letter No. 34/93/78-5.GSI dated 1661979 issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana and argued that the petitioner, who possessed the qualifications of BA with Hindi as elective subject, B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject and MA in Hindi, is entitled to be appointed against the unfilled post of Hindi Teacher as of right.
He further argued that after having selected the petitioner and included her name in the list of candidates found eligible for appointment as Hindi Teacher, the respondent No. 2 cannot refuse to appoint her against the post which has remained unfilled due to non-joining of the candidate placed higher than her in the order of merit.
Shri Sangwan submitted that the petitioner who possesses the qualification of MA in Hindi, which is higher than the qualifications specified in the advertisement is entitled to be appointed in view of the instructions issued by the government vide circular letter dated 1661979.
The learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that in view of the instructions issued by the Government, the eligibility of the petitioner cannot be questioned.
6.
In our opinion, denial of appointment to the petitioner against the vacancy which has remained unfilled due to non-joining of one of the selected candidates has resulted in violation of her fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment granted to her by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and we agree with Shri Sangwan that the petitioner, who possesses qualifications higher than those notified in the advertisement, cannot be denied appointment on the ground that she has not passed Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi).
In Seema Nagpal's case (supra), reference has been made to the order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 18427 of 1994, Smt. Saroj Bala v. State of Haryana and others.
In that case, this Court took cognizance of the fact that candidates possessing the qualification of BA with Hindi have been treated as eligible for appointment as Hindi Teachers because the government has treated the said qualification to be equivalent to Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi) and a number of candidates possessing the qualification of BA with Hindi have, in fact, been appointed as Hindi Teachers.
The learned Deputy Advocate General has not been able to controvert the fact that the candidates possessing the qualifications of BA with Hindi and B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject have been appointed on the posts of Hindi Teachers.
Thus, the decision of the respondent No. 2 not to appoint the petitioner as Hindi Teacher cannot be sustained.
7.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and quash Annexure-P4.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to offer appointment to the petitioner on the post of Hindi Teacher within a period of one month from today.
In case, one of the three posts notified in the list published on 271997 is found to be not available, the respondent No. 2 shall communicate the same to the petitioner within this period of one month.
Petition allowed.