Binod Kumar Roy, J - Through this writ petition filed on 481998 the petitioner has come up with a prayer to quash the Communication dated 31594 of the District Magistrate, Faizabad (as contained in Annexure-5) initmating that her husband had died during General Election of 1991 due to Heart Attack and thus her claim laid before the Oriental Insurance Company Limited under the Accident Policy is not acceptable.
2.
However, the Stamp Reporter vide his endorsement made on 27.7.1998 has raised the following objection :-  "It should be filed before the Lucknow Bench of this Hon'ble Court."
3.
To this objection Sri APN Giri, the learned counsel noted below it as follows :-  "Note : The petitioner is permanent resident of Dist.
Allahabad from where he may sue or be suid vis-a-vis the petitioner may sue from Allahabad for the cause happened in its territory.
Therefore kindly submit it before Court for final decision of this Hon'ble Court.
27.7.98  Sd/-, APN Giri, Adv.
Counsel for Petitioner."
4.
Mr. APN Giri, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner contested this objection of the office stating that in view of the fact that the impugned order has been communicated to the petitioner at her Allahabad address besides in the Insurance policy the residential address of her deceased husband was also shown as Allahabad the cause of action has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of the Principal Bench of the Court.
5.
In our view this explanation has to be rejected in view of three decisions of the Apex Court.
In State of Rajasthan v. M/s. Swaika Properties, AIR 1985 SC 1289 it was laid down that receipt of the notice of the land acquisition proceeding in West Bengal will not confer jurisdiction in the Calcutta High Court to entertain a writ petition to quash land acquisition proceeding initiated in the State of Rajasthan.
In O.N.G.C.
v. Uppal Kumar, 1994(4) SCC 711 : 1994 AIR SCW 3287, following the aforesaid decision, the Apex Court noted with distress the persistence of the Calcutta High Court in exercising its jurisdiction even though no part of cause of action has arisen within its territorial jurisdiction.
Explaining our UP High Court (Amalgamation) Order, 1948 in UP Rashtriya Chini Mill Adhikari Parishad v. State of UP, AIR 1995 SC 2148 it was held that the territorial jurisdiction of a Court and the "cause of action" are interlinked and it is necessary to find out the place where the latter has arisen and that the petitioner got aggrieved only from the order which arose from Lucknow and thereby at Lucknow and accordingly the Lucknow Bench had the jurisdiction to deal with the matter.
For the aforementioned reason, we accept the note of the office and dismiss this writ petition as not maintainable with liberty to the petitioner that if she considers objectively that she has a good case to be adjudicated she may move the Lucknow Bench of the Court.
6.
Before parting we also put on the record that Sri APN Giri, when apprised of the aforesaid decision by us after his submissions were over he had prayed for time to cite certain decisions allegedly supporting his submissions without disclosing their citation and, accordingly, we had refused to adjourn this case as this case was already adjourned at his instance on 20.8.1998 for 2581998 but taken up today.
Petition dismissed.