Dibyendu Bhusan Dutta, J - By an order dated 24798 keeping in view the urgency of the matter and in particular the fact that career of students was involved, the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education was directed to publish the results of the students who appeared in the Madhyamik Examination pursuant to the order dated 10th March, 1998 passed by the learned trial Judge in Civil Order No. 1799(W) of 1996.
2.
We may now proceed to assign reasons in support of the said order.
3.
This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 10th March, 1998 passed by a learned single Judge of this Court in Civil Order No. 1799(W) of 1996.
4.
The fact of the matter lies in a very narrows compass.
One Garifa Arati Academy for Girls (hereinafter referred to ass `the school') was established in the year 1971 as a X-Class High School.
The said school was recognised as II-Class Junior School in the year 1974 and as IV-class Junior High School in the year 1979.
An application has been filed for upgradation of the said school as Class-X High School in the year 1980.
The said representation was forwarded by the Director of School Education for taking appropriate action whereafter, an inspection was held by the Assistant Inspector of Schools.
Before the said authority all papers and documents were filed.
5.
During the period 1982-93 the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education (hereinafter referred to as the Board) allowed the students of the said school to appear at the said Examination suo moto.
However, on 24991 the school authority moved a writ application which was marked as Civil Order No. 3713(W) of 1991 stating the aforementioned facts on the ground that the Board was unable to exercise its statutory duty in terms of Section 19A(3)(c) of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1969 as the State Government has failed to recommend therefor.
The said writ application was disposed of with certain direction.
However, in the year 1994 the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education refused to issue the forms in favour of the candidates where against another writ application was filed.
A learned single Judge of this court by an order dated 21194 directed the Board to issue such forms in favour of the petitioner where against an appeal was preferred by the Board.
By an order dated 10294 the appeal court, inter alia, directed :-  "We grant stay of operation of the order dated 21194.
By virtue of our grant of stay, there will be nothing left with the writ application at the present stage.
We, however, make it clear that even at the late stage if the writ petitioners send their thirty-one students to the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education as external candidates and it be deemed feasible and practical for the Board to get a test examination through a recognised institution selected and authorised by the Regional Examination Council, the Court will not stand on their way and this order will not prevent the thirty- one students from appearing in the examination provided they are found qualified enough to pass the test examination in the manner as indicated earlier.
We desire that the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education should pass an appropriate order in this regard as expeditiously as possible.
By consent of the parties, we take up the appeal as also the writ application for hearing and we dispose of the same in the manner indicated above, and instead of staying the order dated 21194, we set aside the order impugned."
6.
The said appeal was, therefore, disposed of.
Pursuant thereto the Board permitted the students to appear at the said examination for the year 1994 but it did not publish the results whereafter another writ application was filed wherein one of us (SB Sinha, J) keeping in view the aforementioned backdrop directed :-  "Keeping in view the fact that the West Bengal of Secondary Education itself granted permission to the students concerned to appear at the Examination, the question of any further direction by the Division Bench of this Court, did not arise.
In view of the fact that the concerned students appeared as external candidates, this application is allowed and the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education is directed to publish their results.
The mark sheets of the concerned students may be sent to the Headmistress of the concerned school, at an early date, and preferably within a period of one week from date.
This order should not be construed to mean that by this order the school in question would be recognised for any purpose whatsoever.
The writ application is allowed to the extent indicated above."
7.
In the year 1995 also as the authorities of the said school did not permit the students to appear at the said examination Tarun Chatterjee, J by an order dated 8.2.95 in view of the decision of the division bench disposed of the writ application with the following direction :-  "In view of the aforesaid order passed by a Division Bench of this Court which is binding on me, I also dispose of this writ application in terms of the said judgment as referred to hereinbefore passed by a Division Bench of this Court in F.M.A.T.
No. 311 of 1994.
The West Bengal Board of Secondary Education is, however, directed to expedite the matter so that steps may be taken by them to allow the fifty-four students to appear in the ensuing Madhyamik Examination to be held in the month of March, 1995.
The Headmistress of the school in question is directed to receive the forms on behalf of the writ petitioners from fifty-four students."
8.
The writ petitioners-appellants who are members of the Managing Committee of the said School filled a writ application claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs :-  "(a) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents, their servants, agents and/or employees to issue 72 regular forms for the Madhyamik Examination for the year 1996, scheduled to be held on and from 1st March, 1996 to the petitioners herein being the Head of the Institution, namely, Garifa Arati Academy for Girls, PO-Naihati, District North 24-Parganas.
(b) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents, their servants, agents and/or employees to accept the 72 filled-up Forms from the Head of the Institution of the said school for the ensuing Madhyamik Examination for the year 1996 as external candidates with regular syllabus."
9.
GR Bhattacharjee, J passed an interim order in the said writ application marked as Civil Order No. 1799(W) of 1996 of 1996 on 921996 to the following effect :-  "There will be an interim order in terms of order of the Division Bench passed in respect of this school in the year 1994 (1221994) as quoted in the Annexure `C' to the writ application and the WB Board of Secondary Education will be at liberty to allow the 72 candidates of the petitioner's school to appear before the ensuing Madhyamik Examination as external candidates with external syllabus on compliance of all necessary formalities as mentioned in the Division Bench order."
10.
The petitioners filed a supplementary affidavit on 23396 allegedly on the basis of direction issued by the learned trial Judge wherein all the facts were mentioned.
By an order dated 11496 the said writ application was disposed of with the following observations :-  "I, however, make it clear that till the decision is arrived at by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education in the matter of upgradation of the school in question, the students of Class-X of the school should be allowed to sit every year as external candidate with external syllabus on compliance of other necessary formalities as mentioned in the Division Bench Order dated 12th February, 1994, passed in F.M.A.T.
No. 311 of 1994, (which is still pending) and result of such candidates should also be published regularly, including the results of the candidates allowed to appear in the last Madhyamik examination.
All these will he, however, subject to the result of the Appeal as indicated above, provided it is still pending disposal.
I, however, make it clear that the authorities concerned while considering the case of the upgradation of the petitioner's school shall consider the documents as annexed to the supplementary affidavit filed on behalf of the writ petitioners in Court today which the petitioners are to supply to the authority concerned within a fortnight from date."
11.
However, evidently, the learned trial Judge committed a mistake in making an observation of the effect that such an order would be subject to the order of court of appeal if the same is pending inasmuch as noticed hereinbefore, the said appeal had already been disposed of.
The petitioner, however, filed an application for appropriate orders before the learned trial Judge.
The said application was placed before the learned trial Judge on 10398.
On that date the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Board produced the order dated 10294 passed by the Division Bench in order to show that the appeal has already been disposed of.
The learned trial Judge in that view of the matter, inter alia, held that the order dated 11496 was passed on mis- representation of the facts by the petitioner whereafter, the following order was passed :-  "Accordingly, since the writ petitioner School has not yet been upgraded as a Class IX and X School after obtaining due approval from the authority concerned, no student can be sent by the said School for appearing in the Madhyamik Examination or any other examination conducted by the Board.
Accordingly, the writ petitioner School is injuncted from admitting any student in Class IX and X henceforth, or sending any student for appearing in any future Madhyamik Examination before the School in question gets approval in the matter of up-gradation as a Class IX and X School.
However, considering the plights of the students as mentioned by the writ petitioner, at Page 25 of the writ application, i.e. Annexure `C', the Board is to issue necessary forms to the School for allowing such students to appear in this year's Madhyamik Education of course as external students on external syllabus by tomorrow, positively, and the School authorities would return the said forms duly filled up by the Students concerned along with the necessary fees by Thursday next and the Board should also immediately issue necessary admit cards to the School after getting the forms duly filled up by the students concerned and the fees.
I, however, make it clear that if school authorities fail to collect forms from the Board by tomorrow, the Board would be under no obligation to supply forms subsequently or to allow such students in this year's Madhyamik Examination.
The School Authorities can also collect such forms from the Board in course of today.
So far as the students who are at present reading in Class IX and X of the said school are concerned the school should immediately ask such students to take admission elsewhere for their own benefits and if the students fail to take such admission they will do it at their own risk."
12.
Mr. SN Mukherjee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, inter alia, submitted that this appeal has been filed so that the original order may be maintained and the remark of the learned trial Judge that the petitioner is guilty of mis-representing the court, may be expunged.
The learned Counsel contended that keeping in view the fact that the entire order sheet had been placed before the learned trial Judge, question of any mis-representation does not arise.
It was further submitted that there is absolutely no reason as to why the State Government would sit tight over the matter for a long time so as to disentitle the Board from passing any order in terms of the provision of West Bengal of Secondary Act.
13.
Mr. Mitra, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that the petitioners do not have any right to be recognised unless it fulfils all the conditions.
The learned Counsel in this connection has drawn our attention to the circular letter dated (sic) wherein the detailed procedure for grant of recognition of the school had been laid down.
The learned Counsel submitted that there is also a prohibition from admitting students in Class IX or Class X  14.
The order dated 11496 was not appealed against the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
The said order was, therefore, binding on the Board.
In terms of the aforementioned order, Board was directed to issue forms to the students of the school so as to enable them to appear at the School Final Examination as external candidates on external syllabus and publish their results.
15.
The learned trial Judge, however, has passed the impugned order only on the basis of an application filed by the petitioner for an appropriate order.
Such an application was not filed by the West Bengal of Secondary Education.
The Board was thus not aggrieved by the said order dated 11496.
It could have either preferred an appeal there against or filed an application for review thereof.
It did not choose to do either.
In that view of the matter the students who had been permitted to appear by the Board itself, their results could not have been withheld.
It is on that consideration, we have directed the Board to publish the results of the students in terms of our order dated 2471998.
16.
It is not a case where the students of an unrecognised institution could not appear at the examination at all.
Mr. Mitra when questioned, stated that such examinees would appear as external candidates on external syllabus meant for them subject to the condition that they have to pass the Test Examination from a recognised school.
17.
In that view of the matter we are of the opinion that the school could not have been injuncted from admitting any students in Class-IX as they had not claimed any right that the students reading in the said school should be allowed to appear as regular candidates.
However, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that no institution has a right of recognition.
But it is also true that a statutory functionary cannot refused to exercise its statutory function.
It is expected that all statutory functionaries would perform their statutory duties within a reasonable time.
Reasonableness within the meaning of Article 14 of the Constitution of India would also embrace within its fold an action within a reasonable time.
18.
Right of education is a fundamental right so far as the children upto the date of 14 years are concerned.
Beyond that age although nobody has a fundamental right, keeping in view the directive principles as contained in Part-IV of Constitution of India, the State has a duty to see that its citizens become entitled to receive proper education.
In view of the fact that the Legislature of the State of West Bengal has enacted the 1963 Act and a procedure has been laid down for recognition of such school, a duty has been cast expressly upon all the authorities concerned to take steps for either granting or refusing to grant recognition of such school depending on the question as to whether the school fulfils all the conditions precedent therefor or not.
The State, however, cannot sit over the matter without any rhyme or reason for a number of years, As indicated hereinbefore, the school filed an application for its upgradation in the year 1980.
There cannot be any earthly reason whatsoever as to why no order could be passed by the State Government and the Board all these years particularly when the Board itself was allowing the students of the school to appear at the examination from 1982 to 1993 on its own.
Even the Division Bench of this Court took a very cautious approach in directing the Board to consider as to whether in the facts and circumstances of this case the students should be permitted to appear at the examination.
Despite the fact that there was no compulsion on the part of the Board to allow the students to appear at the said Examination, it did so.
But the mala fide attitude on the part of the Board became evident when it refused to publish the result of the students concerned.
Having allowed the students to appear at the Examination, the Board could not have refused to published their result.
19.
We, therefore, in modification of the order passed by the learned trial Judge directed the State Government to pass an appropriate order on the petitioners' application for recognition of the school at an early date and not later than 8 weeks from the date of communication and further direct the Board to pass a suitable order within 4 weeks from the date of receipt of the order passed by the State.
20.
In the event, the school is recognised there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the students reading in the said school would be permitted to appear as regular candidates but in absence of such recognition, the students can only be permitted in terms of the Examination Regulations of the Board i.e. as external candidates on external syllabus and upon fulfilling the requisite conditions therefor.
21.
This court is not oblivious of the fact that the court is not entitled to allow the students to appear at the examination from unrecognised schools as has been held by the Apex Court in Central Board of Secondary Education v. Nikhil Gulati and anr. reported in 1998(3) SCC 5 and CBSE and Anr. v. P Sunil Kumar and others, reported in JT.
1998(4) SC 105 : 1998(2) SCT 788 (SC), but as noticed hereinbefore, the distinction lies in the fact that in the instant case examinees who have not attended any school are also permitted to appear as external candidates and the court has merely so directed.
Thus, the said distinction was not contrary to laws.
22.
This appeal is disposed of with the aforesaid directions but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.