Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J - In this revisional application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has challenged order dated July 6, 1998 passed by the Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation, Durgapur in Claim Case No. 84 of 1991 in a proceeding under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 ("Act").
2.
By the order impugned, the Tribunal below has rejected an application filed by the present petitioner for review of the final order passed by the Commissioner on December 12, 1997 on an application under Section 4 of the Act on the ground he had no power of review under the provision of the Act.
3.
Mr. Banik, the learned Advocate appearing in support of this application has contended that the learned Tribunal below refused to exercise jurisdiction vested in it by law in holding that it had no jurisdiction to entertain an application for review.
Mr. Banik in support of such contention relies upon a decision of the Allahabad High Court in a case of United India Insurance Co Ltd v. Workmen's Compensation Commissioner & others, 1997 ACJ 1028.
Mr Banik further relies upon a Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of Bata India Ltd v. Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax and others, reported in 217 ITR 871.
4.
There is no dispute with the proposition of law that a right of review, like a right of appeal, is a creature of statute and unless a tribunal is vested with authority to entertain such application, a tribunal has got no inherent power.
Patel Narshi Thakreshi and others v. Pradyumna Singhi Arjun Singhi, AIR 1970 SC 1273.
5.
This Court is quite conscious of the position of law that there is a distinction between a procedural review where due to mistake on the part of the tribunal, some erroneous order has been passed and an ordinary review on merit.
In this case the petitioner applied for review of the final order not on the ground of defect in procedure of the tribunal but on merit.
A quasi judicial tribunal is vested with the power to undo wrong which has been done to a litigant due to its procedural fault.
As for instance, if a matter is taken up on a date which was not at all fixed on that day and consequently an adverse order has been passed, on the application of an aggrieved person the tribunal can recall such order notwithstanding the absence of any power of review in the concerned statute.
6.
As indicated earlier in the instant case, the petitioner has applied for review on the ground of error apparent on the face of record for non- consideration of the pleas taken by the petitioner in additional written statements.
7.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Arun Prokash Chatterjee v. United India Insurance Co Ltd and others, 1998(2) ICC 798 held that a motor vehicles tribunal constituted under Motor Vehicles Act has no authority to entertain an application for review on merit.
8.
So far the Act is concerned, there is no proviaion for review therein.
In the rule framed under the Act it is stated that the following provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure would be applicable to a proceeding before Commissioner in so far as they may be applicable :-  (a) Order 5 Rules 9, 15 to 30;  (b) Order 9;  (c) Order 13 Rules 3 to 10;  (d) Order 14 Rules 2 to 21;  (e) Order 15;  (f) Order 23 Rules 1 and 2.
9.
Order 47 does not find excluded in the proceeding before the Commissioner under the aforesaid Act and Rules framed thereunder.
10.
In the case of United India Insurance Co Ltd (supra) the Allahabad High Court made the following observations as regards power of review by an authority under the Act :  "Now the question whether the Workmen's Compensation authority had jurisdiction to review it appears that the Workmen's Compensation Commissioner exercises quasi judicial jurisdiction having all the trappings of the Court procedure whereof has not been elaborately laid down either under the Act or under the Rules.
The absence of specific provision does not debar such authority from dispensation of justice.
The authority who is passing the order which is enforceable otherwise cannot be said to lack jurisdiction to recall or review its order if occasion so demands in order to do justice.
While dispensing justice or exercising quasi judicial jurisdiction unless it has been specifically prohibited or barred, the power to review its own order inheres in the tribunal or the authority concerned."
11.
In my opinion, the aforesaid observation applies to a procedural review where due to procedural mistake on the part of tribunal any injustice has been done but the same observation cannot have any application to an application for review on merit.
(See ANZ Grindlays Bank Ltd v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1981 SC 606).
12.
In Bata India Limited v. Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax and others (supra) a Division Bench of this Court held that in order to prevent grave and serious miscarriage of justice including one resulting from following a patently erroneous procedure or contravention of basic principles of justice and fair play, the supervisory and superintending jurisdiction conferred on Courts by Article 227 of the Constitution of India remains always available.
13.
There is no dispute with the aforesaid proposition of law.
But the said decision has no application to a case where a tribunal below rightly refused to entertain an application for review on merit as the tribunal was not vested with such authority.
14.
As indicated above, in view of the Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of Arun Prokash Chatterjee (supra) this Court is not in a position to accept the observation of the Allahabad High Court in the decision of United India Insurance Co Ltd (supra), as an authority covering even a case of review on merit.
15.
Thus, the tribunal below rightly refused to entertain the application for review on merit.
16.
The revisional application is devoid of any merit.
I however make it clear that I have not gone into the merit of the original order passed under Section 4 of the Act.
17.
No order as to costs.
Application dismissed.