TS Doabia, J - The circumstances under which this petition has come to be filed in this Court be noticed as under :  Posts of Medical Assistants were advertised.
Advertisement Notice No. 5 of 1991 was issued.
This is dated 8th July 1991.
Copy of this notice has been placed on the record as annexure P/2.
Sixty five vacancies were notified.
The petitioners also applied for the posts.
They were not selected.
They have accordingly come to this Court.
They submit that the method which was adopted by the respondents is totally arbitrary and against all canons of service jurisprudence.
They have challenged the method and manner in which interviews were held.
What is pleaded by them is :  (i) That only 65 posts were advertised but 200 posts were filled.
The requisite averments are contained in paras 5 and 8 of the writ petition.
(ii) That the method of pick and choose has been adopted.
(iii) By fixing the interview marks at 20, the whole selection has been manipulated in such a manner that the selection has operated to the prejudice of the petitioners.
2.
That the respondent-Service Selection Board has filed objections.
Some private respondents have also filed their objections.
The stand taken by the respondent-Service Selection Board is to the effect that uniform criteria was adopted.
The criteria given is as under :  (i) Weightage to marks obtained in the Technical Diploma<TD< TD>  (ii) Year of passing Diploma (I point for each year subject to the maximum of 5 points.
)<T< TD>  (iii) Viva-Voce 20</< TD>  Total 100 3.
It is stated that the last candidate who was selected got 5360 marks.
As the petitioners did not come within the list of selected candidates, they were denied appointment.
4.
The further fact is that by an interim order passed by this Court, the respondents were directed to produce the records.
These records could be inspected by the petitioners before the Deputy Registrar (Judicial).
The order passed by this Court on 23th November 1994 is being reproduced below :  "Mr. Anand has produced the record in the court which I have perused and returned to him.
The parties agree that the petitioners' counsel may also peruse the record before the Deputy Registrar in presence of Shri Anand or the respondents' representative.
The record shall remain in the custody of respondents but may be shown to petitioners' counsel.
List after four weeks."
5.
The petitioners submit that one Javid Iqbal was given appointment even though he obtained 50 points/marks.
The petitioners submit that if above be the position then it cannot be said that the Selecting Authority acted in a bona fide manner.
6.
The basic argument which has been raised by the petitioners who are present in person is that only 65 posts were advertised and 200 posts have been filled up.
As to why the respondent-authorities stopped at 200 and why this number was fixed is not apparent from the objections which have been filed by the official respondents.
If above be the situation, then the selection of candidates who are over and above 65 would be hit by the ratio of various decisions given by the Supreme Court of India i.e., Prem Singh and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and Others, 1996(4) Supreme 411 : 1996(3) SCT 563 (SC),Ashok Kumar v. The Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board, AIR 1996(1) SCT 660, Dilip Kumar Tripathy and Others v. State of Orissa and Others, 1996(6) Supreme 674 : 1997(1) SCT 66 (SC) and Surinder Singh and Others v. State of Punjab and Another, AIR 1998 SC 18 : 1997(4) SCT 133 (SC).
7.
Thus the petitioners can validly contend that the selection is not in accordance with the decision given by the Supreme Court of India.
8.
It may, however, be seen that this selection process took place six years back.
The question arises as to what relief should be granted to the petitioners.
The respondent-authorities have not followed the procedure which they were required to follow.
The stand taken by them is that on account of the situation prevailing in the State, these emergent steps were required to be taken.
The question arises as to whether this aspect of the matter can be taken note of and whether humanitarian approach can be adopted.
I am of the opinion that it is possible to grant relief to the petitioners without upsetting the action of the respondent-State in favour of the private respondents.
Guidance can be had from the observations made by the Supreme Court in a decision reported as HC Puttaswamy and others v. The Hon'ble Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court Bangalore and others, AIR 1991 SC 295 : 1991(1) SCT 116 (SC).
There was failure to consult the Public Service Commission.
The appointments were not proper.
Appointees were, however, directed to be treated as regularly appointed on humanitarian grounds.
What was stated in para "16" of the judgment is being reproduced below :  "The precedents apart, the circumstances of this case justify an humanitarian approach and indeed, the appellants seem to deserve justice ruled by mercy.
We also take note of the fact that the writ petitioners also would be appointed in the High Court as stated by learned Advocate General of the State."
The course as indicated in above judgment is being adopted in this case.
The circumstances prevailing in the State cannot be ignored.
The appointment of respondents who were beyond 65 would stand but the respondents-authorities would take steps with a view to accommodate the petitioners against the available vacancies.
It be seen that some of the petitioners have become overaged.
They cannot seek service elsewhere.
Respondents would accordingly as indicated above take guidance from the view expressed in the aforementioned case and consider the claim of the petitioners for appointment against vacant posts.
If posts are not vacant then supernumerary posts be created and petitioners be accommodated.
Let this exercise be completed within a period of two months.
The period of two months would begin from the date the copy of order passed by this Court along with writ petition and annexures thereof are made available by the petitioners to the respondents-authorities.
If for any practical reason it is not possible to take a decision, respondents would be at liberty to seek extension of time but in that eventuality they would have to explain each and every day's delay.
Disposed of accordingly.