RL Anand, J - By this judgement I dispose of four writ petitions, i.e. C.P.W.
No. 3125 of 1996 (Jagtar Singh and others v. Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, and others), CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995 (Jaswant Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others), C.P.W.
No. 11873 of 1995 (Jaswinder Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others), CWP No. 2566 of 1996 (Vaishno Dass v. State of Punjab and others), as in the opinion of this Court all the four writ petitions can be disposed of by a common judgment.
2.
First of all the pleadings of C.P.W.
No. 3125 of 1996, which has been filed by Jagtar Singh and others under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala (hereinafter called `the Commission') respondent No. 1; the State of Punjab (respondent No. 2) and Director of Horticulture, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh (respondent No. 3).
The prayer made in this writ petition is for the issuance of a writ of mandamus/necessary directions, directing respondents Nos. 2 and 3 to issue appointment letters to the writ petitioners with effect from 1111996 as Horticulture Development Officers.
It has been pleaded that the Government of Punjab through the Agriculture Department issued an advertisement for filling up the posts of Horticulture Development Officers in the month of May 1994.
54 number of posts were advertised in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 as per Annexure P1, and it was made clear that the educational qualification prescribed for the said posts was minimum of BSc Agriculture and MSc.
Agriculture would be given preference.
For the post of Horticulture Development Officer the candidate possessing the qualification of BSc with major subject as Horticulture would be given preference.
Respondent No. 1, i.e.
The Commission, which is the authorised Agency as per the Constitution of India and as per the Rules and Regulations prescribed by the State of Punjab for filling up all Class-I posts of the State of Punjab, objected to this proposed direct recruitment by the Department of Agriculture vide Annexure P1.
The objection was accepted by the State of Punjab and respondent No. 1 was authorised to make the selection on behalf of the State.
Thus in the month of December 1994 respondent No. 1 issued an advertisement (Annexure P2) in the local newspapers, inviting applications once again and this time 53 posts of Horticulture Development Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 were advertised .
The following essential qualifications were prescribed :-  Degree of BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as the major subject from any recognised University/Institution.
Those candidates who are MSc.
(Horticulture, or related subjects) would be given preference.
3.
According to the petitioners, they were eligible as per advertisement and also fulfilled the prescribed preferential/essential qualifications.
Petitioner No. 1 is an Agriculture Graduate from Punjabi University, Patiala, with Horticulture subject.
He took the degree in BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as major subject from Brajindera College, Faridkot.
Similar is the position with regard to petitioners Nos. 5 and 6, i.e., Shinder Pal Singh and Jagsir Singh.
Petitioner No. 2 took the degree of BSc Agriculture from HP Krishi Vishav Vidyalia, Palampur.
Petitioner No. 3 took his degree of B.Sc, Agriculture with Horticulture as a major subject from the University of Ajmer from Maharishi Saraswati University, Ajmer from Swami Keshwasnand Maha Vidyaliya at Sangria, Rajasthan.
Petitioner No. 4 also took the similar degree from the same University.
Petitioner No. 7 is a BSc Agriculture graduate with Horticulture as major subject from Guru Nanak Dev University.
He is also a Postgraduate in Agriculture.
On being satisfied that the petitioners fulfilled the requisite qualifications, respondent No. 1 called all the candidates found eligible, including the petitioners for interview in the month of June 1995 on various dates.
At the time of interview original certificates of the petitioners were checked by the officials of respondent No. 1.
Interview was conducted by the Members of the Commission as per their procedure and they had associated Horticulture Experts from Departments of Horticulture of different Agriculture Universities of the State for the purpose of interview.
Shri Kuldip Singh Sandhu, Director, Horticulture, State of Punjab, as also Shri Lakhvir Singh Brar, former Director Horticulture, Government of Punjab, were also associated as Experts with the interview along with some other Experts from the Agriculture Universities on the subject.
All the Members of the Commission and the Experts associated by with the interview had explicitly satisfied themselves that the petititioners were eligible and qualified in terms of their educational qualifications for the post of Horticulture Development Officer, as advetised.
The result of the competition conducted by respondent No. 1 was duly announced by respondent No. 1 on 23.6.1995 and the petitioners were declared successful.
All the 53 selected candidates received a similar letter from respondent No. 3 (Annexure P4).
In this letter the petitioners were specifically asked to bring their certificates and the prescribed record etc. for re-checking showing that they had obtained Degrees of BSc Agriculture with Horticulture as major subject.
All the petitioners did not come to know from the office of respondent No. 3 as to why it had become necessary for them to reverify the certificates after respondent No1 had satisfied itself along with the associated experts, about the qualifications of the petitioners.
The petitioners were directed to appear in the office of respondent No. 1 once again so as to convince it about the essential qualifications.
The petitioners submitted their certificates from their respective Colleges once again and also brought specific certificates from the institutions from where they had passed the essential qualifications.
Later on the petitioners learnt from the Under Secretary of respondent No. 1, who confirmed to the petitioners that necessary letter had been issued by the Commission to respondent No. 2 that the petitioners were eligible and qualified as per terms of the advertisement for selection to the posts of Horticulture Development Officer.
It is alleged by the petitioners that much to their shock, they learnt that on 1111996 appointment letters had been issued only to 44 persons and the petitioners were excluded.
They were excluded on the ground that respondents Nos. 2 and 3 were not satisfied that the petitioners were eligible, as according to them, they did not possess the qualifications of BSc Agriculture with Horticulture as major subject, as prescribed in the advertisement (Annexure P2).
It is further alleged that the petitioners, who are much higher in merit in the various categories, to which they have been selected, have not been issued appointment letters, whereas the persons, who are lower in the order of merit, as per the recommendation of the Commission, have been issued the appointment letters.
It is further pleaded by the petitioners that in CPWNo.
9423 of 1995 (which is also being disposed of by this judgment) the Commission took the stand that the candidates with the required essential qualifications for the post of Horticulture Development Officer, i.e., BSc Agriculture with Horticulture as a major subject, were selected and under these circumstances the stand of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 by not giving appointments to the petitioners on the ground of non-fulfilment of the essential qualifications, was untenable.
The action the part of respondents Nos. 2 and 3 has been challenged treating it as illegal and without jurisdiction mainly on the ground that all the petitioners had fulfilled the requisite qualifications, as laid down in Annexure P2, and that these respondents cannot alter or add any different qualification, which was not the requirement of the advertisement.
Moreover, respondent No. 1, being a specialised and constitutional body, manned by experts in the field was satisfied on the basis of the testimonials furnished by the petitioners and for that reason the petitioners were interviewed by the Commission.
Proper selection was made.
The names of the petitioners were recommended to the government, which in an arbitrary manner and against the spirit of the Constitution of India, wants to set aside the selection on untenable grounds by giving twist to the qualifications prescribed in Annexure P2, more so when the stand of the Commission is also clear in its written statement filed in CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995.
4.
In the present case the petitioners were put higher in merit in the various categories to which they had been selected and still they were ignored and the persons lower in order of merit have been issued the appointment letters, as is clear from Annexure P20.
5.
With the above averments, directions are being sought against respondents Nos. 2 and 3 for the issuance of the appointment letters with effect from 1111996.
6.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The stand of respondents No. 1 is contained in the affidavit submitted by Shri Kartar Singh, PCS, Secretary of the Commission, and it has been stated in para No. 9 of the written statement as under:-  ``.. .. ..
The petitioners were possessing the required qualifications as they had satisfied the interview board that they were holding the required qualifications.
Remaining contents of this para relate to respondent No.
3.''
Thus the Commission has supported the petitioners in so far as the essential qualifications are concerned.
7.
The contest has been given by respondents Nos. 2 and 3, who filed a joint written statement through Shri Kuldip Singh Sandhu, Director of Horticulture, Punjab, and it has been pleaded that on scrutiny of the certificates of academic qualification, it has been found that the petitioners do not posseses the essential qualification of BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as major subject.
Even the qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture) of petitioners Nos. 3 and 7 is not in major field of Horticulture.
As such the petitioners have not been given appointment letters for the post of Horticulture Development Officer.
Elaborating the stand, these respondents submitted in para No. 4 of the written statement that a scrutiny of the certificates of academic qualifications of the petitioners received from the Commission along with the recommendations did not confirm the qualifications of ``degree in BSc (Agriculture with major subject Horticulture) from any recognised university/institution.
Preference to candidates possessing qualification of MSc.
(Horticulture or with related subjects)''.
It was also pleaded that Degree of BSc (Agriculture) consists of four years duration, in which during the first three years all the basic courses related with Agriculture such as Agronomy, Animal Husbandry, Agricultural Engineering, Agricultural Economics and Horticulture etc. are taught as an essential elementary subject.
But during the fourth and final year, the student is given the option of one elective/major subject, which consists of more marks than the other ordinary subjects.
If a candidate who has not taken Horticulture as major subject, wishes to do MSc.
in Horticulture, then the Punjab Agricultural University, allows him to do so, provided he clears the shortfall courses of major Horticulture as additional subjects during the MSc (Horticulture) and the marks of these additional subjects are not included in the final award/grading of his MSc.
(Horticulture) awarded by the university.
The scrutiny of the testimonials/certificates of the petitioners showed that they had not cleared Horticulture as elective/major subject at the BSc level or they possessed the qualification of MSc.
(Horticulture or related subjects).
It has also been explained in the written statement that though Shri Kuldip Singh Sandhu, Director of Horticulture, Punjab, was associated by the Commission as one of the Experts for conducting the interview of the candidates, yet for this purpose different interview boards were constituted and the testimonials of educational qualifications were scrutinised prior to the interview at the level of the Commission itself and those testimonials/certificates were never put before Shri Kuldip Singh Sandhu for scrutiny or for his specific expert opinion, regarding fulfilment of essential qualifications by the candidates.
8.
In short the defence of respondents Nos. 2 and 3 is that the petitioners were not issued the appointment letters as they had not passed BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as major/elective subject.
9.
Now I proceed with the main averments appearing in C.P.W.
No. 9423 of 1995 (Jaswant Singh Saini and others v. State of Punjab and others.
This writ petition has been filed by 19 persons, including Shri Jaswant Singh Saini against the State of Punjab; the Commission; Director, Horticulture, Punjab and private respondents Nos. 4 to 12 (selected candidates as Horticulture Development Officers by the Punjab Public Service Commission) and directions have been sought for the issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the selection made to the post of Horticulture Development Officer by the Commission as a method of pick and choose selecting the favourites of the Commission Members and high -ups and completely ignoring the deserving candidates and all the more even selecting those candidates who did not fulfil the basic requirement as per the Advertisement.
Directions were also sought for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the official respondents to conduct the interview afresh and the case set up by these petitioners is that after doing BSc (Agriculture) and after successfully completing the BSc Degree, they joined the Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana and Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, for doing MSc.
Horticulture in different years and successfully completed the said course.
In spite of the fact that they are MSc.
in Horticulture, they were not given the preferential treatment, as mentioned in the advertisement.
Moreover 350 candidates were interviewed by the Selection Committee.
The process of selection is bad for the reasons set forth in para No. 4 of the writ petition.
Elaborating those allegations, it has been averred that each Member of the Selection Committee sat separately with one Expert in Horticulture field and conducted the interview.
Every day the expert used to change and some new expert used to take his place and the process continued for the remaining days : thereby making the whole selection not uniform.
Each expert has his own mind and the idea of assessing the candidate also varies from expert to expert.
Since the selection was to be made purely on the basis of the interview, the Commission should have short- listed the candidates on some rational and reasonable basis so that the eligible and deserving candidates were called for interview.
The sole purpose of holding interview was to search and select best amongst the applicants.
In the present case for 53 posts the Commission interviewed about 350 candidates.
The Members of the Commission were not in a position to assess properly the candidates who appeared before them as the time given to each candidate was only a minute or two.
The first illegality committed was when the Commission did not adopt a uniform method at the time of interview.
It is also pleaded that as per the advertisement, preference was to be given to those candidates who were MSc.
in Horticulture or its concerned subjects, but the Selecting Authority ignored this basic essentiality and declared those candidates as successful who were not either fulfilling the basic requirement or who were lower in merit than the petitioners or who mostly were BSc only.
Regarding respondent No. 12 it has been averred that he was not even eligible for the post because he was not fulfilling the basic requirements.
This respondent was only BSc in Agriculture but the main subject was not Horticulture, which was a precondition according to the advertisement.
This shows the total lack of application of mind on the part of the Selecting Authority.
The calling of such a number of candidates for interview was just an eye-wash.
The petitioners stood on better footing, position-wise, and qualification- wise, than number of candidates who have been selected.
Hence the present writ petition for quashment of the entire selection.
10.
Different sets of written statements have been filed.
Respondents Nos. 1 and 3 filed a short affidavit on 16.8.1995 submitting that the appointment orders are liable to be issued by the Competent Appointing Authority, after verification and scrutiny of the academic qualifications of the candidates recommended by the Commission and appointment letters will be issued only to those candidates who fulfil the essential qualification of BSc (Agriculture) with Major Subject `Horticulture', which was notified to the Commission in the requisition form for filling up the posts of Horticulture Development Officers.
Respondent No. 2, i.e., the Commission, filed a separate written statement through its Secretary Shri Daljeet Rai Chaudhary, who justified the selection with regard to petitioners Nos. 5,6,7 and 9.
The stand of the Commission is that these petitioners obtained the degree in MSc.
after the closing date fixed for submission of applications, i.e., on 1611995.
The Commission gave due weightage to the candidates having higher qualifications, including the petitioners, at the time of interview, which continued from 1261995 to 1661995.
According to the Commission 350 candidates were interviewed.
There were 53 vacancies of Horticulture Development Officer and 379 candidates were called for interview and 272 candidates had appeared for the interview before the Commission.
The interview was conducted by the Members of the Commission in different interview Boards.
One subject expert was also associated at the time of interview with each interview Board.
There is an established procedure to interview the candidates and the same was followed in the present selection also.
It is within the competence of the Commission either to interview the candidates, or to conduct a short listing test or adopt any other reasonable method of recruitment but it is never based on the whims of the candidates.
Had the petitioners any grievance against the constitution of interview board, they should have agitated the same at the time of interview or after the completion of the interview or before the declaration of the result.
The petitioners had appeared for the interview before the Commission without raising any objection and when they had failed to obtain the required standard of merit and have not been selected, they had challenged the process of selection on imaginary grounds.
In para No. 6 of the reply it has been specifically stated that the candidates holding the qualification of MSc.
in Horticulture or speciality of this subject were given due weightage at the time of selection.
However, the final selection of the candidates has been made on the basis of overall higher merit of the candidates which included demonstrated performance at the time of interview.
All the selected candidates were possessing the required qualifications.
The candidates possessing the qualification of BSc (Agriculture) with vegetable crops, Pomology, Floriculture form part of Horticulture subject.
In this regard Shri J.C. Kumar, Senior Extension Specialist (Vegetable) cum-Head of the Department of Vegetable Crops had given a certificate dated 161995 indicating therein that Horticulture consists of three branches of science, namely (i) Pomology, (ii) Vegetable Crops and (iii) Floriculture.
He had also certified that a candidate possessing the Degree of Vegetable Crops was fully eligible for appointment as Horticulture Development Officer in the Punjab State.
All the selected candidates were possessing the required qualification of BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture.
Thus the present selection of the candidates for the post of Horticulture Development Officer is fully valid and does not suffer from any infirmity.
So far as the candidates having qualification of MSc.
(Horticulture) or other speciality subjects are concerned, they were awarded extra-qualification marks at the time of their interview.
But the final selection of the candidates was made on the basis of overall merit which included academic qualifications, extra-curricular activities and demonstrated performance at the time of interview.
Respondents Nos. 4 to 12 were higher in merit and they had been selected and recommended for appointment.
Mere having the qualification of MSc.
in Horticulture does not confer any right of appointment to the candidates/petitioners.
11.
In short the stand of the Commission is that the selection was proper.
Holding better qualifications by the petitioners, thus, does not make them ipso facto entitled to selection.
Due weightage was given to the persons holding better qualifications and extra marks were also awarded for higher qualifications.
12.
Private respondent Shri Kuldip Singh also filed a written statement and he justified his selection.
13.
CWP.
No. 2566 of 1996 has been filed by Vaishno Dass against the State of Punjab (respondent No. 1); Director Horticulture, Punjab, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2); Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala (respondent No. 3); and Shri Malwinder Singh Dhillon (respondent No. 4).
Major averments of this petition are that he passed BSc Agriculture from the Guru Nanak Dev University in April 1991, with subjects of Horticulture and Entomology.
He passed the MSc.
Degree in Entomology from the Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana, which subject related to Horticulture, vide Annexure P3.
He was fulfilling the prescribed academic qualifications and other terms and conditions of the advertisement.
He was called for interview and was so interviewed on 1561995, but was not selected in spite of the fact that he was to be preferred, and more so, respondent No. 4, who allegedly did not fulfil the requisite academic qualifications, was selected against one of the posts reserved for ex-serviceman/dependent of ex-serviceman.
In addition to this the petitioner has alleged that he was a dependent of ex-serviceman and accordingly he applied against the post reserved for ex-servicemen/dependents of ex-servicemen.
He also submitted certificate issued by the Directorate of Sainik Welfare, Punjab, to the effect that he was dependent of ex-serviceman and was residing with his father.
In short his case is in line with the writ petitioners of CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995.
14.
So far as the defence of the official respondents is concerned, it is the same which has been taken in CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995.
The official respondents also denied the allegation of the petitioner that respondent No. 4 was not possessing the requisite academic qualifications; rather he fulfilled the requisite qualifications and he was rightly called for interview and his selection was made on the basis of merit.
This respondent passed BSc Agriculture with one of the subjects in Horticulture.
Agronomy is also one of the elective subjects.
The candidates who had studied the compulsory subjects, including Horticulture, are understood to have passed Horticulture subject also.
Respondent No. 4 Shri Malwinder Singh also denied the averments by stating that he fulfilled the criteria laid down by the Commission.
The Commission with the help of Government experts examined all the certificates and qualifications of all the candidates and rightly came to the conclusion that this respondent was fully qualified.
Since the petitioner had failed to succeed in the competition, therefore, he was making wild allegations against the selection process.
15.
CWP.
No. 11873 of 1995 has been filed by Jaswinder Singh and two others against the official respondents besides the privates, respondents Nos. 3 to 14, and their averments in the writ petition are in consonance with the averments made in CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995.
Additional factor which has been averred is by Shri Jaswinder Singh (petitioner No. 1), who alleged that he is the grandson of Shri Balwant Singh, who was a freedom fighter and holder of `Tamra Patra'.
He has further alleged that in the advertisement there was no mention regarding reservation in favour of the wards of freedom fighters.
He approached the Commission in this regard and was even assured that in due course a corrigendum would be issued declaring the reservation in favour of freedom fighters, whereby one post, out of 53 posts advertised, would be exclusively reserved in favour of the wards of freedom fighters.
The selection of respondents Nos. 3 to 6 has been challenged on the ground that they were ineligible in terms of the advertisement.
None of these respondents had taken the subject.
of Horticulture in BSc, Respondents No. 7 to 12 also did not possess the requisite qualifications and hence their selection is bad.
16.
No separate written statement has been filed by the respondents in this writ petition, but the stand of the Government is the same as it has taken in other writ petitions, referred to above.
17.
I have heard Shri JK Sibal, Sr. Advocate, on behalf of the petitioners in CWP.
No. 3125 of 1996; Shri HS Mattewal, Senior Advocate, who appeared in CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995 on behalf of the petitioners; Shri PS Chhinna, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab put in appearance on behalf the State of Punjab and the Director, Horticulture.
Shri JK Sibal also appeared on behalf of respondent No. 11 in CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995, CWP.
No. 2566 of 1996 and CWP.
No. 11873 of 1995.
Shri JS Khehar, Senior Advocates has appeared on behalf of the petitioner in CWP.
No. 2566 of 1996; while Shri PS Kang, Advocate, appeared on behalf of the petitioners in CWP.
No. 11873 of 1995.
Shri PS Chhinna, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, represented the State of Punjab in CWP.
No. 2566 of 1996 and CWP.
No. 11873 of 1995 also.
With the assistance rendered by the learned counsel for the parties.
I have perused the record of these writ petitions.
18.
It may be mentioned here that nobody represented the Commission before me at the time of the arguments.
At one point of time D.A.G.
Punjab, appeared on behalf of the Commission, but later on it was revealed that the stand of the State Government was in variance with the stand of the Commission and, therefore, the Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, thought it proper not to put in appearance on behalf of the Commission and rightly too, because in the present controversy the State is not approving the action on the part of the Commission when it did not approve for selection the writ petitioners of CWP.No.
3125 of 1996 on the basis that these writ petitioners did not possess the requisite qualifications and as such the State was not bound to issue the appointment letters to them.
19.
Before I deal with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the writ petitioners, it will be appropriate for me to make a mention about the essential qualifications required for the post of Horticulture Development Officer.
It was prescribed in the advertisement that the candidates must possess Degree of BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as a Major/Main Subject, from any recognised University/institution.
Those candidates, who are MSc.
in Horticulture or related subjects, would be given preference.
Further it is mentioned that these are the minimum requirements.
Any deficiency in this minimum required qualifications can debar the candidates from calling for interview.
In case a very large number of applications is received, comparatively in view of the number of vacancies and the Commission is unable to arrange for that number of candidates, then the Commission will call only the most suitable candidates for the interview on the basis of the minimum prescribed qualification.
Screening test for the same can also be held.
20.
There are two sets of petitioners before me - one, who are/were recommended for appointment by the Commission, but once their recommendations went to the Government, those candidates were not approved on the basis of deficiency in qualifications, as required in the advertisement, and these are the petitioners of CWP.
No. 3125 of 1996.
The second petitioners are those who alleged that they were holding higher qualifications, such as MSc., in Horticulture, and they should be treated as a class in itself and were required to be given preferential treatment by the Commission, and by not doing so, the entire selection is bad.
Further the entire process of selection is a sham one as the mode of selection is not in conformity with the guidelines laid down by the various Courts, including the Apex Court.
21.
First of all I would deal with the submissions of Shri JK Sibal, whose main thrust of the argument was that his clients fulfilled the requisite qualifications as per advertisement and the Government cannot take the benefit of the criteria and the qualifications laid down by the Punjab Agricultural University by giving a twist and by making a wrongful interpretation that the petitioners had not passed in Horticulture as an elective subject, which is totally different from the main subject in which the petitioners had already passed while undertaking their examination of BSc Agriculture.
Shri Sibal also submitted that the Government earlier passed the criteria for the academic qualifications.
Those qualifications were scrutinised by the expert body, i.e., the Commission.
After making a thorough scrutiny of the testimonials and certificates of the petitioners they were found eligible for the post and now under the garb of an elective subject, the Government cannot shift the stand.
Mr. Sibal submitted that the stand taken by the Government does not stand to the test of scrutiny from any angle.
In support of his contention, learned counsel Shri Sibal has drawn my attention to the various certificates of the writ petitioners in order to establish that his clients had the requisite knowledge in the main subject of Horticulture, which was the required standard of the advertisement.
Mr. Sibal interpreted ``Horticulture as a major subject'' would mean that the candidates must possess sufficient knowledge in the branch of Horticulture, which consists of Pomology, i.e., the science of fruits; Science of Vegetables; and Science of flowers.
Since the petitioners had passed these tests in their Degree Courses, as such they were holding the major/main qualifications.
The Commission rightly held them eligible for the interview and now it is not open to the State Government to say that these petitioners were not holding `Horticulture' as the Major Subject, under the garb of elective subject.
22.
In my opinion the submissions made by Shri JK Sibal cannot be accepted.
The syllabus of degree course has been prescribed by different universities.
The petitioners in this case have passed their degree courses from different universities, such as Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishav Vidyalia, Palampur; Punjabi University, Patiala; Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar; and Maharishi Saraswati University, Ajmer.
A perusal of their certificates would show that they had acquired basic knowledge with respect to Horticulture by undertaking the examinations.
The maximum marks for each paper were 150.
The import of the advertisement would show that the Government wanted specialistation in Horticulture and the testimonials produced by the writ petitioners cannot be equated and it cannot be held that these petitioners had passed in Horticulture as Major Subject.
In this regard it will be useful for me to make a reference to the detailed marks card of Part-IV Examination of BSc (Agriculture) of Shri Jagtar Singh petitioner.
Paper No. VI was an elective subject.
This petitioner has passed in Agronomy.
The maximum marks awarded for elective paper are `500'.
as compared to Papers Nos.
I, II, III, IV amd V, each of which carries `150' or `100' marks.
Since Jagtar Singh has passed in Agronomy as elective subject, therefore, it itself makes a distinction, justifying the Government to decline the recommendations of the Commission qua Jagtar Singh.
From the certificate of Shri Anil Thakur it will be clear that elective subject has been independently construed than that of the basic subjects.
Knowledge of basic subjects cannot be equated with the knowledge of a specialised subject like `Horticulture'.
This aspect of the case was lacking.
My reasons are further verified from the detailed marks card of Shri Shinder Pal Singh, Part-IV Examination, making a categorical distinction of elective subject carrying 500 marks and the Government wanted that a candidate must pass in Horticulture as an elective subject.
Similar in the case with Jagsir Singh and Malvinder Singh.
In these circumstances we have to see whether the writ petitioners had qualified in `Horticulture' as major subject, which in the opinion of this Court is synonymous with the elective subject.
It cannot be lost sight of the fact that impugned advertisement was in Punjabi.
The Government wanted to make a categorical distinction that a candidate must have a specialised knowledge in the matter of Horticulture.
The matter was examined by the Committee constituted by the Government and the case of each individual was assessed.
The committee gave the report on 1321996, to which my attention has been invited by the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General and it was found that Shri Anil Kumar Thakur did not fulfil the qualification prescribed for specialisation in Horticulture and BSc (Agriculture).
His elective subject in BSc (Agriculture) was `Plant Protection'.
So far as Shri Jagtar Singh is concerned, his elective subject was`Agronomy'.
He cleared only 3 courses in Horticulture in 2nd, 3rd and 4th year and the maximum weightage was 450 marks.
In Agronomy he has cleared only 3 papers as elective subject with maximum marks 500+2 courses in Ist year and in 2nd year with 300 marks.
This candidate also did not fulfil the qualification prescribed for specialisation in Horticulture in BSc (Agriculture).
Shri Jagsir Singh also passed BSc (Agriculture) with `Agronomy' as elective subject, like Shri Jagtar Singh.
So far as Suvinder Singh is concerned, he studied his courses in Agronomy, Dairying, Horticulture, Extension, Plant Pathology & Micro and Agriculture Engineering and the weightage of each subject was 500 marks.
This candidate has not specialised in any subject nor he attached any document.
The case of Shri Kuldeep Singh is similar to Shri Suvinder Singh.
The subjects he passed carried the weightage of 100 marks each.
There was no evidence produced by this petitioner prima facie that he had done specialisation in `Horticulture' The documents of Shri Shinder Paul Singh also did not reveal that he did specialisation in `Horticulture'.
Shri Malvinder Singh Dhillon also did not fulfil the qualifications for specialisation in `Horticulture at the B.Sc, as well as MSc.
level.
His elective subject in BSc (Agriculture) was `Agronomy'.
He has also done the MSc.
Degree in the subject of `Agronomy'.
It has been held in Dr. MC Bindal v. RC Singh and others,AIR 1989 SC 134, that it is the constitutional requirement envisaged in Article 320 of the Constitution that the Commission will have to perform the duty of recommending the candidate fulfilling all the requisite qualifications for the post to the Government for being considered for appointment to the post concerned.
It cannot be said that since the duty to consult the Commission in the matter of making appointment to Civil Services of the State is directory and not mandatory, the appointment by the Government cannot be questioned or interfered with by the Court inasmuch as the candidature for the post in question has already been withdrawn by the Commission and as such the question of validity or invalidity of the appointment to the said post is no longer open to be considered by the Court.
The ratio of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this respect is reproduced as under :-  ``In the instant case, the advertisement for the post was made at the instance of the UP Public Service Commission and the requisite qualification for the post had been specified in the advertisement It is, therefore, essential that a candidate in order to be considered for appointment for the said post must have to comply with the requisite qualification, namely the educational qualification as well as the experience in drug testing etc. for a period of five years.
If any of these essential qualifications is lacking then the candidate cannot claim to be appointed in the said post.
Under Art. 320(3)(a) and (b), it is the duty of Public Service Commission to consider and to get itself satisfied as to which of the candidates has fulfilled the requisite qualifications specified in the advertisement.
The Commission in this particular case has duly got verified the certificates of the candidate in regard to his experience and after considering his report as well as the certificates came to the conclusion that the candidate though fulfilled educational qualifications lacked in the requisite experience.
The Commission, therefore, revised its earlier decision and withdrew the candidature and also cancelled its recommendation earlier given.
23.
Held, that the decision of the Commission in withdrawing the candidature and cancellation of recommendation was not invalid.
It is the constitutional requirement envisaged in Art. 320 of the Constitution that the Commission will have to perform the duty of recommending the candidate fulfilling all the requisite qualifications for the post to the Government for being considered for appointment to the post concerned.
It cannot also be said that since that duty to consult the Public Service Commission in the matter of making appointments to Civil Services of the State is directory and not mandatory, the appointment by the government cannot be questioned or interfered in by the Court inasmuch as the candidature for the post in question has already been withdrawn by the Public Service Commission and as such the question of validity or invalidity of the appointment to the said post is no longer open to be considered by the Court.''
Simply that the Commission has accepted the forms or that it had satisfied itself about the eligibility criteria would not debar the Government to say that the candidates recommended by the Commission did not fulfil the requisite qualifications.
Shri PS Chhinna, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, also placed reliance on Jatinder Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 SC 1850, and submitted that a person cannot claim as of right that the Government must accept the recommendation of the Commission.
This authority may not be directly applicable to the controversy in hand but one thing is clear that the provisions of Article 320 of the Constitution are directory and a person selected by the Public Service Commission has no right to be appointed.
In the present case it is established on the record that the present petitioners did not possess the valid and essential qualifications in terms of the advertisement and the Government was justified in declining their recommendations.
The citation relied upon by Shri JK Sibal, learned counsel for the petitioners, is Amrit Lal Goyal v. State of Punjab through Secretary, Education Department, Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1994(2) Recent Services Judgments 254 : 1994(2) SCT 283 (P&H).
This authority is not applicable to the facts in hand.
In the cited case the question for determination before their Lordships was whether the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualifications.
Those persons were holding the valid qualifications and those qualifications were recognised by the Government.
Subsequently, the said qualifications were derecognised.
Under those circumstances, it was held that such a derecognition would not affect those persons who had attained such qualifications prior to the date of derecongnition.
In the present case the Government has not changed the qualification at all.
The Commission went in error in treating ineligible candidates as eligible by giving a wrong interpretation to the prescribed qualifications laid down by the Government and when the matter ultimately came to the notice of the Government, it declined to accept the recommendations vis-a-vis the petitioners.
In this view of the matter I find that there is no merit in CWP.No.
3125 of 1996, which is hereby dismissed.
24.
Now I proceed to deal with the remaining three writ petitions, which, in my opinion, are also lacked merit and are liable to be dismissed for the reason set forth hereinafter.
25.
Sarvshri HS Mattewal, JS Khehar and PS Kang, learned counsel, in support of their writ petitions, and while assailing the entire process of selection made by the Commission, submitted that the Commission, had failed to implement the advertisement in its letter and spirit when it did not give preference to the holders of postgraduate qualification over and above the simple graduates to take benefit of their higher educational qualifications, higher mental equipment and quality of performance in the administrative efficiency.
They further submitted that classification on the basis of higher qualifications to achieve higher administrative efficiency is permissible under our constitutional scheme.
Their clients, who are postgraduates, ought to have been treated as a class and they ought to have been given preference.
Such preference, if given by the Commission, would not be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, as most of the recommendees of the Commission were only BSc (Agriculture), whereas the writ petitioners were holding MSc.
Degrees in Horticulture.
In support of their common contention, reliance has been placed on Government of Andhra Pradesh v. P Dilip Kumar and another, 1993(2) SCT 432 and my attention has been invited to paras Nos. 11, 12 and 13 of the judgment, and my pertinent attention has been invited to the following observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court :-  ``13.
The matter may be looked at from another view point.
The word `preference' as understood in ordinary parlance means to preferring or choosing as more desirable, favouring or conferring a prior right.
What then is the purpose and object sought to be achieved by the insertion of the preference clause in the rule ?
There is no doubt that preference was sought to be granted under Note 1 to post-graduates in the larger interest of the administration.
How would the interest of the administration would be served by granting preference to post-graduates ?
It is obvious that is was thought that on account of their higher mental equipment the quality of performance that the State will receive from highly qualified engineers would be better and of a high order.
In other words the State considered it necessary to strengthen the engineering service by recruiting post-graduates to the extent available so that the State may benefit from their higher educational qualifications and better performance.
If this was the objective surely it would not be realised unless post-graduates are treated as a class and given preference en block over the graduates.
Since sufficient number of post- graduates may not be available from the feeder channels and even if available cannot be promoted out of turn without causing heart burns, it was thought desirable to resort to such large scale recruitment directly from the open market.
The underlying idea of the Memo.
dated 13th October, 1978 was the same but certain difficulties were felt in resorting to enforcement of the preference clause at the promotion state and that is why the second part came to be inserted in Note 1 but no such difficulty would be experienced in strengthening the cadre through direct recruitment.
But then it was said what was the need for PSC to hold the written test by inviting applications from graduates and subjecting them to test.
That was for the reason that there was no guarantee that sufficient number of post-graduates would qualify for selection and appointment.
But if the preference rule were to be implemented as held by the Tribunal it would apply only where the post-graduate and graduate candidates have secured the same number of marks.
If the rule so implemented is carried to its logical end it would ultimately resolve a tie only at the last rung of the ladder because ties at higher levels would be resolved by a post-graduate being followed by a graduate in the select list.
The question of elimination would really arise at the last placement in the list and hence the real purpose of the preference rule would not be served.
That is why this Court in Md Usman's case (supra) approved of this method of recruitment as most reasonable.
There is nothing arbitrary or unreasonable in the employer preferring a candidate with higher qualification for service.
It is well settled by a catena of decisions that classification on the basis of higher educational qualification to achieve higher administrative efficiency is permissible under our constitutional scheme.''
26.
The submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioners may look alluring at the first instance, but on my deeper scrutiny, I have been able to find that this judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court cannot be helpful to the writ petitioners.
It is a settled principle of law that the Courts cannot add or subtract any qualification with regard to a particular post.
It is the prerogative of the State Government to lay down the qualification.
In the cited case, Hon'ble the Supreme Court was interpreting Rule 4 of the Andhra Pradesh Engineering Service Rules, 1966, and in the rule itself it was mentioned that the candidates with postgraduate qualifications shall be treated as an additional qualification and preference will be given to such candidates in the matter of direct recruitment, promotion and recruitment by transfer of the post of Deputy Executive Engineers.
In the present case we have to see what are the basic essential qualifications for the post of Horticulture Development Officer.
At the cost of repetition it may be mentioned that this qualification is BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as the major/main subject from any recognised university/institution.
It is further mentioned in the advertisement that those candidates, who are MSc.
(Horticulture with other subjects) will be given preference.
Now I have to interpret these relevant words in the light of the `other essential qualifications' referred to above, and, in my opinion, what the Government meant was that due weightage must be given to those candidates, who were possessing MSc.
(Horticulture with other subjects).
It may be difficult for me to gather from this advertisement that they were to be treated as a separate class and must be recommended at the first instance.
If such an interpretation were to be given, a candidate with BSc Agriculture with Horticulture as a major/main subject, could not be reconsidered or recommended for appointment.
Rather the correct interpretation to this essential qualification is that due weightage must be given to those candidates who were holding postgraduate qualifications, like MSc.
(Horticulture with other subjects).
This interpretation, in my opinion, gets strength when it has also been stated in the advertisement that the Commission will call only the most suitable candidates for interview, the basis of which is the minimum prescribed qualifications.
It has been specifically averred by the Commission in the return that due weightage was given to the postgraduate candidates and during the course of arguments it was also brought to my notice that there were seven candidates with postgraduate qualifications, recommended by the Commission for appointment.
It is not the case of the petitioners that any undue favour had been shown while selecting the candidates with BSc (Agriculture) with Horticulture as a main/major subject qualification.
27.
It may be mentioned that every effort has been made by Shri HS Mattewal to convince me that appointment of 7 persons holding postgraduate qualification in Horticulture itself suggests that even no due weightage has been given, but this Court is not in a position to sit over the judgment of experts constituting the different Selection Boards at the time of the interview.
Out of the 53 vacancies, which were to be divided amongst different categories, 7 posts were offered to the postgraduate candidates, which itself suggests that due weightage has been given by the Commission at the time of selection.
Final selection of the candidates was made on the basis of overall higher merit, which must be based on demonstrated performance at the time of the interview.
It is clearly mentioned in the return of the Commission that the candidates having qualifications of MSc.
(Horticulture) or other specialised subjects were awarded extra qualification marks at the time of their interview, but the final selection was made on the basis of the overall merit, which included academic qualifications, extra-curricular activities and demonstrated performance at the time of the interview.
The private respondents were higher in merit and they had been selected and recommended for appointment.
In Secretary (Health) Department of Health v. Dr. Anita Puri and others, JT 1996(8) SC 130, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold that the High Court was in error in holding that a MDS qualified person was entitled to be selected where only some preference was given in the advertisement.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that a clause in the advertisement that preference would be for higher qualification would mean that some additional weightage had to be given to the higher qualified candidates.
But buy no stretch of imagination it can be construed to mean that a higher qualified person automatically is entitled to be selected and appointed.
28.
With regard to those writ petitioners, who are seeking the quashment on the basis that no reservation has been given, they have not been able to establish on the record their entitlement with regard to the basic and essential qualifications.
29.
Learned counsel Shri HS Mattewal has also invited my attention to Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1985(4) SCC 417, and submitted that the process of selection is visited with mala fides and arbitrariness when the Commission has invited 379 candidates as 53 candidates.
In fact, 272 candidates appeared.
According to Mr. Mattewal, the Commission ought to have invited two or at the most three times candidates against the available vacancies having regard to the average time of 10 to 30 minutes which should be devoted in interviewing each candidate.
When the Commission has called such proportionately large number of candidates for interview, the chances of reasonable bias vitiating the entire selection can creep in.
This authority is not helpful to the learned counsel for the petitioners as it stands on its own facts.
It was a case of composite test consisting of a written examination followed by viva voce test.
In the present case the interview had been extended to different dates.
It is not proved on the record that the process of selection was a superficial or a sloppy exercise, nor it has been established prima facie that the selection was the result of arbitrariness on the part of the Commission.
30.
Hence this Court is of the opinion that even the other three writ petitions, i.e. CWP.
No. 9423 of 1995, CWP.No.
11873 of 1995 and CWP.
No. 2566 of 1996, lack merit and they should also be dismissed like CWP.
No. 3125 of 1996.
31.
Resultantly, all the four writ petitions are hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.