NV Balasubramanian, J - This writ petition raises an interesting question on the rule of reservation in a solitary post.
2.
The petitioner joined the service of the Madras Port Trust on 27.4.1967 as a Statistical Assistant, Grade II and he was later promoted as a Statistical Assistant Grade I He got the further promotion as a Research Officer (P & S Cell) in the accounts department and it is a Class II post.
According to the petitioner, he is the seniormost officer in the cadre of Research Officer and he is eligible for promotion to the Class I post viz., Assistant Director (P & R) which is the single post in the Planning & Research Cell of the accounts department of Madras Port Trust.
The post of the Assistant Director, Planning & Research was initially filled up on 9121990 by promoting one Sridharasundaram and later he was promoted as Deputy Director with effect from 1111993.
Consequent on his promotion, a vacancy arose in the post of Assistant Director from 2111993 and the post is kept vacant by the respondent.
The case of the petitioner is that the post of Assistant Director is a selection post and the channel of promotion is an approved probationer in the feeder category of Research Officer.
According to the petitioner, he was fully qualified to be appointed as Assistant Director on 2111993 when the vacancy arose for the post of Assistant Director.
The petitioner alleges that for some ulterior reasons the first respondent, viz., the Madras Port Trust has not filled up the post.
He was fully qualified to be appointed as the Assistant Director.
He refers to the four persons who are working as Research Officer on the date of filing of the writ petition and according to the petitioner, he is the seniormost person.
It is stated in the affidavit that the first respondent has decided to promote the juniormost person by applying the rule of reservation/roster system in the carry forward reservation against the scheduled caste candidate, when the first vacancy arose in the year 1990.
Since no scheduled caste candidate was available on the date of the vacancy and the second respondent became qualified and completed probation only on 8111993 subsequent to the date on which the vacancy arose, the first respondent kept the post vacant with an intention to promote the second respondent.
According to the petitioner, there are no valid reasons whatsoever for the first respondent to keep the post vacant and the intention to favour the second respondent is evident from the fact that though the vacancy arose on 2111993 the first respondent kept the post vacant for the second respondent to complete the requisite period of five years in the cadre of Research Officer.
It is, therefore, submitted since the post of the Assistant Director (Planning & Research Cell) in the accounts department is a single post, the rule of reservation could not be applied and the first respondent should have prepared the list of eligible persons for the promotion to the said post as soon as the vacancy arose on 2111993.
It is alleged that the first respondent cannot keep the single promotional post vacant since 2111993 so as to enable the second respondent to acquire the necessary qualification.
The case of the petitioner is that the Port Trust has acted in an elaborate manner and the first respondent has no authority to do so.
The petitioner further states that on the date when the vacancy arose there were number of qualified persons available for appointment and the fact that the Port Trust has kept the post vacant shows its deliberate intention to promote the second respondent alone.
The petitioner therefore contends that since he is a seniormost officer in the feeder category of Research Officer, the action of the first respondent recommending the Board to relax the experience acquired by the second respondent is not in accordance with law.
The petitioner therefore prays for issue of writ of mandamus directing the first respondent to promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Director (P & R), accounts department with effect from 2111993 and sanction all monetary benefits.
3.
The first respondent has filed a counter affidavit denying all the averments made in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition.
In the counter affidavit the first respondent sets out the necessary qualification for the appointment to the post of Assistant Director, Planning & Research and according to the roster point the post had to be filled up only by a scheduled caste candidate.
Since the second respondent was the only scheduled caste candidate in the feeder post and since he has not completed probation, the vacancy was not dereserved to fill up the vacancy from other community candidate.
Therefore, the relaxation of experience was resorted to in respect of the second respondent and the Board of Trustees of the Madras Port Trust have the power to relax with regard to the shortfall in experience.
The Board also by a resolution dated 20.11.1995 sanctioned the relaxation for the shortfall insofar as the second respondent was concerned.
As regards the reservation for the single post is concerned, it is stated that the rule will apply only in the case of promotion from Class I post lowest in the rank to another class I post, and since the instant case is a promotion from class II post to class I, there is no prohibition to make reservation for the single post.
The sum and substance of the case of the first respondent is since the candidate belonging to the scheduled caste community was available in the feeder category, the question of dererservation did not arise when the vacancy arose in the year 1990.
According to the second respondent, the vacancy was carried forward and in the year 1993 when the candidate belonging to the scheduled caste was available, suitability was considered and the necessary qualification with reference to the experience was relaxed for the same.
4.
The second respondent also filed a separate counter-affidavit supporting the stand of the first respondent stating the post is a reserved post for a scheduled caste community and therefore, the name of the second respondent was considered to fill up the vacancy which arose in the year 1992.
He also referred to the resolution of the Board relaxing the experience and the case of the second respondent is, since it is a reserved post, the Port Trust was justified in not filling up the same when the vacancy arose on 2111993.
5.
Mr. K Alagirisamy, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the post of Assistant Director is a single post and it is not permissible to make reservation for the promotion in favour of the scheduled caste candidate to the said post.
He referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Chakradhar v. State of Bhiar, AIR 1980 SC 959, the decision of this Court in Chockalingam, P.R.
v. Director of Tourism, (1973) 1 Mad L W 17, the decision of the Karnataka High Court in Dr. Rajkumar v. Gulbarga University, AIR 1990 Karnataka 320 and the decision of the Supreme Court in Chetana Dilip Motghara v. Bhide Girls Education Society, Nagpur, AIR 1994 SC 1917and submitted that it is not open to the Port Trust to make reservation for the scheduled caste candidate for an isolated post.
6.
Mr. RG Rajan, learned counsel of the Madras Port Trust submitted that it is open to the Madras Port Trust to make reservation in favour of the scheduled caste candidate as the reservation is made on the basis of roster.
It is unnecessary to consider the submissions made by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner in great detail as the matter is no longer res integra in view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Madhav, (1997) 2 SCC 332, Union of India v. Brij Lal Thakur, (1997) 4 SCC 278 and Suresh Chandra v. JB Agarwal, (1997) 3 Scale 697 : 1997(2) SCT 593 (SC), wherein the Supreme Court has consistently taken the view that even though there is a single post, if the Government has applied the rule of rotation or the roster point for the vacancy that has arisen in the single point post and were sought to be filled up by the candidates in reserved categories at the point on which they are eligible to be considered, such a rule is not violative of Art. 16(1) the Constitution of India.
The facts of the case clearly indicate that the Port Trust has applied the rule of roster and therefore, the reservation made by the Madras Port Trust even for a single post by applying the rule of roster is constitutionally permissible and the submission of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner has no force, after recent decisions of the Supreme Court cited supra.
7.
Mr. K Alagirisamy, learned senior counsel for the petitioner then contended that the vacancy arose for the post of the Assistant Director (P & R) on 1111993 and on that date the petitioner alone was qualified to fill up the post as he had 5 years and 22 days of his experience in the lower cadre and when the decision was taken by the Madras Port Trust on 9111993, the petitioner alone was qualified to fill up the post as the second respondent was recruited directly as the Research Officer on 8111993 and he lacked five years experience as the Research Officer, which was the essential condition for the appointment of the Assistant Director and therefore, when the Port Trust decided to fill up the post, the second respondent did not have the essential length of experience for considering him to the post of Assistant Director.
The learned senior counsel also submitted that it must be taken that the Madras Port Trust decided to fill up the post when it decided to relax the qualification regarding the experience in favour of the second respondent on 9111995 and the agenda clearly shows that the Port Trust has decided to fill up the post on 9111995.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Umakant Saran v. State of Bihar, (1973) 1 SCC 485 in support of his submission that the crucial date is the date of decision to fill up the post and on that date the petitioner alone was filly qualified and he alone should be considered for the post.
Then the learned senior counsel also submitted that there can be no relaxation of experience to full up the post and in support of his submission he relied upon an unreported decision of this Court of Sathidevi, J in W. P. No. 8743/85 dated 1331988 and submitted that the Madras Port Trust has no power to relax the qualification regarding experience.
The further submission of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner was that Madras Port Trust had no power to relax the qualification or experience in favour of an individual and the relaxation can be made in general and not in particular cases under the provisions of the Madras Port Trust Employees' (Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) Rules and he also placed reliance on the letter issued by the Madras Port Trust dated 13121984 to show that the Port Trust itself has admitted that it has no power to relax the experience prescribed under the relevant rules.
He also relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of RR Verma v. Union of India, (1980) 3 SCC 402, Jit Singh v. State of Punjab.
(1979)3 SCC 37 and Full Bench decision of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, AIR 1990 Pun & Har 117, and submitted that the Port Trust had no power to relax the qualification regarding experience in favour of the second respondent.
8.
Mr. RG Rajan, learned counsel for the Madras Port Trust on the other hand submitted that while the matter of filling of the post was on consideration, the petitioner has approached this Court and obtained the interim stay and therefore, he submitted that since the matter is still under consideration by the Port Trust, the decisions relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner have no application.
He also referred to the relevant provisions of the Madras Port Trust Act and the relevant rules and submitted that under Regulation 24 of the Madras Port Trust Employees' (Appointment, Promotion, etc.) Regulations (hereinafter referred to as `the Regulations') the Port Trust has the power to relax any of the regulations and the unreported decision relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner has no application as the relaxation in that case was made by the Chairman, but in the instant case the relaxation was made by the Board.
He also submitted that even the facts of the case are different and therefore that case has no application to the facts of the instant case.
9.
I have carefully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel.
The Port Trust is the first respondent in the writ petition and it has filed the counter affidavit wherein it has been categorically stated that while the matter of filling up the post was under consideration, the petitioner has approached this Court to promote the writ petitioner to the post of Assistant Director (P & R) in the accounts department.
The counter-affidavit makes it clear that the Port Trust was still considering the matter of filling up the post and has not decided to fill up the post.
Therefore, the submission made by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner has no force on the facts of the instant case.
10.
The learned senior counsel referred to the resolution of the Chairman of the Madras Port Trust dated 911995 and the said resolution indicates that as per the roster point the vacancy has to be filled up by scheduled caste candidate and the second respondent was scheduled caste candidate appointed as the Research Officer on 8111991.
The resolution also refers to a decision taken on 2871985 that the relaxation of qualifying service can be made upto a period of one year by the Chairman with the prior sanction of the Board.
The resolution does not in any way indicate that Chairman of the Madras Port Trust has decided to fill up the post and called for applications to fill up the post.
The resolution, if properly read, would indicate the proposal to relax qualification regarding experience in favour of the second respondent by the Chairman of the Madras Port Trust and the resolution of the Chairman was placed before seeking the approval of the Board for relaxation of the qualifying service in respect of the second respondent.
The Board resolution also shows that the Board has resolved, after discussion, to approve the proposal of the Chairman.
In my view, neither the proposal of the Chairman nor the resolution of the Board indicate that the Board had decided to fill up the post and it is not permissible to read more into the proposal or the resolution of the Board to come to a conclusion that the Commissioner or Board had decided to fill up the post on 9111995.
Even assuming that the decision was taken by the Board to relax the experience the decision was taken in the public interest.
According to the Chairman of the Madras Port Trust, as per the roster point the vacancy has to be filled up with scheduled caste candidate and the second respondent belongs to the scheduled caste community and since he lacked experience, the Chairman of the Madras Port Trust felt that the post should be filled by candidate belonging to the scheduled caste community.
The proposal of the Chairman of the Madras Port Trust to fill up the post from the candidate belonging to the scheduled caste community cannot be taken to mean that the Chairman has decided to fill up the post; it means that the condition regarding experience was ordered in favour of scheduled caste candidate so that the rule or reservation enshrined in Art. 16 of the Constitution is fulfilled and the person from a reserved community can be given the opportunity to fill up the post.
It cannot be said that the Chairman has decided to fill up the post or appoint a particular candidate at that point of `time itself', but his proposal should be taken in the spirit of fulfilling the mandate of the Constitution of India, and therefore, the relaxation should be construed as a relaxation in public interest, so that person from the reserved candidate can get promotion to the higher post.
11.
That apart, the decision relied upon by learned senior counsel for the petitioner in W.P. No. 8743/85 dated 1331988 has no application as in that case the relaxation was granted by the Chairman, but in the instant case the relaxation was granted by Board under Regulation 24 of the Regulations.
Mr. K Alagirisamy, learned senior counsel submitted that under the proviso to Rule 5 it is permissible to relax only the upper age limit in the case of candidate belonging to SC, ST or any other special category in accordance with the general orders issued from time to time.
The proviso to Regulation 5 has no application to the facts of the case as the proviso to Regulation 5 empowers the Chairman to relax the upper age limit in the case of candidate belonging to SC or ST. That apart, further the relaxation contemplated under the proviso to Regulation 5 can be made in favour of SC and ST employees by general notification and the counsel for the Madras Port Trust has not rightly relied upon the proviso to Regulation 5 for relaxing the qualification regarding the experience in favour of the second respondent.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner referred to Regulation 19 of the Regulations, but that regulation has no application as the Board has invoked its powers under Regulation 24 to relax the qualification regarding experience in favour of the second respondent.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submitted that it is not permissible for the Board to relax the experience under Regulation 24 of the regulations.
I am not able to accept the contention of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner as the regulation empowers the Board to relax any of the provisions of the regulations.
Under Rule 5 the manner of appointment to a post shall be laid down by the Chairman of the Port Trust from time to time.
The manner of appointment contemplated under Rule 5 includes not only the educational qualification, length of service, age limit, but also other conditions to fill up the post.
The condition for the appointment can either be the educational qualification or the length of service in a feeder category and when the Chairman invokes the power of Regulation 5 and frames the rules for appointment, it must be taken that the rules made for appointment to the post were made under the regulations themselves.
I have already held it is open to the Board to relax any of the provisions of the regulations, which would include, in my opinion the relaxation regarding an aspect of qualification namely, experience in the feeder category.
The condition for selection framed under the rules has two dimensions; one is educational qualification and another is experience and in my view, it is open to the Board to relax any of the conditions for the selection to the posts on proper reasons.
Therefore, in my view, the Board has the necessary power to relax the qualification regarding experience as and when the power conferred under Regulation 24 cannot be confined to relax some of the provisions contained in the regulations but in my view, it will extend to orders issued in exercise of powers conferred under the Regulation as the orders issued under the Regulations are part of the Regulations.
It cannot also be said that the Board has exercised the power arbitrarily.
The proposal of the Chairman gave reasons for the relaxation of the experience as the second respondent fell short in experience by one year and the Board after discussion has decided to accept the proposal of the Chairman.
Therefore, it cannot also be said that the Board has exercised the power in an arbitrary manner in favour of the second respondent.
The decisions relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner in my view have no application to the facts of the case.
12.
In Umakant Saran v. State of Bihar, (1973) 1 SCC 485 the Supreme Court held the crucial date is a date when the decision was taken to fill up the post.
In that case, it was a case of promotion, but in the instant case, the mode of selection for the post of the Assistant Director (P & R) is by selection and the channel of promotion is the approved probationer in the category of Research Officer to Assistant Statistical Officer.
Therefore, the crucial date in this case is that date of selection unlike in the case of a promotion.
I am of the view that mainly because the candidate has the necessary qualification and necessary experience, he has no right of the post unless he is selected by the committee considering the appointment for the post of Assistant Director.
Therefore, it is only to enable the committee to consider the case of the second respondent, the condition regarding experience of 5 years was relaxed in favour of the second respondent and it is only thereafter the selection committee can consider whether the second respondent was eligible for the post of Assistant Director.
So also the petitioner by having requisite experience of 5 years in the post of Officer, has no right to the post till he is selected by the committee.
In other words, the crucial date in the instant case is the date of selection and not the date of decision to fill up the post.
Therefore, the decision in Umakant Saran's case is distinguishable and is not applicable to the facts of the case.
13.
The next decision relied upon by learned senior counsel for the petitioner is the decision of the Supreme Court in RR Verma v. Union of India, (1980) 3 SCC 402 and the law laid down by the Supreme Court which is relevant for the purpose of the case reads as under:-  "The Central Government is bound to exercise the power in the public interest with a view to secure civil servants of efficiency and integrity and when and only when undue hardship is caused by the application of the rules, the power to relax is to be exercised in a just and equitable manner but again, only to the extent necessary for so dealing with the case.
We do not have to add that the exercise of power of relaxation like all other administrative actions affecting rights of parties is subject to judicial review on grounds now well known.
Viewed in this light we do not think that Rule 3 is unconstitutional on the ground that it vests an unfettered discretion in the Government."
In the instant case, we have already seen the relaxation was made only in the public interest and not in the individual interest on the basis that the benefit and facilities should be extended to a reserved candidate viz. the scheduled caste candidate so that a candidate from the weaker section of the community can come up and the rule of roster was applied in favour of the scheduled caste candidate.
Hence, the test laid down by the Supreme Court in RR Verma's case, cited supra, that the relaxation should be made in pubic interest is fully satisfied on the facts of the case.
14.
In Jit Singh v. State of Punjab, (1979) 3 SCC 37, the Supreme Court was construing the provisions of Rule 14 of the Punjab Police Service Rules, 1959 and Rule 14 as it stood then restricted the powers to relax the rules in favour of particular candidate and it did not permit any general relaxation of the rules.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner therefore, submitted that Regulation 24 of the Regulations, on the other hand, empowers the Board to make general relaxation, but not to make relaxation of favour in particular case.
In my view, Regulation 24 empowers the Board to relax any of the provisions of Regulation which would comprehend within itself, general relaxation in favour of particular class or classes of employees or individual relaxation in favour of certain individual, if the circumstances so warrant.
Therefore, the decision of the Supreme Court referred to above is not applicable to the facts of the case.
15.
The decision in Punjab State Electicity Board, Patiala v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, AIR 1990 Punj & Har 117 is a case of promotion and under the rules when a candidate acquired the eligiblity he was entitled to be promoted in preference to his senior as and when promotion post became available.
On the facts of the case, we have already seen either by acquiring the educational qulification only putting in sufficient length of service a candidate acquires no right to the post, as the promotion in the instant case is by selection and mere acquistion of the eligibility condition is not sufficient for the selection.
Hence, the decision of the Full Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the above case is not applicable to the facts of the case.
16.
In an unreported decision of this Court in WA No. 756/93 dated 2971993 in the case of SP Jalaja v. D Jayaselvi, the Division Bench of this Court has held that there is no law or rule that a person who is eligible for promotion shall have a right to be promoted from the date when the vacancy arose and right vested is only a right to be considered for promotion and on that date the case of promotion was considered and those who are eligible for filling up the vacancy are required to be considered.
In my view, the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court would squarely apply to the facts of the case and it cannot be said that the petitioner had acquired right to fill up the post right from the date when the vacancy arose.
His right would accrue only on the date of seletion till the committee considered the case of the eligible persons for promotion and selected candidate has no right to the post.
It is significant to notice that the second respondent has acquired the qualification regarding the experience during the pendency of the writ petition and is eligible to be considered for the post of Assistant Director in his own right.
Hence, I am not able to accept the contention of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner.
17.
Hence, I am of the view that the Board has the necessary power to relax the experience and the relaxation in favour of the second respondent regarding the experience in the feeder category was made in public interest and I do not find any infirmity in the proposal of the Chairman of the Madras Port Trust or in the resolution of the Board in relaxing the experience in favour of the second respondent.
The writ petition is deviod of merits and is liable to be dismissed and accordingly, it is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.