HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - On 2351994 a Division Bench of this Court allowed the present Writ petition relying exclusively on a Single Bengh decision of this Court in CWP No. 15088 of 1990 (Madan Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others).
The State of Haryana then went to the Hon'ble Supreme Court by way of an SLP and leave was granted and ultimately Civil Appeal No. 14169 of 1996 was allowed vide order dated 20.11.1996 with the following observations:-  "Leave granted.
On the basis of the decision of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 1304 of 1995, Haryana State Electricity Board v. Radhey Shyam Garg and others, decided on October 31, 1995, this appeal is allowed, the judgment and order of the High Court is set aside and the matter is remitted back to it for fresh disposal in accordance with law."
It is in that eventuality that the matter has been placed before us today.
2.
In Madan Lal's case the Single Bench had primarily placed reliance on the fact that one Madan Lal had filed a civil suit against the State of Haryana claiming the same relief and that suit had been decreed and the said appeal upto the High Court had also been dismissed.
It may be noticed that the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while disposing of the Civil Appeal No. 1419/96 had relied upon the judgment in Haryana State Electricity Board v. Radhey Shyam Garg and others, Civil Appeal No. 1304 of 1995, in which case the Supreme Court also went into the correctness of the judgment in Krishan Lal's case and observed as under:-  "As regards the suit of Krishan Lal, who was a driver in the Haryana Roadways, it may be stated that the decision in that suit was given in the context of the facts of that particular case.
The said decision may have binding force against the State of Haryana in so far as Krishan Lal is concerned but it could not form the basis for holding that the respondents, who were not employees of Haryana Roadways but were employees of the Board, are entitled to count the services rendered by them in the private company for the purpose of retiral benefits.
Moreover, in the instant case the offer of appointment on the basis of which the respondents joined the Board clearly indicates that they would be treated as fresh entrants in service for all purposes.
We are, therefore, unable to uphold the impugned judgment of the high court.
3.
It may also be noticed that in the pleadings before us in the present writ petition, the petitioner had only placed reliance on Madan Lal's case alone and no other matter had been pleaded or raised.
Reliance on Madan Lal's case in so far as it relies on Krishan Lal's case can no longer be accepted.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner admits this position and says that this petition may be disposed of with liberty to the petitioner to file a fresh petition giving more particulars.
We accept this prayer.
5.
This petition is accordingly dismissed with the observation that in case the petitioner wishes to file another writ petition giving more particulars with regard to his entitlement to pension, he will be at liberty to do so and the dismissal of the present petition will not stand in his way.
Petition dismissed.