TS Doabia, J - This appeal has been preferred against an order passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court, whereby a writ of mandamus stands issued.
Direction has been issued to the State of Jammu & Kashmir to treat the period for which the petitioner had undergone Post Graduation Course on deputation in terms of Article 44-F of the J&K Civil Service Regulation.
It is against the above direction given by a learned Single Judge of this court, this appeal has been preferred.
2.
Appeal is barred by limitation.
Delay is sought to be explained by submitting that some time was taken in processing the file by the State Government.
Taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case the delay in the matter of filing appeal is condoned.
So far as merits of controversy is concerned following facts are apparent :-  (i) Whenever a doctor has to undergo a training or undertake a Post Graduation Course, the Government has been passing orders with a view to treat that period as period spent as on deputation.
(ii) That the petitioner has also undergone aforementioned training.
He submits that he is entitled to the benefit of Article 44-F of the J&K Civil Service Regulation.
(iii) Plea of the State was that the case of writ petitioner is distinguishable as he went for the courses without being sponsored by the State.
This plea was not accepted as there was no rebuttal of the stand taken by the petitioner.
No step was taken by the State to file counter.
(iv) Treating period of training as on deputation and refusing to do so in other cases would be arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of equality clause.
We are of the opinion that there is no merit in this State appeal.
3.
Somewhat similar matter came up for consideration in the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Dr. Satish Kumar Gupta and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) Recent Services Judgments 216.
A Doctor working with the State Government and who had completed five years of service was entitled to receive full pay whereas a Doctor who had less than five years standing but more than three years was only entitled to a stipend.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court came to the conclusion that this classification has no rationale behind.
It was held that this was not based on any intelligible differentia and no distinction could be made between a doctor with five years or more service and those having less than five years' service.
It was observed as under :-  "...
This further classification has in my opinion no rationale behind it and is not founded on any intelligible differentia which could distinguish the doctors with five years or more service from those having less than five years service.
When all relevant considerations are the same as in the instant case, persons holding identical posts of PCMS Class II and having been admitted to the Post Graduate Courses for the purpose of improving their educational qualifications cannot be treated differently in the matter of pay for the duration of the Course solely on the ground of their length of service in PCMS Class II service is to my mind wholly irrelevant so far as the Post Graduate Courses are concerned.
Again, the doctors who were selected for the Post Graduate Courses in January, 1987 session and have two years of rural service to their credit have also been given full pay during the period of the Course whereas it is denied to the doctors who joined in any subsequent session.
There is no rationale behind this either...." 4.
The above decision given by NK Sodhi, J of Punjab and Haryana High Court was followed in Ajit Pal Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(3) SCT 332 (P&H) : 1993(14) Legal Reports and Statute 173.
Amarjeet Chaudhary, J took note of the fact that a Letters Patent Appeal filed in Satish Kumar Gupta's case (supra) was dismissed by the Division Bench of that Court.
Students undergoing house jobs were denied stipends.
This was challenged.
This was held to be violative of equality clause in the case of Dr. Rashmi Gadkari v. State of MP, 1996(2) SCT 266; it was observed as under :-  "When a student is given admission for pursuing studies in the higher courses, the object is to impart the requisite knowledge to the students.
The object in all the cases remains the same.
As such making a distinction between a student who was given admission against Assistant Surgeon quota or against some other quota cannot be said to be based on any rationale."
It was further said :-  "The object is to enable the doctors/students to improve the educational qualification.
It is a matter of common knowledge that during the course of study, these students look after the patients and perform similar work/duties irrespective of the category from which they are admitted.
Thus, I am of the view that the classification sought to be made in the present case is not tenable and the petitioners in both the petitions are entitled to the same privileges which have been given to other students."
"The petitioner has also placed reliance on an order passed by this Court in MP No. 1501 of 1989 decided on 23rd April, 1991 in the case of Dr. Ashutosh Dwivedi v. Dean, GR Medical College Gwalior and others.
The court observed as under :-  "...
He was admitted in the M.D.
Course on 2251990 under an order of this Court.
The other admitted students have been paid their stipend under the rules.
The petitioner should have been paid his stipend, but none has been paid so far."
5.
In view of the above, no exception can be taken to the view expressed by the learned Single Judge of this court.
Non-grant of such benefits in case of writ petitioner was rightly held to be violative of equality clause.
In view of the above, we find no justification to interfere with the order under appeal.
This appeal is found to be without merits and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.