Sat Pal, J - This application has been filed by Narinder Mohan Sharma (hereinafter referred as the writ petitioner) under Order 21 Rule 10 CPC for execution of the order dated 5th January, 1995, passed by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 15472 of 1993.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the writ petitioner who was employed as a Lecturer in the Doaba College, Jullundur City, submitted his resignation on 6th September, 1993 to be effective from 6th December, 1993.
Before the aforesaid effective date, the writ petitioner vide his letter dated 1st December, 1993 withdrew his resignation.
The College Management accepted the resignation submitted by the writ petitioner on 25th November, 1993 i.e. before the request for withdrawal of the same was received by the College Management.
Since the College Management refused the request of the writ petitioner for withdrawal of the resignation, he filed CWP No. 15472 of 1993.
The said writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated 5th January, 1995.
By this judgment, the Division Bench quashed the order dated 14th December, 1993 issued by the College Management by which the request of the writ petitioner for withdrawal of the resignation was rejected.
Consequently the College Management was directed to permit the petitioner to withdraw his resignation and allow him to join his duty.
Pursuant to the judgment dated 511995 passed by the Division Bench of this Court, the writ petitioner was reinstated in service on 221995.
3.
Thereafter, the writ petitioner filed an application bearing C.M.
No. 7804 of 1995 seeking specific direction of this court for payment of the back wages.
This application was disposed of with the following order :  The petitioner will be at liberty to make a representation for the back wages.
On quashing of the order all the consequential reliefs are presumed to follow.
No specific direction is required to be issued for the consequential reliefs.
CM stands disposed of.
4.
In terms of the clarification given by this Court the writ petitioner made a representation to the respondents for the payment of the back wages for the period from 7121993 to 121995.
In reply to this representation, the stand taken by the College Management was that the college was liable to pay to the extent of its share of 5% of back wages and the remaining 95% should be recovered from the Director of Public Instructions (C) Punjab.
The State Government through Director of Public Instructions (C), however, refused to pay 95% amount of the back wages on the ground that 95% of the wages can be given by the State Government only with regard to lecturer who has put in 40 hours of work in a week as stipulated in rule 18 of the terms and conditions applicable to the employees working in the Government-aided Colleges.
5.
Since the amount of backwages was not paid to the writ petitioner, he filed the petition bearing COCP No. 1228 of 1995 against the respondents.
The said petition was, however, dismissed by a learned Single Judge of this Court vide order dated 2751996.
In this order, it was, however, observed that the writ petitioner may enforce his rights by seeking appropriate remedy before the appropriate forum by claiming back wages.
It was in these circumstances that the writ petitioner has filed the present application for recovery of the amount of back wages for the period from 7121993 to 121995.
6.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that after the order passed by the College Management refusing to accept the withdrawal of the resignation and relieving the writ petitioner from his post with effect from 6121993, was set aside by the Division Bench of this Court, the writ petitioner was entitled to back wages for the period from 7121993 to 121995 when he was reinstated in service.
In support of his submission, learned counsel placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in KC Joshi v. Union of India and others, 1985(2) S.L.R.
204, Full Bench judgment of this Court in Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala, 1983(1) SLR 15 and judgment of the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in Union of India v. Kewal Krishan Mital, 1984(2) SLR 614.
7.
Mr. Anil Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate-General, however, submitted that under rule 18 of the terms and conditions applicable to the employees working in the Government Aided Colleges, the College could claim 95% of the salary payable to a lecturer subject to the condition that such a lecturer has put in 40 hours of work in a week.
He submitted that in the present case, admittedly, the writ petitioner had not worked at all during the period for which the College Management is claiming 95% of the salary payable to the writ petitioner.
He, however, submitted that even in refusing to accept the request of the writ petitioner regarding withdrawal of his resignation, was not with the approval of the State Government and on this ground also the State Government was not liable to pay 95% of the salary payable to the writ petitioner.
8.
Mr. Nagpal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the College Management submitted that the Executing Court could not go beyond the relief granted in the main case.
He submitted that in the main case, while allowing the petition, the Division Bench had granted only consequential benefits but consequential benefits do not include the arrears of salary.
He, however, submitted that if there was any ambiguity in the order passed by the Division Bench, the Division Bench should be approached to seek clarification.
He, however, submitted that in any case, 95% of the amount of the back wages was to be paid by the State Government as the State Government itself was party in the writ petition and as per directions issued by the office of the Director, Public Instructions (C) in their letter dated 421994, the post of lecturer which fell vacant after the writ petitioner was relieved, was not filled up.
9.
I have given thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records of the case.
While disposing of C.M.
No. 7804 of 1995, the Division Bench clarified that on quashing of the order, all the consequential reliefs are presumed to follow.
In view of this clarification, there could not be any doubt that the writ petitioner was entitled to back wages for the period from 7121993 to 121995.
The contention of the learned counsel of the College Management that the consequential benefits do not include the arrears of salary, is without any merit.
In this connection, reference may be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in KC Joshi's case (supra) wherein it was held that "ordinarily where the order of the termination of the service is shown to be bad and illegal, the necessary conclusion must follow that the employee continued to be in uninterrupted service and he is entitled to full back wages."
In the present case, as stated hereinabove, it was clearly observed by the Division Bench that all the consequential reliefs are presumed to follow.
Accordingly, it is held that the writ petitioner is entitled to back wages for the period from 7121993 to 121995.
10.
The question now to be examined is as to whether the amount of arrears for the abovementioned period is to be recovered in full from the College Management or the College Management is liable to pay 5% of the said amount and the remaining 95% is to be paid by the State Government.
In this connection, reference may be made to rule 18 of the terms and conditions applicable to the employees of the Government Aided Colleges.
The said rule reads as under :-  "A certificate shall be furnished by the principal of the college to which the grant is given that each of the lecturers for whom the grant has been claimed puts in 40 hours of work in a week.
Out of this, he will spend at least 20 hours in a week on the premises of the College for teaching and guidance of students.
This would be subject to the prevision that a teacher may be detained in the college beyond this limit in the interest of work."
This rule has been interpreted by a Division Bench of this Court in the judgment dated 19.6.1998 passed in L.P.A. No. 411 of 1998 : 1998(2) SCT 657 (State of Punjab and another v. KK Sharma).
In this case, the employee was suspended by the management of the school without approval by the competent authority and the State Government was not involved in the matter.
Accordingly, it was held that the responsibility of passing illegal order of suspension and dismissal of the writ petitioner was solely of the management of the school and accordingly, the management of the school was directed to pay to the writ petitioner the amount of arrears of salary.
11.
In the present case, the impugned order dated 6121993 relieving the writ petitioner from his post (which has been held to be illegal) was passed by the College Management.
This order was challenged by the writ petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 15472 of 1993 and in this writ petition, the State Government and the Director, Public Instructios (College) Punjab were also impleaded as respondents.
In the written statement filed by the State Government, inter alia it was stated that the writ petitioner being employee of Doaba College, Jalandhar falls under the administrative and financial control of the college management and "the answering respondent only provides financial assistance to the respondent-college of 95% of the approval deficit in respect of salaries of the staff under 95% deficit grant in aid scheme to the college through the Principal."
In reply to the relief clause, it was stated that the contentions of the petitioner are exclusively against respondent No. 3.
The State has been made a proforma party only.
The written statement was however silent on the point as to whether the action of the college-management in refusing to accept the withdrawal of the resignation submitted by the writ petitioner was legal or not.
From the file of COCP No. 1228 of 1995, I find that the State Government through Director of Public Instructions (C) Punjab vide letter dated 421994 had informed the College Management that till the decision of the Hon'ble High Court in C.W.P.
No. 15472 of 1993, the vacancy arising as a result of the resignation of the writ petitioner could not be filled up.
From the facts mentioned hereinabove, it is clear that till 321994, the State Government was not a party to the action of the college- management in refusing to accept the withdrawal of the resignation of the writ petitioner, which has been held to be illegal by the Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 15472 of 1993.
Accordingly, I hold that for the period from 7121993 to 321994, the College Management is liable to pay the arrears of salary in terms of law laid down by the Division Bench of this Court in KK Sharma (supra).
12.
The above-mentioned letter dated 421994 shows that from the said date the State Government was very much aware of the action taken by the management and also the said action having been challenged by the writ petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 15472 of 1993.
The State Government even directed the College Management not to fill up the vacancy which arose as a result of the acceptance of the resignation of the writ petitioner but the State Government did not direct the college management to concede the case of the writ petitioner before the High Court.
On the contrary, the stand taken by the State Government in their written statement dated 931994 was that "the answering respondent only provides financial assistance to the extent of 95% of the approval deficit in respect of salaries of the staff.........
The State has been made a proforma party only."
Since the State Government after having become aware of the action of the college management, did not issue any direction to the college management to reinstate the writ petitioner and in pursuance of the directions given by the State Government, vacancy which arose as a result of the acceptance of the resignation of the writ petitioner, was not filled up, I am of the opinion that the arrears of salary for the period from 421994 to 121995 to the extent of 95% shall be paid by the State Government to the writ petitioner and the remaining 5% shall be paid by the college management.
It may be relevant to note here that in the letter dated 1261995 (copy of which was filed as Annexure R-2/6) along with the reply filed by the college management in COCP No. 1228 of 1995, it was stated by the college management that in a similar case of Librarian, Mr. Ranjit Singh, GN Khalsa College, Daroli Kalan, the share of the salary was paid by the State Government and this fact was not controverted by the State Government.
In view of the above discussion, the application is allowed in the manner indicated hereinabove and I direct the State Government to make payment of 95% of the arrears of salary for the period from 421994 to 121995 and the college management is directed to make the full amount of arrears of salary for the period from 7121993 to 321994 and 5% of the arrears of salary for the period from 421994 to 121995 within a period of three months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
Appeal allowed.