DH Nasir, J - The petitioner is challenging the legality of the proceedings taken by the 2nd respondent vide Rc.
No. PACS/DNK/1/96 dated 1171996 and seeking a direction to the respondent to reinstate the petitioner into service with all consequential benefits, in this writ petition.
2.
The services of the petitioner were terminated as Paid Secretary of the Respondent-Society (Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit Society, Dendukuru, Madhira Mandal, Khammam district).
Under Rule 72 of the Cooperative Societies Rules (for short `the Rules'), the petitioner was deputed to L.S.C.
Mudigonda on 2591992.
However, since this was not accepted by the President of the Society, the petitioner was sent on deputation to the 1st respondent Society by order dated 231993.
According to the instructions of the 3rd respondent, the petitioner was placed under suspension in exercise of the power conferred under Section 59 of the AP Cooperative Societies Act (for short `the Act').
This was done on the basis of an ex parte enquiry report made under Section 51 of the Act.
According to the report, the petitioner was found to have misappropriated a sum of Rs. 79,357/- for which the petitioner was suspended by letter dated 891993.
The 3rd respondent appointed an enquiry officer to initiate disciplinary action against the petitioner vide proceedings dated 1531995.
Subsistence Allowance was paid to the petitioner up to the end of 1994 while he was under suspension.
But the Society had not paid Subsistence Allowance from 111995 onwards.
The enquiry officer framed charge against the petitioner and called for his explanation vide Rc.
No. 3095-D.S.
dated 10.10.1995.
Pending enquiry, the petitioner made representation to the Divisional Cooperative Officer as well as the 3rd respondent on 2631996 and 751996 to direct the 1st respondent-Society to pay Subsistence Allowance to the petitioner and also represented that his family and himself were put to grave hardship and his family life was disrupted on account of acute poverty.
By letter dated 1841996, the petitioner was directed to be paid the Subsistence Allowance by the Divisional Cooperative Officer.
The 3rd respondent also gave the same direction to the 1st respondent.
3.
Further, according to the petitioner, the 2nd respondent issued the impugned order of removal of the petitioner from service.
In the order of removal it was stated that the domestic enquiry report was received by the 1st respondent on 25111995 and a resolution was passed on 941996 for petitioner's removal from service.
The decision for petitioner's removal was taken by the District Level Committee and the 2nd respondent was directed to take further action in the matter.
It was also stated in the report that the Managing Committee passed a resolution on 1171996 delegating its power to the 2nd respondent to remove the petitioner from service and that the respondent passed the impugned order accordingly.
However, according to the petitioner, the proceedings conducted against him were totally illegal and devoid of jurisdiction and that the principles of natural justice were grossly violated.
4.
The 2nd respondent (President, P.A.C.C.S.
Dendukuru, Madhira Mandal, Khammam district) filed a counter affidavit denying the allegations made by the petitioner.
A preliminary ground is taken in the counter that the writ petition was not maintainable in view of the fact that without exhausting remedies available to the petitioner under the provisions of the Act, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition invoking writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, which was illegal and premature.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was working as Paid Secretary before de-caderisation under Section 116-AA of the Act and under Rule 72 of the Rules, the petitioner was depicted to the 1st respondent-Society.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was placed under suspension for misappropriation of Rs. 79,357/- under the instructions of the 3rd respondent on the basis of the enquiry report under Section 51 of the Act.
During the enquiry, according to the deponent, it was revealed that several irregularities were committed by the petitioner leading to misappropriation of funds by the petitioner to an extent of Rs. 45,000/-.
This amount was irregularly drawn on 21.8.1993 towards building repairs in the name of the President of the Society.
It is also revealed in the preliminary enquiry that the Secretary had failed to bring the amounts of share capital from the members into the cash book while disbursement of SAO loan from 2451993 to 29.5.1993.
The petitioner retained the same up to 2081993 and misappropriated Rs. 41,189/-.
The petitioner also drew an amount of Rs. 20,000/- towards vehicle loan basing on the resolution of the Managing Committee but without the approval of the competent authority.
An amount of Rs. 2,500/- was drawn irregularly on 3081993 in the name of the President.
5.
It is further pointed out by the respondents that Subsistence Allowance was paid to the petitioner while he was under suspension for about 16 months and from 111995 the Society stopped paying the Subsistence Allowance as the petitioner was no longer continued in service.
The order of removal was issued by the 2nd respondent under Bye-law No 12 of the P.A.C.C.S.
6.
Further, according to the respondents, the writ petition is not maintainable in view of the fact that Bye-law No 12(3) of the P.A.C.C.S.
Dendukuru provided for an appeal to be filed before the District Collector writhing 60 days from the date of removal order from service and that the District Collector was the competent authority to settle the matter.
The decision for petitioner's removal from service was taken by the Managing Committee in consultation with District Level Committee and that the Managing Committee of PACCS Dendukuru also passed a resolution in that regard on 941996.
The decision of the Managing Committee was implemented by the 2nd respondent who is the Chairperson of the Managing Committee.
Further, according to the respondents, Section 51 of the Act clearly provided that if a person was placed under suspension, Subsistence Allowance should be paid for a period of six months only.
7.
In this background of the facts, the learned Counsel for the petitioner emphatically submitted that the enquiry was conducted behind his back and he was not given an opportunity of hearing which was in gross violation of the principles of natural justice.
Further, according to the learned Counsel for the petitioner, the action taken by the respondents was not sustainable also on account of the fact that the 2nd show cause notice was not served upon the petitioner and the petitioner was not heard before imposing the penalty of removal from service.
The 3rd contention which constitutes the main bone of contention is that non-payment of Subsistence Allowance to the petitioner was patently illegal and that even if the respondents' case is accepted that the petitioner did not avail the opportunity of hearing after receipt of show cause notice, the non-payment of Subsistence Allowance, according to the petitioner, could justifiably be invoked as the just cause for not attending the enquiry proceedings, and in support of this contention, large number of authorities were cited by the learned Counsel for the petitioner, which I now propose to discuss one after another.
8.
In Ghansham Das.
v. State of MP, 1973(1) SLR 636 the Supreme Court was confronted with a situation in which the appellant, a Forest Ranger, was put under suspension with effect from October 30, 1994 by the State of Madhya Pradesh.
He was directed to remain at Jagdalpur during the period of suspension.
Certain charges were framed against him and an enquiry was initiated.
He did not participate in the enquiry.
The enquiry proceeded ex parte.
On May 28, 1995, the enquiry officer submitted his report to the Government.
The enquiry officer found the charges proved and recommended dismissal of the appellant from the service.
On June 8, 1996, the Government passed an order dismissing the appellant from service and, therefore, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed.
He, therefore, preferred an appeal before the Supreme Court.
The appellant's main argument before the Supreme Court was that in the special circumstances of the case he did not get any opportunity to defend himself before the enquiry officer.
The place of enquiry was Jagdaplur which was 500 kms away from Rewa where he was residing during his suspension.
No subsistence allowance was paid to him and he had no money to go to Jagdalpur.
The Supreme Court took the view that if no subsistence allowance was paid to him and if he could not go to Jagdalpur and face the enquiry on account of non-payment of subsistence allowance, the enquiry should be vitiated and the order of dismissal could not be sustained.
9.
The Supreme Court thereafter came to the conclusion as recorded in paragraph 5 that it was expressly alleged in the writ petition that on 5121964, the appellant sent a letter to the enquiry officer informing that unless he was paid subsistence allowance he would not be able to face the enquiry proceedings.
The Supreme Court took a specific note of the fact that the appellant could not attend the enquiry because of non-payment of subsistence allowance and non-availability of sufficient funds to attend the enquiry.
It is further observed that in the affidavit the appellant could not give any particulars about his sources of income and the estimate of expenses to be incurred in the enquiry, but it could be prima facie gathered that he had no other source of income except his pay.
The Government affidavit did not allege that he had any other source of income.
The fact that he has been drawing a monthly pay of Rs. 300/- till October 1964 could not necessarily show that he had sufficient money to enable him to go to Jagdalpur to attend the enquiry in February, 1965.
The Supreme Court further observed that the fact that the appellant filed a writ petition immediately on the passing of the order of dismissal and thereafter came in appeal to this Court, could not establish that he had enough resources to enable him to attend the enquiry.
According to the Supreme Court, the observation on the whole show that the High Court had gone by conjectures and surmises.
There was nothing on the record to show that the appellant had any other source of income except pay, and as he did not receive subsistence allowance which was paid to him on March 20, 1995 after a part of the evidence had already been recorded on February 9, 10 and 111965, the enquiry proceedings, during those days were vitiated.
The Supreme Court, therefore, held that the order of the Government dismissing the appellant from service could not stand as it was passed in violation of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution for the appellant did not receive a reasonable opportunity of defending himself in the enquiry proceedings.
10.
In the case before us, the petitioner was suspended on the basis of a charge that he had misappropriated the Society's funds, that he was placed under suspension from 891993 and that subsistence allowance was paid to him from 891993 to 111995 and thereafter the payment of subsistence allowance was stopped.
The petitioner was suspended by an order passed by the 1st respondent under the instructions of the 3rd respondent.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondents that the subsistence allowance was not withheld during the progress of the enquiry but the respondents stopped making payment of the said allowance from 111995 when his services were terminated after considering the report of the enquiry officer.
It was further pointed out by the learned Counsel for the respondents that under Section 51 of the Act, when a person was placed under suspension, the subsistence allowance could be paid to him up to 6 months only.
However, in spite of the said provisions, the petitioner was paid subsistence allowance for as many as 16 months.
This is however not borne out of the documents which appear in the record of the case.
11.
The petitoner has produced along with the writ petition a xerox copy of the Charge Memo dated 10.10.1995 in which it is alleged that the Deputy Registrar Khammam, in the surcharge order issued under Section 60(2) of the Act dated 311094 had ordered for recoveryof Rs. 1,12,213/- from the petitioner with interst at 18% from 31101994 till the entire amount was realised and the petitioner was directed to submit detailed item-wise particulars with supporting documents, if any, in his favour before 25101995 for settlement of the issue and finalisation of the enquiry.
The petitioner was also directed to appear before the enquiry officer on 25101995 at the Society's office.
It was also pointed out in the said charge memo that in default of appearance along with the necessary evidence, the issues mentioned in the charge memo will be decided on merits basing on the material available on record ex parte.
He was also cautioned that he would be committing an offence punishable under Section 79 of the Act and that action would be initiated against him as per the relevant provisions of the Act.
12.
In proceedings No. PACS/D.N.K.
1/96 dated 1171996 of the President, PACS Dendukuru, it has been observed that the petitioner had been suspended for misapporpriating the funds of the Society to the exent of Rs. 88,839/- and it was proved in the enquiry report of the Divisional Cooperative Officer, Khammam.
The District Registrar/OSD, DCCB Ltd Khammam also conducted a domestic enquiry and held that the misappropriation of Society's funds was proved.
Accordingly, the Managing Committee, PACS Dendukuru passed a resolution for removal of the petitioner from service of the Society under Bye-law No 12 of the Special by-laws governing the service conditions of the employees of PACS, and requested the District Level Committee for taking further action in this regard.
The District Level Committee took a decison for dismissal of the petitioner and also requested the President/Managing Committee of Society to take action accordingly.
The Managing Committee passed a resolution on 1171996 duly delegating the powers to the President of the Society for removing the petitioner from the services of the Society.
Accordingly, vide proceedings dated 1171996, the President of the Society passed the order of removal which reads as follows:-  "Sri K Venkateswara Rao, Secretary (under suspension) PACS, Dendukuru has been removed from the service of the Society from the date of this proceedings."
13.
By Proceedings No. Rc.
3063/93-C dated 12.7.1996 taken by the District Cooperative Officer, Khammam, and addressed to the President, PACS, Dendukuru, Madhira Mandal, it is observed that Sri K Venkateswara Rao (Petitioner) had reported that the PACS Dendukuru was not paying subsistence allowance to him from January 1995 even after the instructions were issued by the Divisional Cooperative Officer, Khammam vide Proceedings No. 538/96-C, dated 1841996 as a result of which he was facing hardship of his family and requested for arranging payment of allowances from January, 1995.
It was, therefore, pointed out in the said proceedings that under Bye- law No. 12(3)(b) of Special Bye-laws governing Service conditions all the employees working in PACS, the authority competent to suspend an employee of the Society may sanction subsistence allowance to the employee placed under suspension and that the President, PACS Dendukuru was requested to take action, vide Proceedings No. 1595/96-C, dated 3151996, against Sri K Venkateswara Rao (Petitioner) on the strength of the opinion of the District Level Committee Meeting held on 2351996.
The President of the Society was, therefore, advised by the aforesaid proceedings dated 12.7.1996 to pay subsistence allowance to K Venkateswara Rao under the provisions of Bye-law No 12(3)(b) of the Special Bye-laws governing the service conditions of Employees of PACS It was also stated in the said proceedings that the incumbent represented that the amount for which liability was fixed on him could be adjusted from the amounts due to him from the Society and, therefore, the President was requested to issue orders for his removal from the services of the Society as recommended by the District Level Committee duly placing the matter in the Managing Committee Meeting of PACS Dendukuru urgently.
A permission was also granted by the said proceedings to incur the expenditure from the Funds of Society to defend the case filed by Sri K Venkateswara Rao in the Asst.
Commissioner of Labour Court, Khammam on behalf of the respondents and inform the result of the case at an early date.
14.
It abundantly becomes clear from the proceedings discussed above that the removal of the petitioner took place on 1171996 and not on 111995 from which date the subsistence allowance to the petitioner was stopped.
The question which therefore, arises for our consideration is whether the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court that a delinquent could not be expected to attend the domestic enquiry if subsistence allowance is not paid to him keeping in view the fact that the incumbent and his family members would suffer hardship and may also be subjected to starvation which may incapacitate the delinquent from attending the proceedings of the domestic enquiry.
If it was true that by 31121994 the proceedings of the domestic enquiry were over and the resultant order of removal had already passed prior to 31121994 or even on 31121994 from which date the payment of subsistence allowance was stopped, the respondents would have been justified in urging that the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in the ruling cited above could not be invoked.
But in view of the facts and circumstances before this Court, it prima facie appears that the respondents cannot acquit themselves of their responsibility and allege that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ghanasham Das's case (supra) should not be legitimately applied to the facts of the present case.
15.
In State of Maharashtra v. Chandrabhan, 1983(2) SLR 493 the Supreme Court held that if the civil servant under suspension, pending a departmental enquiry or a criminal trial started against him, is entitled to subsistence allowance at the normal rate which was a bare minimum required for the maintenance of the civil servant and his family, he should undoubtedly get in even pending his appeal filed against his conviction by the trial Court and his right to get the normal subsistence allowance pending consideration of his appeal against his conviction should not depend upon the chance of his being released on bail and not being lodged in prison on conviction by the trial Court.
Whether he was lodged in prison or released on bail on his conviction pending consideration of his appeal, his family would require the bare minimum by way of subsistence allowance.
Any departmental enquiry made without payment of subsistence allowance contrary to the provision for its payment, was violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Similarly any criminal trial of a civil servant under suspension without payment of the normal subsistence allowance payable to him under the rule would be violative of that Article.
Payment of subsistence allowance at the normal rate pending the appeal filed against the conviction of a civil servant under suspension was a step that makes the right of appeal fruitful and it was, therefore, obligatory.
16.
The same view is expressed by the Supreme Court in Fakirbhai Fulab Ai Solanki v. Presiding Officer, AIR 1986 SC 1168.
17.
Notwithstanding the situation emerging from the rulings discussed above that without payment of subsistence allowance the employer was not justified in conducting departmental enquiry against an employee, the learned Counsel for the respondents raised a dispute which according to him should be decided as a preliminary issue whether the writ petition was at all maintainable having regard to the fact that the petitioner had not exhausted the remedy available to him under the provisions of the Act before invoking the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by filing the present writ petition.
It is true that under Bye-law No 123 of the Special Bye-laws relating to the Service Conditions of Employees of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies, a provision is made with regard to `Appeal against the punishment' which reads as follows:-  "123 Appeals against the punishment:-  (a) In respect of censor, appeal shall lie before Managing Committee whose decision shall be final.
The appellate authorities against various punishments inflicted under Regulation 121 are indicated below :  1.
Secretary Managing Divl.
Coop.
District Committee Officer Collector concerned 2.
Clerk/Sales - do - Managing district man Committee Coop.
Officer 3.
Attender/President Managing Managing Peon Committee Committee.
However, as submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner, it was not incumbent upon the petitioner to fall in line with the same bye-law when it is apparent on the face of the record that the conduct of the employer was reprehensible which was strongly disapproved by the Supreme Court, inasmuch as the respondents stopped making payment of subsistence allowance to the petitioner during the period during which a departmental enquiry was conducted against the petitioner so as to enable him to participate in the enquiry.
We have already seen above that the Supreme Court did not approve of the employer's conduct stopping payment of subsistence allowance during the pendency of the departmental enquiry.
In UP State v. Mohd.
Nooh, AIR 1958 SC 86, the Supreme Court observed in para 11 as follows:  "(11).
On the authorities referred to above it appears to us that there may conceivably be cases - and the instant case is in point - where the error, irregularity or illegality touching jurisdiction or procedure committed by an inferior Court or tribunal of first instance is so patent and loudly obtrusive that it leaves on its decision an indelible stamp of infirmity or vice which could be obliterated or cured on appeal or revision.
If an inferior Court or tribunal of first instance acts wholly without jurisdiction or patently in excess of jurisdiction or manifestly conducts the proceedings before it in a manner which is contrary to the rules of natural justice and all accepted rule of procedure and which offends the superior Court sense of fair play, the superior Court may, we think, quite properly exercise its power to issue the prerogative writ of certiorari to correct the error of the Court or tribunal of first instance, even if an appeal to another inferior Court or tribunal was available and recourse was not had to it or if recourse was had to it, it confirmed what ex facie was a nullity for reasons aforementioned.
This would be so all the more if the tribunals holding the original trial and the tribunals hearing the appeal or revision were merely departmental tribunals composed of persons belonging to the departmental hierarchy without adequate legal training and background and whose glaring lapses occasionally come to our notice.
The superior Court will ordinarily decline to interfere by issuing certiorari and all we say is that in a proper case of the kind mentioned above it has the power to do so and may and should exercise it.
We say no more than that."
18.
It is true indeed in the case before us, that the gravity of the lapses committed by the respondents is not so serious with which the Supreme Court was concerned in the above case.
However, it cannot be denied that the principles of natural justice were flagrantly violated taking into consideration the severity of inaction on part of the respondents to pay subsistence allowance during the progress of the departmental enquiry and, therefore, there is no reason why the principle above stated in UP State v. Mohd.
Nooh's case (supra) should not be applied to the facts of the present case so as to come to a conclusion that in spite of the fact that the provision of appeal was available to the petitioner, his conduct of approaching this Court by invoking the Writ Jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the relief claimed in the present writ petition was legal and proper.
19.
Considering the above facts and circumstances as well as the principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court, the Writ Petition is allowed.
The order of removal issued by the 2nd respondent dated 1171996 is held to be illegal and without jurisdiction and in violation of the principles of natural justice.
Consequntley, the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated in service with 50% of the back wages and accordingly the respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner in service of Respondents No. 1 Society with 50% of back wages within four weeks from today.
It is however clarified that the respondents shall be at liberty to prosecute the disciplinary proceedings for the charges already levelled against the petitioner in accordance with law after giving him reasonable opportunity of hearing.
No costs.
Petition allowed.