Satyabrata Sinha, J - The writ petitioner being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with an order dated 18.9.1997 passed by Ajoy Nath Roy in W.P. No. 1928 of 1997 has preferred this appeal.
The basic fact of the matter is not much in dispute.
The petitioner obtained the degree of MBBS from the University of Calcutta.
He received the degree of Doctor of Medicine from Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University, Madras in 1993.
Admittedly University of Calcutta offered Post-Graduate Degree and Diploma Courses to those candidates who are eligible, for which applications were invited, inter alia, in Cardiology and Neurology for 1997-2000 Session.
The petitioner being eligible, duly applied therefor.
He appeared at the examination also.
The results were published on 24th June, 1997 and the petitioner was ranked fourth in the merit list.
Admittedly there are three seats in DM (Cardiology) Course and as such the petitioner was not admitted.
He immediately requested the respondent- authorities to publish the detailed mark sheets which having been denied, the writ petitioner filed a writ application claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs :-  "(a) A Writ of and/or in the nature of Mandamus be issued commanding the respondent authorities to cancel and/or withdraw and/or rescind the purported selections made and admissions given in the DM (Cardiology) and DM (Neurology) Courses for the 1997-2000 Session.
(b) A Writ of or in the nature of Mandamus be issued commanding the respondent authorities to re-evaluate the petitioner's answer script and/or reconsider his case, and to admit him to the DM (Cardiology) Course for the 1997-2000 Session."
2.
It is not in dispute that there is no provision for re-evaluation of the petitioner's answer script and/or reconsideration of his case.
There cannot, further be any doubt that no Writ of or in the nature of Mandamus can be issued directing the petitioner to admit him in the DM (Cardiology) Course for 1997-2000 Session.
3.
Mr. Hirak Mitra, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that keeping in view the allegation made by the petitioner as regards the manner in which the examination was conducted in connection with admission of MD (Neurology), the learned trial Judge erred in dismissing the writ application in limine.
According to the learned Counsel, this court has wide power to remedy a manifest injustice in such a situation.
Strong reliance in this connection has been placed on Tripura Sankar Chail v. University of Calcutta & Ors., reported in 1991(2) CLJ 279 and a decision of mine in Miss Sharmistha Gangopadhyay v. State of West Bengal & Ors., reported in AIR 1996 Cal.
239.
4.
Mr. Mitra would urge that every candidate has a right to know.
In this case according to the learned Counsel, the petitioner has claimed a privilege of such information and in support of the aforementioned contention reliance has been placed on Duncan & Anr. v Cammell, Laird & Company Ltd, reported in 1942 Appeal Cases 624.
It was submitted that the petitioner in absence of any specific knowledge as regard the circumstances in which examination has been conducted even could not allege mala fide.
It is submitted that all the factual matrix is within the special knowledge of the authorities of the Ist respondent and in that view of the matter it is for them to prove that the examination was conducted in a fair manner.
5.
Mr. Dipankar Dutta, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that the allegations made by the petitioner in the writ application are absolutely vague and no relief can be granted relying on or on the basis thereof.
According to the learned Counsel, this Court does not have the requisite expertise to re-evaluate the answer scripts.
It has further been submitted that the other students who had been admitted, having not been impleaded as parties in the writ application, this application is not maintainable.
According to the learned Counsel even the principles of natural justice in a situation of this nature have no role to play.
Mr. Dutta would urge that the question as to whether correct marks had been awarded or not does not come within the purview of the domain of this court's power of judicial review.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on University of Calcutta v. Dr. (Mrs.) Mamata Datta & Ors., reported in 96 CWN 1066, and Dipta Kumar Sinha Chowdhury v. The State of West Bengal & Ors., reported in 100 CWN 113.
6.
There cannot be any doubt that a student can ask the respondent to supply the marks obtained by him but therefor a strong prima facie case must be made out.
We have gone through the entire writ application and find that no particulars as regard alleged mala fide action on the part of the respondents has been furnished.
The allegation of illegality or mala fide has been made without raising any factual foundation thereof.
However, in order to satisfy our conscience we had asked Mr. Dutta to produce the mark-sheets as also the answer script.
7.
It is admitted that the admission test was held on 361997.
According to the University, the answer scripts were sent to two different examiners for independent evaluation by both of them and no marking was given on the answer scripts and the examiners submitted their evaluation as per code number.
From a perusal of the answer scripts as also the evaluation thereof it appears that the evaluation had been done by two examiners and they had sent the result with reference to the code number.
The full marks for the examination were 70 but allegedly the paper setters made the same 65 and, thus, upon awarding the average marks awarded by the two examiners, the same was increased for the extra five marks accordingly.
8.
Even from the entire mark sheet which have been produced before us, it appears that the petitioner had raised his doubt about wrong evaluation of his publication by the selection committee but from the mark-sheet it appears that he has obtained the highest mark therein.
9.
This court does not have the requisite expertise to evaluate the mark- sheet.
Although in a service matter, in Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, reported in AIR 1990 SC 434, the Apex Court clearly held that it is the function of court to hear appeals over decision of selection committee and scrutinise relative merits of the candidates.
The Apex Court also held that it is not the selection committee alone which has expertise on the subject and the court has no such expertise.
10.
In University of Calcutta v. Dr. Anindya Kumar Das & Ors., reported in 1992(2) CLJ 339, a division bench of this court, in which the learned trial Judge was a member, considered a large number of decisions and held that the court cannot enter into the accuracy of the answers.
11.
In West Bengal Board of Examination for Admission to Engineering, Medical and Technological Degree Colleges and Ors. v. Dr. Jitendra Lal Banerjee & Ors., reported in AIR 1984 Cal.
52, a division bench of this court has held that a mere allegation without any material in support thereof would not entitle a writ petitioner to ask for any assistance from this court or otherwise any unsuccessful candidate in any examination may file a writ application alleging that the answer scripts have not been properly assessed by the examiners.
It was further held that on such vague allegation unsupported by any material the court will refuse to entertain a writ application.
12.
In Arun D Desai v. High Court of Bombay through Chief Justice & Ors., reported in 1984 (Supp) SCC 372, the Apex Court held :  "The petitioner has failed in the second LL.B.
examination.
It is not shown how the assessment of his answer books is defective, arbitrary or partial.
Students who fail in their examinations are generally prone to make such allegations to explain their failure and to console themselves with the thought that, not they but the examiners are to blame.
We understand the anguish of the petitioners at his failure but we have no power to pass him."
13.
In University of Calcutta & Ors. v. Dr. (Mrs.) Mamata Datta & Ors., reported in 96 CWN 1066, it was held :-  "As I have held in recent Division Bench Case in University of Calcutta v. Anindya Kumar Das & Ors., decided on 13th March, 1992, these questions cannot be appropriately determined in a Writ proceeding unless we throw asunder all the limitations imposed in Writ Jurisdiction by well settled principles and binding precedents.
Ajoy Nath Ray, J who has come out with a much more comprehensive and well considered judgment in that case, has very ably and amply demonstrated the impossibility as well as impermissibility of such a task in a Writ proceeding.
And even though I am grateful to the learned Senior Counsel, Sri Kashi Kanta Mitra, for his very persuasive and learned argument for and on behalf of the Respondent, I have not been able to take a different view."
14.
In Dipta Kumar Sinha Chowdhury v. The State of West Bengal & Ors., reported in 100 CWN 113, the law is stated in the following term :  "Mere allegation that his results are not in comformity with his performance in the examinations is not enough as students who fail in the examination are generally prone to make such allegations.
Here in our case, there is no allegation that the examiners had any bias against the writ petitioner.
The writ petitioner has not been able to show how the assessment of his answer books was defective, arbitrary or partial.
In the case of Anindya Kr.
Das (supra) it has been laid down by this court that the Court cannot enter into a re-evaluation of the questions and answers and act as a head-examiner of examinations held by the Competent Authority."
15.
In that case the learned single Judge relied upon decision of Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. Paritosh, reported in AIR 1984 SC 1543.
16.
In Tripura Sankar Chail v. University of Calcutta & Ors., reported in 1991(2) CLJ 279, a learned single Judge of this court was considering a case of negligence and deliberate insincerity on the part of the authorities of the Calcutta University.
In that case the petitioner had appeared at LL.B.
Examination.
There was a provision of re-evaluation of the mark-sheet to which the said writ petitioner took recourse to.
But the same as not given effect to for a number of years and, therefore, this court awarded damages of Rs. 25,000/- on the ground that a valuable 2-1/2 years or so had slipped out from the petitioner's hand and the said lost time cannot be regained.
17.
In Miss Sharmistha Gangopadhyay v. State of West Bengal & Ors., reported in AIR 1996 Cal.
239, I, speaking for the division bench, had considered the decision in Tripura Sankar Chail v. University of Calcutta, reported in 1991(2) CLJ 279 as also the decisions reported in AIR 1983 SC 1230, 90 CWN 743 and 96 CWN 1149.
Keeping in view the change in the academic atmosphere it was held that in a given case where the court finds that there exists a prima facie case for consideration of the answer papers being scrutinised by another expert exercise of court's jurisdiction cannot be ruled out.
This Court, however, refrained from making any comment as regards Tripura Sankar Chail's case (supra) as an appeal (probably) still is pending therefrom.
This court, however, distinguished the said case on facts.
In that case the Calcutta University had already exercised its right of review to which the writ petitioner was entitled to and some marks were enhanced.
It was held :  "In a given situation, we are of the opinion that the Court may consider that desirability of asking the University to produce the answer scripts so as to satisfy its conscience that the statements made in the writ application are correct and/or enable this Court to arrive at a finding that assessment of marks had not been done arbitrarily or there has been no omission on the part of the examiner to allot marks in relation to the question which has been answered by the candidate concerned."
18.
In this case we have satisfied our conscience that no illegality had been committed.
19.
In Duncan & Anr. v Cammell, Laird & Company Ltd reported in 1942 Appeal Cases 624, the House of Lords was considering a case relating to an application for discovery of documents.
It was held that production of document should only be withheld when the public interest would otherwise be damnified, as where disclosure would be injurious to national defence or to good diplomatic relations, or where the practice of keeping a class of documents secret is necessary for the proper functioning of the public service.
20.
We are not concerned with the question of claim of privilege by a party in respect of certain documents asked to be produced by the other side in the instant case.
21.
For the reasons aforementioned we have not found existence of any prima facie case.
Therefore, we affirm the judgment and order passed by the learned trial Judge.
The appeal is consequently dismissed but without any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.