Dr. Sarojnei Saksena, J - Petitioner is seeking quashment of order (Annexure P-5) and also praying for a writ of mandamus for promoting him as Assistant Superintendent (Revenue) w.e.f.
4.6.1967 and all consequential benefits thereafter.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioner's contention is that plaintiff joined as a Clerk on 2261951, after taking into account his previous five years, military service, his seniority was fixed at Serial No. 14 amongst the integrated Senior Clerks of Deputy Commissioner's office, Patiala, published in revenue department, Pepu notification No. 72 dated 24101956, which was effective since 191948.
He averred that as per seniority, he should have been given promotion as Assistant.
He was promoted as Accountant on 821967 and as Assistant on 171967, but thereafter he was reverted to the post of Clerk vide order dated 591967, again promoted as Assistant on 26.5.1968 and was again reverted to the post of Clerk on 16.7.1969.
He challenged this reversion order by filing civil suit on 2821973.
His suit was decreed on 30.5.1975.
The trial Court directed that the plaintiff be considered as on the date when the persons junior to him were promoted and according to rules then in force, if found fit for promotion as on that date the promotion already given to him to that post be dated back to that date and all consequential benefits be also granted to him.
Plaintiff filed execution petition wherein he claimed that he was entitled to be considered for promotion to the higher rank of Assistant Superintendent, Superintendent and Tehsildar.
The executing Court held that under the judgment and decree, the petitioner was entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant to which he has already been promoted retrospectively w.e.f.
1.1.59 and given all the benefits; thus, the decree dated 30.5.1975 stands fully satisfied.
3.
Petitioner filed Civil Revision No. 2538 of 1985 against the executing court's aforesaid order dated 29.5.1985 which was decided on 29111985.
The State Government was given direction to consider petitioner on the basis of seniority-cum-merit for the post next higher to that of Assistant and for any post to which post stands restored to him during the pendency of the execution proceedings with all pecuniary benefits available to him under rules.
In compliance of this order, the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, passed the order dated 21.3.1986 (Annexure P-5) wherein it was observed that since the petitioner is not fulfilling the eligibility criteria of 5 years experience as Assistant and during the year 1964-65, his work and conduct was not quite satisfactory and his reputation was reported to be shady, he cannot be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent.
Thereafter, the aforementioned revision was again heard by the High Court and vide order (Annexure P-6) an opportunity was given to him to challenge the order (Annexure P-5) by filing any departmental appeal, revision, or representation.
4.
The petitioner is challenging the impugned order (Annexure P-5) on the ground that he is senior to Mohan Singh, who was promoted as Assistant Superintendent (Revenue) on 561967, but at that time the petitioner was not considered.
After his suit was decreed on 30.5.1975, he was given promotion as Assistant w.e.f.
111959 retrospectively and all arrears and other service benefits were also paid to him and his seniority as an Assistant over Mohan Singh was duly recongnised.
In view of this promotion given to him retrospectively w.e.f 111959, it will be deemed that he has put in service as Assistant for more than 18 years on 561967 when Mohan Singh was promoted a Assistant Superintendent Revenue.
It was not for any fault of the petitioner that he was reverted especially when reversion was declared null and void by the civil Court vide judgment and decree (Annexures P-1 and P-2).
He further assailed the order (Annexures P-5) on the ground that as per direction given by the High Court while deciding his revision, the government was directed to consider the petitioner's case for promotion on the basis of seniority-cum- merit for the next higher post, but the Commissioner has declined him promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent (Revenue) on the ground that he does not have 5 years experience of Assistant and in the year 1964-65 there was an adverse entry in his 'Annual Confidential Report', but this adverse entry was never conveyed to him.
Thus, it could not have been taken into consideration while denying promotion to him.
5.
Petitioner's learned counsel admitted that the petitioner has retired in 1979; therefore, now he is not claiming arrears of pay, but he is claiming only notional promotion on the post of Assistant Superintendent (Revenue) and notional fixation of pay and on that basis he is now claiming enhanced pension.
6.
The respondents in their reply denied the averments made in the petition though it is admitted that the civil suit and the revision were decided in petitioner's favour and the impugned order (Annexure P-5) was passed by the Commissioner.
Respondents have pleaded that for promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent, only those employees are eligible who had experience of 5 years on the post of Assistant, but as the petitioner was not having 5 years experience for this promotion, he was rightly not considered eligible for promotion.
Secondly, in 1964-65, there was an adverse ACR's entry in his record, his integrity was found doubtful and otherwise also, as per rules, he was not found eligible for promotion.
7.
Petitioner's learned counsel submitted that the petitioner was wrongly reverted to the post of Clerk; therefore, respondents could not raise an objection that as he did not have experience of 5 years as Assistant, he was not eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent (Revenue).
He also submitted that so far as Annual Confidential Report of 1964-65 is concerned, as it was not conveyed to him, it could not have been considered for declining promotion to him.
To support this contention, he has relied on VP Nigam and others v. Prabhat Chandra Jain and others, JT 1996(1) SC 641 and Parmal Khan v. State of Haryana, 1996(3) SCT 793.
8.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, relying on RD Goyal v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1994(3) SCT 607 contended that even if Annual Confidential Report of 1964-65 was not conveyed to the petitioner, it could have been taken into consideration, while his promotion case was to be considered by the department.
He also submitted that promotion can be made only if the petitioner is found eligible.
Promotion can only be made in accordance with guidelines laid down in the administrative instructions.
As per those instructions, the petitioner was required to have an experience of the post of Assistant for five years, which he was not having, hence, the impugned order, Annexure P-5, was rightly passed.
To support this argument, he has relied on Sawinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(4) SCT 156, Harish Chander v. Haryana State etc, 1995(2) SCT 760 and lastly, he submitted that if notional promotion is given to the petitioner, he cannot claim arrears of salary.
In support of this contention, he has relied on State of Haryana v. O Gupta,, 1996(2) SCT 294.
9.
After hearing the rival contentions, in my considered view, the writ deserves to be allowed as finally prayed by the petitioner.
10.
So far as OP Gupta's (supra) is concerned, petitioner's learned counsel has clearly submitted that the petitioner is not claiming arrears of pay.
He is only praying that notional promotion and fixation of pay be given to him so that he could claim enhanced pension; therefore, question of payment of arrears of salary does not arise in this case.
11.
In Sawinder Singh's case (supra), it is held that the petitioners were ineligible for promotion as they were not fulfilling the minimum conditions of eligibility criteria.
Hence, they cannot make a grievance and cannot be heard to say that persons junior to them have been given promotion.
12.
In Harish Chander's case (supra), the Division Bench of this High Court has held that promotion is required to be made in accordance with guidelines laid down in administrative instructions.
13.
In these cases, the petitioners were not reverted to a lower post and after the decree of the civil Court, they were not promoted retrospectively; therefore, they are distinguishable on facts.
In this case, the petitioner was wrongly reverted to the post of Clerk on 16.7.1969.
When he challenged this reversion by filing civil suit, it was decreed and it was held by the civil Court that he is to be considered for promotion and thereafter he was promoted retrospectively w.e.f.
111959.
The petitioner is entitled to say that the department should have considered that he has worked on the post of Assistant from 111959 and thus there was no reason for the department to say that he does not fulfil eligibility criteria, as he does not have the experience of five years on the post of Assistant.
14.
So far as the adverse 'Annual Confidential Report' is concerned, admittedly, adverse entry of 1964-65 was not conveyed to the petitioner.
From order (Annexure P-5) it is evident that it was an adverse entry, as his integrity was found shady.
Petitioner has averred that this adverse entry was not conveyed to him.
In the written statement, the respondents have denied this allegation, as according to them, this adverse entry was conveyed to him.
Petitioner has filed replication and has denied the communication of this adverse entry.
From Paragraphs 11, 28 and 43 of order Annexure P-7, it is evident that this adverse entry was never conveyed to the petitioner.
Even during arguments, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, admitted that this adverse entry was not conveyed to the petitioner.
The learned Deputy Advocate General's reliance on R.D Goyal's case (supra), does not help the respondents because in that case it was an average report, not an adverse report and since this average report was not communicated to the petitioner, it was held that the petitioner could not make any grievance on that ground.
As per the Apex Court judgment rendered in VP Nigam and others v. Prabhat Chandra Jain and others, JT 1996(1) SC 641, it is evident that adverse entry is required to be conveyed to an employee because it can be used against him for any purpose.
Hence, in my considered view, the Commissioner fell into an error in relying on the adverse entry of 1964-65, which was not conveyed to the petitioner.
Thus, the impugned order is invalid on both the counts.
Hence, it is hereby quashed.
15.
In terms of the prayer made by the learned petitioner's counsel, the writ petition is hereby disposed of with the direction to the respondents to consider the petitioner's case for granting him notional promotion on the post of Assistant Superintendent (Revenue) and also for notional fixation of pay.
Thereafter petitioner's pension case be finalised as the petitioner has already retired in 1979.
No order as to costs.