GS Singhvi, J - The question of law which arises for adjudication in these petitions is whether a candidate who has passed B.Ed.
without Sanskrit as a teaching subject is eligible for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher.
2.
The petitioners applied for selection as Sanskrit Teachers in response to the advertisement No. 4 of 1996 issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') for recruitment of 1234 Sanskrit Teachers (751 male and 483 female).
After scrutiny, the Board rejected the applications of the petitioners on the ground that they do not possess the essential qualifications.
The petitioners represented to the respondent-Board and the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana for consideration of their cases but they could not persuade the respondents to revise their decision and this is the reason for filing of these petitions.
3.
Before we deal with the issue in controversy, it will be useful to notice the qualifications incorporated in the advertisement as also the qualifications of the petitioners.
The qualifications prescribed by the respondents for recruitment of Sanskrit Teachers are :-  (i) Shastri (Honours in Sanskrit) from a University recognised by the Haryana Government.
(ii) Pass LTC (OT) in Sanskrit conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualifications recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
The qualifications possessed by each of the petitioners are detailed below :-  S. No. Name Qualifications  C.W.P.
No. 9313/97: i) Seema Nagpal i) Matric from Board of School Education Haryana (1986) ii) Shastri (Honours in Hindi) from MDU, Rohtak (1989).
(iii) B.Ed.
from MDU Rohtak (1991) ii) Summan Lata i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education Haryana (1990) ii) Honours in Sanskrit (Shastri) from MDU, Rohtak (1995) iii) B.Ed.
from MDU iii) Seema Rani i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education Haryana (1987).
ii) B.Ed.
from MDU, Rohtak.
iii) Honours in Sanskrit (Shastri) from MDU, Rohtak (1994).
iv) MA (Sanskrit) from MDU, Rohtak (May, 1996).
iv) Manju Bala i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education Haryana.
ii) Honours in Sanskrit (Shastri) from MDU iii) BEd.
from MDU iv) MA (Previous) in Sanskrit from MDU C.W.P.
No. 9314/97 : i) Bharti i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education Haryana (1988).
ii) Shastri (BA) from Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidya Peetham, New Delhi (1993) iii) Shiksha Shastri (B.Ed) from Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidya Peetham, New Delhi (1994).
ii) Geeta Mehta i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education Haryana (1990).
ii) Shastri (BA) from Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidya Peetham iii) B.Ed.
from MDU iv) MA (Previous) in Sanskrit from MDU C.W.P.
9315/97: i) Kamlesh Kumari i) Matric with Hindi from CBSE (1985) ii) BA from Panjab University with Sanskrit as an elective subject (1989) iii) MA (Sanskrit) from Panjab University (1995).
iv) B.Ed.
from MDU v) M.Ed.
from MDU ii) Sabhyata i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education (Haryana) 1988.
(ii) BA with Sanskrit as an elective subject from MDU iii) BEd.
from MDU iii) Promila Devi i) Matric with Hindi from Board of School Education Haryana.
ii) BA with Sanskrit from MDU iii) BEd.
from MDU iv) MA (Hindi) from MDU iv) Lalita i) Matric from Board of School Education Haryana (1985) ii) Shastri from Kurukshetra University (1988) iii) MA (Sanskrit) from Gurukul Kangri iv) B.Ed.
without Sanskrit from MDU C.W.P.
No. 9489/97: Jitender Singh Yadav i) BA with Sanskrit as one of the subjects from University of Rajasthan (1990).
ii) B.Ed.
from MDU iii) MA (Political Science) from University of Rajasthan (1995) C.W.P.
No. 9531/97: i) Jaswant Singh i) Matric from Board of School Education Haryana.
ii) Rishi Kesh iii) Ram Dhari ii) Honours in Sanskrit  iv) Ashok Kumar iii) B.Ed.
from MDU, Rohtak (1996) v) Urmil Yadav C.W.P.
No. 9576/97 : i) Pushpa Mehta i) BA with Sanskrit from Kurukshetra University as one of the subjects (1986).
ii) MA (Sanskrit) from KU (1988).
iii) MPhil.
from KU iv) B.Ed.
from MDU C.W.P.
No. 9557/97: i) Sangita Yadav i) BA with Sanskrit from MDU ii) B.Ed.
from MDU iii) MA in Sanskrit from MDU ii) Sushila Devi i) BA with Sanskrit from Kurukshetra University.
ii) B.Ed.
from KU iii) MA in Sanskrit from KU iii) Vinita i) BA with Sanskrit from Kurukshetra University.
ii) B.Ed.
from KU iii) M.Ed.
from KU iv) MA (English) from KU C.W.P.
No. 9766/97: Raj Kumar i) Honours in Sanskrit (Shastri) from MDU, Rohtak (1989).
ii) B.Ed.
from MDU, Rohtak (1996).
C.W.P.
No. 9777/97: i) Dhanpati i) Shastri from MDU ii) BA (Sanskrit) from MDU.
iii) B.Ed.
from MDU, Rohtak.
iv) MPhil.
(Sanskrit) from MDU.
ii) Anita i) BA with Sanskrit from MDU.
ii) MA (Sanskrit) from MDU.
iii) B.Ed.
from MDU iii) Shakuntla Devi i) Shastri.
ii) MA (Sanskrit).
iii) B.Ed.
iv) Anil i) BA with Sanskrit.
ii) MA in Sanskrit.
iii) B.Ed.
v) Darshana i) BA with Sanskrit.
ii) MA (Sanskrit) iii) B.Ed.
vi) Neelam i) BA with Sanskrit.
ii) MA in Sanskrit iii) B.Ed.
vii) Santosh Kumari i) BA with Sanskrit as an elective subject.
ii) MA in Sanskrit.
iii) B.Ed.
viii) Surinder Kaur i) BA with Sanskrit as an elective subject.
ii) B.Ed.
C.W.P.
No. 9801/97: i) Munni Kumari i) Matric from Board of School Education ii) Kiran Bala ii) BA from MDU iii) BEd.
from MDU (1996) iv) MA (Sanskrit) from MDU.
C.W.P.
No. 9816/97 : Pradeep Kumar i) BA with Sanskrit as one of the subjects from MDU (1995).
ii) B.Ed.
from MDU C.W.P.
No. 9916/97 : i) Sneh Lata i) MA (Sanskrit) (Honours).
ii) Harmohinder Kaur ii) B.Ed.
from MDU C.W.P.
No. 9965/97: Urmila Devi i) Matric from Board of School Education Haryana (1987) ii) Sanskrit Visharda from Kurukshetra University (1988) iii) Honours in Sanskrit (Shastri Part-I and II) from KU iv) Shastri (Honours in Sanskrit) (1993).
v) B.Ed.
(Correspondence Course) from MDU (1996) C.W.P.
No. 10067/97: i) Bijender Singh i) Matric from Board of School Education (ii) Janesh Kumar ii) Honours in Sanskrit from MDU.
iii) B.Ed.
from MDU C.W.P.
No. 10215/97: Krishna Kumari i) Matric with Sanskrit as one of the subjects from Board of School Education Haryana (1980) ii) Sanskrit Visharda from MDU iii) Shastri from MDU (1989).
iv) B.Ed.
from MDU (1996) C.W.P.
No. 10467/97: i) Sunita i) MA (Sanskrit).
ii) PhD (Sanskrit) iii) B.Ed.
ii) Shakuntla i) BA with Sanskrit.
ii) B.Ed.
iii) Anguri Devi i) BA with Sanskrit.
ii) B.Ed.
C.W.P.
No. 10550/97 : Kusum Lata i) BA with Sanskrit.
ii) MA (Sanskrit).
iii) B.Ed.
from MDU 4.
Recruitment to Class-III service of the Education Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab used to be regulated by the Punjab Educational Service, Class-III, School Cadre, Rules, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules of 1955') which were enacted under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Appendix-B attached to these rules specifies the posts falling in different cadres in men's branch as well as women's branch.
The men's branch is divided into two categories.
The posts of Sanskrit Teacher, Hindi Teacher, Punjabi Teacher etc. falls in the second category and the qualifications prescribed for Sanskrit Teachers are "Shastri, STC or with OT certificate".
In the women's branch, the post of Sanskrit Teacher comes in the category of Teachers.
Qualifications for recruitment of Sanskrit Teachers in women's branch is "STC training with proficiency in Sanskrit."
5.
Although the State of Haryana was created on 1111966, no separate rules have been framed for regulating recruitment of teachers including Sanskrit Teachers and the Rules of 1955 are still being followed even though some of them have become obsolete.
For the first time an amendment has been made in 1995 Rules vide notification dated January 13, 1995.
Para 2 of this notification which has been relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners to support the case set up by the petitioners reads as under :-  "2.
In the Punjab Educational Service, Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955, in Appendix `B', in para II, under heading S.E.S.
(iii) Non- Gazetted, against the post of Hindi Teacher, for the existing entries the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- (1) Under sub-heading Men's Branch, under Columns 1 and 2, "(i) Matric from Panjab University OR Board of School Education Haryana OR an equivalent qualification recognised by the said Board; (ii) Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi) from a recognised University; and  iii) Pass in LTC (OT) examination in Hindi conducted by the Haryana Education Department OR an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department;  OR  Graduate from a recognised University with Hindi as an elective subject/MA in Hindi from a recognised University/BA (Honours) in Hindi with B.T./B.Ed.
OR equivalent in all the cases";  (2) under sub-heading Women's Branch, under Columns 1 and 2 against the post of Hindi Teacher, for the existing entries, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :-  "(i) Matric from Panjab University OR Board of School Education Haryana OR an equivalent qualification recognised by the said Board; (ii) Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi) from a recognised University; and (iii) Pass in LTC (OT) examination in Hindi conducted by the Haryana Education Department OR an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department; OR  Graduate from a recognised University with Hindi as an elective subject/MA in Hindi from a recognised University/BA (Honours) in Hindi, with B.T./B.Ed.
OR equivalent in all these cases."
6.
In 1997, the education Department has proposed the framing of the Haryana State Education Group-C Service Rules, 1997.
The qualifications incorporated in the Rules of 1997 for recruitment of Language Teachers i.e. Sanskrit Teachers, Hindi Teachers and Punjabi Teachers are extracted below because the learned Deputy Advocate General has relied upon them for supporting his contention that the appointing authority has always intended that a candidate possessing B.Ed.
with a particular teaching subject should only be recruited as Language Teacher.
These are :-  "Sanskrit Teachers:  i) Shastri/BA (Hons in Sanskrit) from recognised University i) Shastri/BA (Hons.
in Sanskrit) from recognised University.
ii) L.T.C./OT in Sanskrit conducted by the Haryana Education Deptt.
or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Deptt.
ii) L.T.C./OT in Sanskrit conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department  OR B.T./B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject from a recognised University OR B.T./B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject from a recognised University.
OR In case, the candidates of above qualifications are not available then BA with Sanskrit as an Elective subject with B.T./B.Ed.
from a recognised university with Sanskrit as a teaching subject shall be considered.
BA with Sanskrit as an Elective subject with B.T./B.Ed.
from a recognised university.
ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto matric standard.
ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
iii) at least 3 years of experience on the post of JBT in case of promotion.
Hindi Teachers: i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board.
i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board.
ii) Prabhakar/BA (Hons.
in Hindi) from a recognised university.
ii) Prabhakar/BA (Hons.
in Hindi) from a recognised University.
iii) L.T.C./OT in Hindi conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department OR BA Hons.
in Hindi with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject from a recognised university.
iii) L.T.C./OT in Hindi conducted by the Haryana Education Department of an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department OR BA Hons.
in Hindi with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject from a recognised university.
OR Note :- In case the candidates of above qualifications are not available then BA with Hindi as an Elective subject with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi teaching subject from a recognised university shall be considered.
BA with Hindi as an Elective subject and B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject from a recognised university.
iii) at least 3 years of experience on the post of JBT teacher in case of promotion.
Punjabi Teachers: i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board.
i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board.
ii) Giani Gurumukhi Script/BA (Hons.
in Punjabi) from a recognised university.
ii) Giani (Gurmukhi Script) BA (Hons.
in Punjabi) from a recognised university.
iii) L.T.C./OT in Punjabi conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by Haryana Education Department.
iii) L.T.C./OT in Punjabi conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
OR B.T./B.Ed.
with Punjabi as teaching subject from a recognised University.
B.T./B.Ed.
with Punjabi as teaching subject from a recognised University.
OR Note :- In case the candidates of above qualifications are not available then BA from a recognised University with Punjabi as an Elective subject and B.T./B.Ed.
with Punjabi as teaching subject from a recognised university shall be considered.
BA from a recognised University with Punjabi as an Elective subject and B.T./B.Ed.
with Punjabi as teaching subject from a recognised university.
ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto matric standard.
ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
iii) at least 3 years of experience on the post of JBT teacher in case of promotion."
7.
At this stage we deem it appropriate to observe that although the Rules of 1955 prescribe the qualifications of Shastri, S.T.C.
or with OT certificate for Sanskrit Teacher for Male Teachers and S.T.C.
training with proficiency in Sanskrit for Sanskrit Teacher for Female Teachers, the appointing authorities in the States of Punjab and Haryana have not been requiring that the candidates should fulfil these qualifications.
Rather, they have made recruitment by advertising the qualifications of BA and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject for last more than 1 decade.
This may be due to two reasons namely, (i) the realisation by the appointing authorities that such courses are not being conducted in the two States, and therefore, candidates possessing such qualifications are not available and (ii) the changing pattern of education requires better qualified and trained candidates to teach the language papers.
It is, therefore, reasonable to take the view that the qualifications prescribed by the Rules have become obsolete and redundant.
8.
Vide Letter No. 34/93/78-5GST dated 1661979 the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana, clarified that a candidate possessing qualifications higher than those prescribed in the same line should be considered eligible for recruitment to the particular post.
For reference purposes that letter is reproduced below :-  "I am directed to refer to the subject noted above and to state that the question has come up for consideration by the Govt. whether possessing higher qualifications higher than those prescribed for a post, but not those actually prescribed for it should be considered and it has been decided that if a candidate possesses higher qualifications in the same line and has passed such higher examination in the same division or class as prescribed for the minimum qualification applicable to a particular post, then he should be considered eligible for that post.
To illustrate if the minimum education qualification prescribed for a post is Matric 1st Division and if candidates with higher qualifications such as Higher Secondary of BS have applied for it then such candidates as have passed higher examination may not have passed the Matric examination in the 1st division."
9.
In the year 1992, the Government of Haryana, Education Department constituted a committee to decide whether Shastri from Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and Bachelor in Education with teaching in Sanskrit from Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak is equivalent to Shastri from a university recognised by the Haryana Government and the Language Teachers' Certificate (Sanskrit) awarded by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualifications are recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
The committee observed that there is no dispute about the basic academic qualifications because Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak is an approved university.
It then compared the professional course of B.Ed.
of Maharishi Dayanand University with Language Teachers' Certificate Course and opined that qualifications of Shastri, MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit is at least equally good if not better than the qualifications prescribed for the post.
The relevant portion of the report of the committee is reproduced below :-  "Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak is an approved University, so there is no dispute in the basic academic qualification that is Shastri, MA in Sanskrit is an additional qualification.
As regards professional training part (qualification), the curriculum contents of Bachelor in Education (with teaching in Sanskrit) of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and language Teacher Certificate awarded by the Haryana Education Department are almost equivalent.
Both these professional courses contain the following papers :-  Bachelor of Education of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak Language Teacher certificate of Haryana Education Department 1.
Education in the Emerging Indian Society.
1.
Education and Indian Society.
2.
Educational Psychology and Statistics.
Educational Psychology.
3(a) Indian Education System Structure and Problems.
3.
Education and principles of Education 4.
Essentials of Teaching learning.
4.
Pathya Vastu (Sanskrit).
5.
Concept-cum-methodology of 1 Teaching subject.
5.
Methodology of Teaching of Sanskrit.
6.
Content-cum-methodology of II Teaching subject.
10.
The committee went into the details of each paper.
The contents contained in different papers were examined thoroughly.
It was found that the curriculum of Bachelor in Education qualification of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak is richer in all respects in comparison to that of Language Teacher Certificate of Haryana Education Department with the exception that there is no separate paper with the name Pathya Vastu (Sanskrit) in it which is one of the papers of Language Teacher Certificate of Haryana Education Department.
But the absence of this content paper does not make any difference because the subject matter contained in this paper of Language Teacher Certificate of Haryana Education Department is just a repetition and revision of the subject matter of Sanskrit of Matriculation standard.
In a nutshell, the committee is of the view that the qualification of Shastri, MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit is at least equally good if not better than the qualifications prescribed for the post."
11.
Now we shall notice some orders/decisions on the issue of eligibility of candidates possessing BA (Shastri) (Honours) and B.Ed.
qualifications for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers/other language teachers.
12.
In C.W.P.
No. 1642 of 1982, Rajinder Singh v. State of Punjab, decided on 17121983 (MM Punchhi, J, as his Lordship then was) held that a person, who has passed Shastri or Prabhakar as a degree is eligible for recruitment as Hindi Teacher even though he may not have passed OT in Hindi because he has sufficient knowledge of Hindi.
A similar view has been expressed by a Division Bench on May 20, 1993 while disposing of C.W.P.
No. 15394 of 1992, Ashok Kumar v. State of Haryana and others.
13.
In State of Haryana v. Jagdish Singh and others, (1950-1988) (3) RSJ 394, this Court held that Sanskrit Teacher holding Shastri with OT qualifications has been rightly treated at par with trained graduate but this parity cannot be claimed by Classical and Vernacular Teachers.
14.
In Manvinder Kaur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(1) RSJ 716 : 1991(2) SCT 364 (P&H), a learned Single Judge held that a person who possesses the qualification of BA, Prabhakar and B.Ed.
is eligible for recruitment as Hindi Teacher because the qualifications required for that post are Matric, Prabhakar, OT and STC.
The learned Single Judge also held that person possessing higher qualifications cannot be treated ineligible.
15.
Smt. Raj Kalan and others filed C.W.P.
No. 14803 of 1991 for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to consider them for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers.
When the writ petition came up for hearing before the Court on 2691991, a Division Bench issued notice of motion.
Simultaneously it directed the respondents to consider the petitioners for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
On 3121992, the respondents filed CM No. 1775 of 1993 for vacation of the interim order.
While deciding the Civil Miscellaneous application, the Court took notice of the report of the expert committee constituted by the government and disposed of the main case by passing the following order :-  "During the pendency of the writ petition the government appears to have appointed an expert committee to examine the question of equivalence of the qualification passed by the petitioners with reference to the qualification prescribed in the advertisement.
The expert committee further appears to have given the advice that the said qualifications were equivalent to ones prescribed in the advertisement the above view of the experts' committees and appears to have been accepted by the government by an order dated December 3, 1993 a Division Bench of this Court directed the respondents to interview the petitioners alongwith other candidates but restrained them from declaring the result till further orders.
The present application seems vacation of the said stay orders.
In view of the facts stated above namely that "expert committee" has come to the conclusion that the qualifications possessed by the petitioners are equivalent to the qualification prescribed for the posts advertised in the newspaper the claim of the petitioners stands practically vitiated.
For these reasons we allow the Civil Misc. No. 1775/1993 and vacate the stay against declaration of the result.
This would mean that the respondents are free to comply with the order of the Supreme Court dated October 8, 1992.
In view of the what has been stated above, the relief prayed for in the writ petition stands granted and the petition is rendered infructuous.
The same is disposed of accordingly."
16.
While deciding C.W.P.
No. 18427 of 1994, Smt. Saroj Bala v. State of Haryana and others, this Court directed the respondents to examine the question of equivalence of BA with Sanskrit vis-a-vis Shastri (Honours).
In compliance of the direction issued by the Court a committee was set up at the level of Directorate of Secondary Education.
The committee opined that a person having qualifications of BA with Sanskrit and B.Ed.
will be more suitable than the candidate having Shastri with OT for the post of Sanskrit Teacher.
The findings of the committee were accepted by the department as is evident from memo No. 17/6-95-E-III(2) dated 2441996 written by the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana to the Secretary of the respondent-Board, the relevant portion of which is extracted below :-  "Smt. Saroj Bala w/o Sh. Mala Singh R/o 7-B Mahesh Nagar, Ambala Cantt, has filed C.W.P.
No. 18427 of 1994 for directing the respondent No. 3 to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher.
The case was defended by the Department and written statement has been filed in the Hon'ble High Court.
Therefore, the Hon'ble High Court had disposed of the case with the following directions :- Operative part :-  In the result, it is held that in terms of the advertisement Annexure P-1, persons possessing the qualifications equivalent to Shastri (Hons) in Sanskrit cannot be treated eligible for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
However, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to decide the question of equivalence of BA with Sanskrit vis-a-vis Shastri (Hons) in the light of the facts that for the post of Hindi Teacher BA with Hindi has been treated equivalent to Prabhakar (Hons) in Hindi and the candidates possessing the equivalent qualifications have in fact been appointed against the post of Hindi Teachers.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 should take a decision regarding equivalence of qualification within two months of the admission of a certified copy of this order.
While doing so, the respondents shall take into consideration not only the equivalent qualifications for Hindi Teachers but also the letter of Govt. of India dated 23.6.1964 and the letter dated of Govt. of Haryana 451968, if BA with Sanskrit is treated as equivalent to Shastri (Hons), the petitioners' candidature shall be considered by the Board for selection and appointment on such a post, in case she is found suitable.
In that event, the Board shall also determine the seniority of the petitioner, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
In compliance of court's order, a committee was set up at Directorate level to examine the question of equivalence of BA with Sanskrit vis-a-vis Shastri (Hons).
The committee has considered the case of the petitioner and observed that having qualification of BA with Sanskrit and B.Ed.
will be more suitable than the candidate having Shastri with OT for the post of Sanskrit Teacher.
The Department had accepted the findings of the Committee.
In light of findings of expert committee and direction of Hon'ble High Court given in this case dated 161995, it is requested to consider the petitioner's candidature for selection on the post of Sanskrit Teacher and determine her merit and inform this office accordingly so that further necessary action may be taken accordingly."
17.
In Madan Gopal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) RSJ 506, a Division Bench held that the petitioner who had passed Matric from Haryana Board of School Education, Shastri from Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit from the same University as well as MA in Sanskrit is eligible to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher.
18.
In Parkash Chand v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) RSJ 548, the Court held that degree of Shiksha Shastri of Rashtriya Sanskrit Shiksha Sansthan is equivalent to OT (Sanskrit) and relying upon the decision of the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 1642 of 1982, Rajinder Singh v. State of Haryana (supra) and of the Division Bench dated May 2, 1993 in C.W.P.
No. 15397 of 1992, Ashok Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra), it has been held that the service of such person cannot be terminated even though he has not passed OT with Hindi.
19.
In C.W.P.
No. 11520 of 1996, Veena Devi and 2 others v. State of Haryana and others, a Division Bench of which one of us (GS Singhvi, J) was a member allowed the writ petition on the basis of the judgment in Raj Kalan's case (supra) and directed the respondents to consider the petitioners for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
20.
In C.W.P.
No. 5470 of 1982, Santosh Kumari v. The State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) RSJ 247 : 1996(4) SCT 337 (P&H) (DB), JL.
Gupta, J held that in view of the report of the committee constituted by the Director, Secondary Education in compliance of the order passed in C.W.P.
No. 18427 of 1994, a candidate possessing the qualifications of BA and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as one of the subjects during BA class is eligible to be considered for regularisation of service.
21.
The first contention urged by Shri P.L.
Verma and other learned counsel appearing for the petitioners is that the decision of the respondent- Board not to consider the petitioners for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers is illegal because B.Ed.
with Sanskrit is not one of the prescribed qualifications.
Second contention of the learned counsel is that in view of the judgments in Rajinder Singh's case (supra), Ashok Kumar's case (supra), Parkash Chand's case (supra), the candidates who have passed BA/MA with Sanskrit and B.Ed.
must be treated eligible for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers and the Board is not justified in rejecting their candidature only on the ground that they have not passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject.
Shri RK Malik, appearing for some of the petitioners further argued that in view of the 1995 amendment made in the Rules of 1955 the candidates who have passed B.Ed.
simpliciter should also be treated eligible for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers.
He laid emphasis on the report of the committee constituted by the Directorate of Secondary Education in compliance of the order passed in Saroj Bala's case (supra) and argued that in the light of the directions given by the learned Single Judge, the petitioners should be considered for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers.
Shri RS Sangwan argued that a candidate who has passed Shiksha Shastri from Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidya Peetham, New Delhi should be considered eligible because the Central Government has declared it to be a deemed university under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and has also recognised degree of Shiksha Shastri awarded by the Vidya Peetham as equivalent to B.Ed.
The learned Deputy Advocate General argued that none of the petitioners possess the qualifications prescribed in the Appendix-`B' attached to the Rules of 1955 and, therefore, they cannot make a grievance that the recruitment made by prescribing the qualifications of Shastri and LTC (OT in Sanskrit) or equivalent qualifications is illegal or arbitrary.
Shri Jaswant Singh pointed out that the committee headed by Smt. Kamla Chhikara had opined that the qualifications of Shastri, MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject should be treated equivalent to LTC (OT in Sanskrit) and, therefore, a candidate who has not passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject cannot derive any benefit from the report of the committee.
He argued that the respondents are justified in insisting on the rigorous compliance of the requirement of passing B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject because only a person trained for teaching in the concerned subject can properly teach the students and the one has passed B.Ed.
without Sanskrit as teaching subject will not prove to be proficient for the purpose of teaching Sanskrit.
Shri Jaswant Singh invited our attention to the ordinances, syllabus and courses prescribed by Maharishi Dayanand University and Kurukshetra University to substantiate his argument that a candidate must have passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject for being considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher.
22.
The first contention urged on behalf of the petitioners deserves to be rejected summarily because none of the petitioners fulfil the qualifications enumerated in Appendix-`B'.
It is also an admitted fact that for last more than one decade and half recruitments have not been made by advertising the posts keeping in view the qualifications contained in Appendix-`B'.
This is perhaps due to the realisation by the government that the candidates possessing those qualifications are not at all available and also because the government is cognizant of the requirement of well trained teachers.
It is, therefore, reasonable to take the view that the appointing authority has itself treated the qualifications incorporated in Appendix-`B' as redundant and recruitments have been made from among those who possess the qualifications of Shastri and LTC (OT) or equivalent qualifications like BA and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject.
No doubt, some persons who do not possess these qualifications have also been appointed under the orders passed by the Court but such appointments cannot be made basis for directing the respondents to appoint those who do not possess the qualifications specified in the advertisement.
23.
Shri Malik's argument that the amendment made in the year 1995 for recruitment of Hindi Teachers should be treated as conclusive of the government's intention to treat all such candidates who possess Shastri or BA with B.Ed.
eligible for recruitment as Sanskrit Teachers may appear attractive but the same is without substance.
The very fact that while prescribing qualifications for recruitment of Hindi Teachers which confer eligibility upon those who have not passed B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject, the rule making authority did not consider it appropriate to prescribe similar qualifications for recruitment to Sanskrit Teachers is sufficient to negate the plea of Shri Malik.
If at all the rule making authority wanted that candidates who have not passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject should also be treated eligible then nothing prevented it from making appropriate amendment in the rules.
Hence, we are unable to agree with Shri Malik that the candidates who have done B.Ed.
without Sanskrit as teaching subject should also be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers deserves to be rejected.
24.
Counsel for the petitioners made serious endeavour to convince us that in view of the judgments in Rajinder Singh's case, Ashok Kumar's case, Manvinder Kaur's case, Smt. Saroj Bala's case, Parkash Chand's case and Santosh Kumari's case (supra), the issue should be treated as conclusively decided in favour of the petitioners and, therefore, a writ of mandamus should be issued in their favour.
However, after carefully perusing these judgments, we are unable to agree with them.
In Rajinder Singh v. State of Punjab and Ashok Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra), the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench did not examine the issue in the context of the qualifications enumerated in the advertisement.
Likewise in Manvinder Kaur's case (supra), this issue was not dealt with by the learned Single Judge.
In Saroj Bala's case (supra), the Court was called upon to examine the issue whether BA with Sanskrit can be treated as equivalent to Shastri (Honours).
The committee appointed pursuant to the direction given by the Court examined that limited issue and opined that BA with Sanskrit should be treated at par with Shastri (Honours).
The committee was neither called upon to re-examine the recommendations made by the earlier committee headed by Smt. Kamla Chhikara nor did it delve into that issue.
Therefore, the judgment in Saroj Bala's case (supra) is of no help to the cause of the petitioners.
In Parkash Chand's case (supra), the Court was dealing with the issue whether degree of Shiksha Shastri of Rashtriya Sanskrit Shiksha Sansthan, New Delhi is equivalent to OT (Sanskrit).
We may again say that the issue raised in these petitions was neither raised nor considered in Parkash Chand's case (supra).
No doubt, some observations made in Santosh Kumari's case (supra) appear to support the claim of the petitioners but on a careful reading of the judgment, it becomes clear that the learned Single Judge was not dealing with the issue whether a candidate who has not passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit can be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher.
Therefore, the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be made basis for issuing a direction to the respondents to consider the petitioners for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers even though they have not passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a teaching subject.
25.
At this stage we deem it appropriate to observe that the role of a teacher is extremely important not only to the society but also to the nation.
The teacher alone can bring about a skill and intellectual capability in the students.
He is the principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values.
He moulds the career, character and morale fibre and aptitude for educational excellence.
A teacher has to keep himself abreast of ever changing needs of the educational system because unless he is fully equipped with the latest developments, the teacher cannot effectively play his/her role of nation building.
Therefore, the quality of teacher should be such which would inspire the pupils.
The need of well trained and well equipped teachers cannot be over emphasized.
Hence before appointing a person as teacher the candidates should be subjected to rigorous training with rigid scrutiny of efficiency in the context of the subject which he is expected to teach.
An untrained or illtrained teacher will always prove to be a serious threat to an important segment of the society.
The nation will suffer immensely if well equipped and trained persons are not appointed to teach the students.
Thus the insistence by the respondent that a candidate must have passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a teaching subject appears to be quite logical and there is no reason why the Court should dilute the qualifications laid down by the appointing authority by directing it to accommodate those who have passed B.Ed.
without the Sanskrit as a teaching subject.
26.
The courses prescribed by the universities are also clearly indicative of the intention of the universities to provide trained hands to the government.
A perusal of the scheme of B.Ed.
courses conducted by the Maharishi Dayanand University and the Kurukshetra University shows that the general aim of B.Ed.
programme is to prepare effective Secondary School Teachers, who are capable of responding to the changing needs of the modern Indian society.
The objective of the B.Ed.
programmes which are common to both the Universities and which are printed in the booklets issued by the Maharishi Dayanand University and Kurukshetra University are :-  "1.
To develop competency to teach effectively in accordance with the accepted principles of teaching-learning and using modern technology in teaching.
2.
To develop skills in identifying, selecting, innovating and organising learning experiences for teaching.
3.
To acquire knowledge of Indian Education System and the way it functions.
4.
To develop understanding of psychological principles of growth and development, learning and transfer of training.
5.
To develop necessary skills, understanding, interests and attitudes enabling the pupil-teacher to foster all-round development of children under his care.
6.
To develop awareness among the every student-teachers about the role of education in building up a democratic, secular and socialistic pattern of society.
7.
To acquire appropriate professional behaviour and to develop commitment to teaching profession.
8.
To acquire desirable social attitudes and to become effective instrument of social change and develop understanding of his role in the modernisation of Indian Society.
9.
To possess sufficient competency and skills to guide pupils under his care in health education, recreational activities and work experience.
10.
To develop skills and competencies in educational guidance and counselling."
27.
The scheme of examinations conducted by the two universities as well as the marks allocated for the various papers are more or less identical in both the universities.
For Kurukshetra University the scheme of examination is divided into seven papers, Tables 1, 2 and 3 contained in the booklets issued by the two universities contain :-  (i) Weightage to different curricular areas; (ii) allocation of time to different curricular areas; and (iii) allocation of marks to different curricular areas.
28.
Item No. 2 of Table I, Tables II and III in its entirety are reproduce below for reference purpose :-  "TABLE : 1 : Weightage to Different Curriculars Areas : Area Course Weightage xx xx xx xxx 2.
Content-cum-Methodology and Practice teaching including related Practical Work 4.
Essentials of Teaching-Learning 5.
Content-cum-Methodology of I teaching subject.
6.
Content-cum-Methodology of II teaching subject.
554%  xx xx xx TABLE-II  Allocation of time to Different Curricular  Areas :  Area Course Time Allocated Hrs.
1.
Pedalogical Theory 1.
Education in the Emerging Indian Society.
100 2.
Education Psychology.
100 3.
A) Indian Education System: Structure and Problems 50 B) Any one of the following : 50 a) Health Physical Education and Recreation.
b) Educational and Vocational Guidance.
c) Audio-Visual Education.
d) Adult and Continuing Education.
e) Curriculam and Text-book.
f) School Library Organisation.
g) Mental Hygiene and Education.
h) Yoga Education.
i) Introduction of Educational Tradition and Thinkers.
j) School Management.
2.
Content-cum-Methodology and Practice teaching including related Practical work.
4.
Essentials of Teaching Learning 100 5.
Content-cum-Methodology of I Teaching subject 200** 6.
Content-cum-Methodology of II Teaching subject.
200** 3.
Black Board Writing Work Experiences and Adult Literacy.
7.
Black Board Writing and Adult Literacy 20 8.
Work Experiences (two) 40 9.
Adult Literacy 40 Total :-  900 hrs.
** Papers V and VI dealing with Content-cum-Methodology courses in teaching subjects at School level will be as follows :-  Group A : English, Hindi, Sanskrit, Punjabi and Urdu.
Group B : Mathematics, Home Science, Commerce and Arts.
Group C : Life Sciences, Geography, Economics and Music.
Group D : Physical Sciences, Civics, History, Social Studies.
Note : The candidates shall choose two subjects for Methodology of Teaching from the above mentioned four groups.
They will choose these from two separate groups.
One of the subjects selected for these papers shall be the same as offered for the degree course.
A candidate may offer Teaching of Art if he had Art or Fine Arts at the BA examination or possesses a BA Degree and Diploma in Drawing and Painting or has a BA Degree and did Art and Crafts Teacher's Course from a recognised institution.
TABLE-III  Allocation of Marks to Different Curricular Areas  Area Course Theory Practical Total -- -- Marks Marks Marks 1.
Pedagogical Theory 1.
Education in the Emerging Indian Society.
100 - 100 2.
Educational Psychology.
80 20 100 3.
(A) Indian Education System Structure and Problem 50 50 (B) Any one of the following : 50 50 a) Health, Physical Education and Recreation  b) Educational and Vocational Guidance.
c) Audio-Visual Education d) Adult and Continuing Education e) Curriculam and Text Books f) Mental Hygiene and Education.
h) Yoga Education i) Introduction of Educational Traditions and Thinkers.
j) School Management.
4.
Essentials of Teaching Learning 100 100 2.
Content-cum-Methodology and Practice Teaching including related practical work.
5.
Content-cum-Methodology of I teaching subject 100 100 6.
Content-cum-Methodology of II teaching subject.
100 100 200* 3.
Black Board Writing Work 7.
Black Board Writing 20 8.
Work Experiences (20+20) (Any two) 40 100 Experiences and Adult Literacy.
9.
Adult Literacy 40 Total :  580 20 900 * For asterix please see end of Table II.
GUIDELINES FOR ORGANISATION AND EVALUATION OF PRACTICE TEACHING  1.
Every candidate will teach atleast 40 lessons 20 lessons in each subject during practice teaching season.
Atleast 10 lessons in each subject should be supervised by a subject specialist.
2.
The minimum of 10 lessons in subject will be supervised and evaluated by the subject specialist or a team of specialists of the subject.
3.
By and large, the evaluation of the performance in the practice teaching will be based on the last ten lessons in the subject when the student has acquired some competence and skills of teaching.
The practice of teaching will carry 200 marks comprising the criteria for classroom teaching evaluation;  The performance in class-room teaching is to be evaluated against the following criteria;  i) Knowledge of the teaching subject.
ii) Ability to organise the subject content.
iii) Ability to present the subject-matter systematically and methodically.
iv) Ability to arrange and control the class.
v) Ability to stimulate pupil participation.
vi) Ability to use illustration and teaching aid.
vii) Ability to incorporate innovations into teaching.
viii) Ability to face new situation with ingenuity and tact.
ix) Ability to try out and introduce innovations in teaching."
A bare look at the above extracted portion of the booklets issued by the two universities shows that Papers V and VI dealing with content-cum- Methodology Courses in teaching subjects in Group-A relate to English, Hindi, Sanskrit, Punjabi and Urdu.
The marks allocated for these papers are 400 out of a total of 900 for the 9 papers.
This shows the importance of the paper relating to Content-cum-Methodology and Practice Teaching and Practical Work relating to the concerned subject.
The allocation of almost 50 per cent out of the total marks for these papers has a direct nexus with the objectives of the B.Ed.
course.
Therefore, the laying down of requirement of B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject has a rational relation with the object of selecting a person having proficiency in Sanskrit for the purpose of appointment as Sanskrit Teacher.
A candidate who has passed B.Ed.
with subjects other than Sanskrit cannot prove to be an efficient teacher in the subject of Sanskrit and selection of such person will be clearly against the interest of students community as well as the public interest.
We, therefore, hold that those petitioners who have not passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject are not eligible to be recruited as Sanskrit Teachers and the respondents did not commit any illegality by refusing to consider their candidature for selection.
29.
Before concluding we deem it proper to observe that although Shri Jaswant Singh relied upon the Rules of 1997 and we have extracted a portion thereof in order to show that the department has made an attempt to bring about uniformity in the qualifications prescribed for language Teachers of different subjects, we have refrained from making those rules as the basis of our judgment because the same are still at the draft stage.
However, we hope that the government will finalise the rules within a period of three months so that future litigation on this subject can be avoided.
30.
In the result, the writ petitions are dismissed.
However, it is made clear that if any of the petitioners possesses a qualification other than B.Ed.
without Sanskrit and such qualification has been treated as equivalent then he/she may make representation to the Director, Secondary Education.
Such representation shall be considered and decided by the competent authority within a period of one month and if the representationist is found eligible then the respondent-Board shall interview and determine the suitability/merit of such a person within next one month.
Petition dismissed.