Swatanter Kumar, J - One Tirlok Chand was working as Conductor in Haryana Roadways but unfortunately, while in service, he died on 2311993 in a road accident while on duty.
He left behind two unmarried daughters and one unmarried son.
2.
Ashok Kumar is the son of the deceased Tirlok Chand and has filed the present writ petition for the issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction, more particularly in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the petitioner for appointment to the post of Supervisor/Inspector/Chief Inspector/Accountant or Chief Auditor in the Transport Department on compassionate ground in accordance with the policy of the State Government.
Ashok Kumar, immediately after the death of his father completed his M.Sc.
in Computer Science and upon his application, which was probably made in furtherance to the policy of the Government dated 13.7.1971 regarding compassionate appointments, was appointed to a clerical post designated as Computer on 261994.
He, however, on 2nd November, 1995, made a representation to the Government of Haryana through proper channel requesting that he should be given a post keeping in view his qualifications.
It was further averred in the representation that in some other cases of death like the father of the petitioner their children were given higher posts like Inspectors, Station Supervisors and Assistants in higher pay scales.
As there was no response to this representation of the petitioner, he has filed the present writ petition.
3.
The respondents have filed a reply alleging that consideration for such employment is not a vested right, which can be exercised at any time.
According to the respondents they have offered and given appointment to the petitioner, whichever was available with them at the relevant time.
They claimed their action in consonance with the policy and more particularly the policy/instructions issued by the Government on 851995.
4.
The short question that falls for consideration before this Court in this petition is - `what is the right of the children of the deceased- employee, to claim an appointment in the department/departments where his/her father was serving' and what is the nature of the obligation upon the State, if any, to provide such an employment.
The undisputed facts are that the instructions dated 13.7.1971 were in force at the relevant time as Tirlok Chand died on 2311993 prior to the coming into force of the instructions dated 851995.
The relevant time in the cases of the present kind can only be the date of death or at best when the ward/heir of the deceased is given employment.
Both these stages are prior to 851995 and as such we are not prepared to accept the contention on behalf of the State that the instructions of year 1995 have any bearing on the matter in question.
Hence, we proceed to discuss the merits of the case on the basis of 1971 instructions.
5.
The instructions issued by the State of Haryana under Circular No. 3442-3GS-II/71/19109, dated 13.7.1971 have been annexed to the petition as Annexure P.1 and the relevant part of those instructions reads as under :-  `` .... ..... .....
Instead each individual case should be examined carefully and employment, which should be confined to Class III and Class IV posts, should be provided only if it is justified in order to avoid exceptional hardship and not otherwise.''
..... ..... ...... ......'' 6.
It appears to us that the above instructions/policy are/is nothing but a good gesture on the part of the State and is to provide more security to the members of the family of its deceased-employee.
This concept of seniority must be confined to its reasonable limits.
No doubt, the State is a mass employer in our country, but there is a heavier burden placed upon the State to be fair, and just.
Its action must not be discriminatory or arbitrary in the matters of employment.
To carve out this reasonable classification/or a group, the State has to divulge from its policy and regular modes of recruitment from different sources.
This is a self-imposed obligation by the State and is in the larger sphere of social-welfare activity of the State.
It will be very difficult to give it dimensions of indefeasible right in a ward/or heir of deceased which could be forced in law like any other right which flows from a statute of a subordinate legislation.
Welfare activities of the State are to be, though free from discrimination, but has to be within the limitations, which the State has, including infrastructures, scope of employment, vacancies, creation of posts, feasibility of budgets and all such other ancillary factors.
7.
The Supreme Court in a recent case titled as Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar, JT 1996(2) SC 542 : 1996(2) SCT 778, with approval relied upon the earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, JT 1994(3) SC 525 : 1994(4) SCC 138 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) and held as under :-  ``It has been submitted before us that this Court has very clearly indicated in the said judgment that the consideration for compassionate employment must be treated as an exception to the general rule for giving employment only by making open recruitment and consideration of out of turn employment on compassionate ground is intended to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis caused on account of death of the earning member.
Learned counsel has also drawn our attention to paragraph 6 of the decision where it has been indicated : ``For these very reasons, the compassionate employment cannot be granted after a lapse of reasonable period which must be specified in the rules.
The consideration for such employment is not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in future.
The object being to enable the family to get over the financial crisis which it faces at the time of the death of the sole breadwinner, the compassionate employment cannot be claimed and offered whatever the lapse of time and after the crisis is over.''
It was further held :  ``It appears to us that the principle of compassionate appointment as indicated in the aforesaid decisions of this Court, is not only reasonable but consistent with the principle of employment in Government and public sector.
The impugned decision of the High Court therefore cannot be sustained.''
In the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal (supra) the Supreme Court after dealing with the matter in great detail directed that the top appointments on compassionate grounds could not be offered as a matter of course irrespective of financial conditions or to the posts above Class-III or Class-IV.
Their Lordships held that appointment to these lowest posts can be made as an exception to the rule and would not be hit by the vice of discrimination.
Limited to that extent it would justify the nexus and rational with the object sought to be achieved by such polices.
The appointments to such posts were directed to be given expeditiously and primarily with the intent to avoid complete change in the status and affairs of the family resulting from the death of the employee and to provide a bridge to the family of the deceased to overcome the destitute.
Again in a very recent judgment the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar v. Samsuz Zoha etc., 1996(3) Recent Services Judgments page 92 : 1996(4) SCT 51 (SC), while upsetting the judgment of the High Court of Patna which had directed the Government to appoint the petitioner to Class-III post or to promote him to the said post observed that the High Court was not justified in passing such directions as there is no right vested in the candidate for particular appointment on compassionate grounds.
The State is justified in following its own policy and appointing the persons to Class-III or Class-IV as the case may be, a person who claims appointment on compassionate grounds.
Consequently, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had allowed the plea of the State and granted special leave petition.
8.
A Division Bench of this Court in Bhupender Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) Recent Services Judgments page 389 : 1996(3) SCT 636 (P&H), declining to issue a writ of mandamus in the case of the present kind, held as under :-  ``It may also be mentioned that no person has a right to claim appointment on compassionate grounds.
There is no vested right in this behalf.
If the argument raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner is accepted, it may even give right to a graduate to claim appointment to a Class-I service like the Haryana Civil Service or even a higher service on the ground that he is qualified for the post.
Such is not the object of granting appointment on compassionate grounds.
A writ of mandamus can only be issued when the petitioner has a right and the State is under a legal obligation to do some thing.
In the present case, it has given appointment to the petitioner.
He has no vested right to claim appointment as a Deputy Forest Ranger and the State was under no legal obligation to give him that post.''
A consistent view has been taken by various Benches of this Court and reference can also be made to a judgment of this court in the case of Daya Kaur v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1996(2) Recent Services Judgment 179 : 1996(2) SCT 447.
9.
The learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner made a reference to the judgment of a single Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 179 of 1990, Parveen Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 14.7.1992 and Civil Writ Petition No. 8933 of 1993, Rajiv Kumar Sharma v. The State of Haryana and others decided on 2821995 : 1995(3) SCT 643 (P&H), copies of which have been placed on record as Annexures P.8 and P.9.
In view of the clear instructions issued by the Government and subsequent development of law, we are of the view that these judgment may not be of much help to the petitioner.
These judgments in any case were prior to the pronouncement of the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Nagpal (supra) which holds the field now.
10.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner also relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Smt. Phool Wati v. Union of India, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 469.
Firstly, the basic principles settled in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court are that the appointment should be provided immediately to redeeming the family in distress, but secondly, no instructions or policy of the Government was brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India by the Union of India in that case.
The subsequent pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India have laid down clear principles of appointment on compassionate grounds in the afore-stated cases.
11.
From the analysis of the aforestated judgments it emerges that following principles of law stand settled and must be adhered to and followed by the State :-  (i) The heir or ward of a deceased claiming appointment on compassionate grounds does not have any indefeasible vested right to claim such an appointment.
(ii) The State Government is fully justified in formulating and following its policies for appointments on compassionate grounds, (iii) Such appointments should be made immediately upon the death of the deceased or at least within reasonable time thereafter, as time would have to be treated as of some essence in such matters, and (iv) lastly the appointments so made should not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or discrimination.
The State should be able to give equal treatment to all such cases, however, in consonance with its policy and keeping in view other limitations of the State.
12.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner is entitled to appointment in the higher scale as some other persons similarly situated were given such appointments.
Thus, the petitioner raises plea of discrimination.
Firstly, no challenge has been made to the other appointments nor other persons have been impleaded as party to the present petition.
Secondly the learned counsel for the State has argued that after the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Umesh Nagpal (supra) no appointments have been made to any post except Class-III and Class-IV that too keeping in view the other guidelines and directions issued by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Even if some wrong has been committed we do not think that Court should perpetuate such wrongs by directing other appointments in violation to the policy.
As already stated the purpose is not to defeat the claim of eligible persons who may be entitled to compete for the said posts but for compassionate appointments but the purpose is to avoid the family being exposed distress but of course in a limited and acceptable manner.
The petitioner had accepted the appointment without any protest or, reservations and it is after a period of one year that he thought of raising an objection in this regard.
As such there is no force in the plea of discrimination raised on behalf of the petitioner.
For the reasons aforestated we do not find any merit in the writ petition which is dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.