DH Nasir, J - Sixty-eight writ petitioners of these writ petitions are seeking declaration against the Andhra Pradesh Beverages Corporation Limited, that not placing the petitioners in the pre-revised higher scale of pay of Rs. 1010-1800 as per G.O.
Ms. No. 195, General Administration (PE.I) Department dated 151987 and the proceedings in letter No. 56/OSD/87-5, dated 1271988 are illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and for a direction to the respondents to place the petitioners in the pre-revised higher scale of pay of Rs. 1010-1800 as per PRC 1986 revised to Rs. 1875-3750 by PRC 1993 with effect from the date of their confirmation in the post of operator with all consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioners' case is that they were employed with the Andhra Pradesh Beverages Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as `Corporation') since 1986/87 as operators.
Some of them were directly recruited and some of them were recruited through employment exchange in various bottling units/depots owned by the Corporation.
They were qualified ITIs.
in different trades such as electricians, fitters, instrument mechanics, welders etc.
They were initially granted a consolidated pay of Rs. 500/- per month.
After the completion of their probation period, they were regularised in the post of operator and were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 810-1420.
The petitioners made representations to the management from time to time for granting them the pay scale on par with the pay scales recommended and approved for the Government Departments, according to PRC 1986 for similar category of posts with ITI qualifications.
But the management did not accede to their representations in spite of assurances to the petitioners and other employees that they would be placed in the appropriate pay scale as per revised scales of 1986.
3.
It is further urged by the petitioners that Pay Commission recommendations as contained in GOMs.
No. 288, Finance and Planning (Fin- Wing.
PRC-I) Department dated 17.11.1986 were made applicable to the Government employees as well as to the employees of the Local Bodies with effect from 1986.
Subsequently after considering the demand of the public enterprises in the State, the Government issued GOMs.
No. 195 dated 151987 approving adoption of the revised pay scales for the employees of public enterprises.
4., It is further the case of the petitioners that the respondent- Corporation had been making huge profits, and the employees including the petitioners were granted Dearness Allowance and other allowances on par with the Government employees and, therefore, the writ petitioners were entitled to be awarded the revised pay scale with effect from their respective dates of confirmation.
Taking into consideration the fact that the petitioners were performing duties similar to the duties being performed by the ITI qualified employees in the Government departments, the respondent-Corporation had been empowered to adopt the revised pay scales of 1986 by GOMs.
No. 195 dated 151987, but the respondent-Corporation failed and neglected to give the advantage of the same to the petitioners and referred the matter to the Government.
The Government issued proceedings in letter No. 56/OSD/87-5 dated 1271988 reiterating that for the new post of operator the pay scale recommended by PRC be adopted.
At item 17 of the Annexure I to the said proceedings, the approved pay scale for operator was shown as 810-1420.
According to the petitioners, these proceedings were required to be harmoniously read with the PRC recommendations in GOMs.
No. 288 dated 17.11.1986 for similar posts in the Government as well as in the local bodies, according to which the revised pay scale for those with ITI qualification was fixed at 1010-1800 and for those appointed in the same post without ITI qualification were given lesser scale of pay and, therefore, the petitioners were entitled to the scale of Rs. 1010-1800 as all the petitioners were possessing ITI qualification.
However, the respondent-Corporation recommended the pay scale of Rs. 910-1625 to the petitioners with a mala fide intention of causing delay and depriving the petitioners of their lawful rights.
5.
The counter affidavit filed by the General Manager (Operations) of the respondent-Corporation does not dispute the fact that the Corporation was a Government company.
However, the Corporation's incapacity to pay and apply the revised pay scales is sought to be emphasized on the ground that due to ban on arrack, the packing activities were closed with effect from 1.10.1993 and due to imposition of total prohibition with effect from 1611995, the volume and the turnover of the Corporation has drastically reduced resulting into under-utilisation of manpower.
The Corporation has also endeavoured to point out the distinction between the operators with ITI qualification on one hand and the Lab-Assistants possessing B.Sc.
(Chemistry) or ITI qualification on the other.
However, both the posts were considered to be equivalent in view of the nature of duties, according to the respondents.
It is further contended by the Corporation that the petitioners were categorically told that they would be paid a consolidated salary of Rs. 500/- per month during the probation period and that the benefit of suitable pay scale would be extended after completion of their probation period.
The petitioners accepted the same while joining the Corporation.
Further according to the respondent- Corporation, the Government after careful examination of the job requirement and responsibilities approved the pay scales to various categories of employees vide letter No. 56/OSD-87-5, dated 1271988 and, therefore, the petitioners' demand that they were entitled to the pay scale recommended by PRC 1986 on par with similar categories of posts with ITI qualifications for Government Departments was untenable.
6.
It is further contended by the respondent-Corporation that the order issued by the Government in GOMs.
No. 288, Finance and Planning Department dated 17.11.1986 was applicable to the employees drawing pre-revised pay scales and similar pay and allowance prior to 1.7.1986.
But the Corporation was neither in existence prior to 1.7.1986 nor were the petitioners drawing the pre-revised pay scales of 1986 to qualify for implementing the revised pay scales of 1986 as ordered in GOMs.
No. 288 dated 17.11.1986 and GOMs.
No. 195, General Administration Department, dated 181987.
The respondent- Corporation also contended that the writ petition was barred by laches.
7.
It is further pointed out by the respondent-Corporation that different pay scales were fixed as could be seen from GOMs.
No. 288, dated 17.11.1986 for ITI qualified persons in different departments of the State considering various duties attached to the post in each Department and, therefore, the petitioners' claim that merely because they possessed ITI qualification they were entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1010-1800 was wholly unjustified.
8.
It is further contended by the respondent-Corporation that the Corporation had been incurring losses from the accounting year which ended on 3091987 to the tune of Rs. 17693 lakhs, which alone, according to the respondent-Corporation, relieved the Corporation from adopting the revised pay scales without Government's approval.
9.
As far as grant of higher pay scales to Officers are concerned, the respondent-Corporation states that the Government after careful examination of the merits of the case approved that proposal, but did not approve of extending higher scales of pay to the petitioners.
10.
Particulars of pay scales are given on Annexure I to letter No. 56/OSD/87-5 date 1271988 received by the respondent-Corporation from the Government.
From perusal of the letter dated 2261991, addressed to the respondent-Corporation, the alternate proposals on the pay scales would be gathered from Annexure I, which are reduced below :  Annexure I ALTERNATE PROPOSALS ON THE PAY SCALES S.No.
Designation Scales Alternate 1.
Operator 1100-1950 1050-1945 2.
Lab Asstt.
Accountant Asst-cum-Typist Stores Asst.
1280-2440 1230-2330 3.
Stores Supervisor, Plant Supervisor 1330-2630 1330-2630 Note : The above grades may be made effective from the date of appointment, as in the case of officers, and arrears may be paid.
Sd/- (R.V.
Subba Rao) President APBCUS It is evident from the particulars mentioned in the above annexure that the alternate proposal was to allow a pay scale of Rs. 1050-1945 instead of the scale of petitioners 1100-1950 demanded on 8101990.
The respondent- Corporation, however, by its letter dated 21101991, addressed to the Principal Secretary to the Government, Revenue Department, AP Secretariat, Hyderabad suggested new pay scales for different posts as shown below :  Name of the Post + Pay scale attached + 1.
Accounntant/Acc ountant-cum-Cashier Rs. 910-1625 2.
Assistant-cum-Typist Rs. 910-1625 3.
Stores Assistant Rs. 910-1625 4.
Plant Supervisors/Stores Supervisors Rs. 1330-2630 Gr.-I 1050-1945 Gr.-II 5.
Operators/Lab-Assts.
Rs. 810-1420 6.
Sweeper-cum-Helpers Rs. - 11.
On material page 20, produced along with the writ petition, a statement showing particulars of pay scales of operators prevailing in other State run public undertakings are given, which are reproduced below :  STATEMENT The information collected regarding the pay scales of operators from other State run public undertakings :  S. No. Organisation Designation Pay Scales 1.
AP Agro Industries Development Corporation Ltd Operator Gr.
I & II 1150-2110 2.
AP Co-operative Oil Seed Growers Federation Ltd Operator qualified 1100-1670 3.
AP Dairy Development Co-operative Federation Operator qualified 810-1625 4.
AP Small Scale Development Corporation Operator qualified 1050- 1945 5.
AP Mineral Development Corporation Operator qualified 1100-2050 6.
AP Handicrafts Development Operator qualified 950-1670 7.
A.P.S.R.T.C.
Operator unqualified qualified  1075-1860 1125-1935 12.
From the scrutiny of facts as stated above, it prima facie appears that the pay scales in force in the respondent-Corporation are much less than the pay scales for similar posts in other public sector undertakings.
The justification for the same is sought to be made out on the ground that the respondent-Corporation had been incurring huge losses because of prohibition introduced in the State and that on such dying organisation, if additional financial burden on par with other State undertakings is imposed, the process of eventual closure of the organisation would get accelerated which would be disadvantageous to the petitioners themselves.
On the other hand the learned Counsel for the petitioners emphatically submitted that the attitude manifested by the respondent-Corporation was in flagrant violation of the principle of equal pay for equal work as enshrined in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
13.
He further submitted that the principle of equal pay for equal work was applicable irrespective of the applicability of the revised pay scales.
This view has been expressed by this Court in Mohd.
Hasanuddin v. Director-General, Central Reserve Police Force, 1983(2) AWR 87.
The High Court was pleased to direct that an appropriate writ be issued to the respondents to give the petitioner the revised scale of pay of Rs. 330-480.
In that case, the Court was concerned with the fact that the petitioner was working as an Electrician in Central Reserve Police Force.
He was appointed as Electrician on 14th July, 1975 in the scale of pay of Rs. 150-5-175-6-205-7-240.
The new scales of pay came into force on 1st January, 1973.
The scale of pay as per the Central Civil Service Revised Pay Rules in respect of persons holding posts with scales of pay of Rs. 150-5-175-6-205-7- 240 was revised to Rs. 330-8-370-10-400-EB-10-480.
The petitioner complained that instead of putting him in the above scale of Rs. 330-480, he was put in the scale of Rs. 260-350 and thus he was denied the higher emoluments, which constitutes violation of the doctrine embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India with special reference to the principle of `equal pay equal work' as laid down by the Supreme Court in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879.
Applying the doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' irrespective of the applicability of the revised pay scales Rules, the High Court observed that once it was shown that the Electrician in Central PWD was allowed to draw the higher scales of pay, as ruled by the Supreme Court construing Articles 14 and 16 in the light of the preamble and Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India, it was clear that the principle `equal pay for equal work' was deducible from those Articles and could be properly applied to the cases of unequal scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing different scales of pay were doing identical work under the same employer.
It was ruled that "It is true that equation of posts and equation of pay are matters primarily for the Executive Government and expert bodies like the Pay Commission and not for Courts but where all things are equal that is, where all relevant considerations are the same, persons holding identical posts may not be treated differentially in the matter of their pay merely because they belong to different departments".
Apart from saying that there was no post of Electrician in the schedule appended to the revised pay scales the respondents could not deny the existence of a higher revised scale of pay to the Electrician in the Central PWD, and the posts of electrician in the Central PWD being in no way different from that of the post held by the petitioner, the Court held that there was no option but to apply the principle of equality embodied in Article 16 as enunciated by the Supreme Court and that the petitioner was entitled to the revised scale of pay of Rs. 330-480.
14.
In Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers' Union v Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 1173 : 1991(2) SCT 95 (SC), the Supreme Court held that equal pay for equal work was not expressly declared by the Constitution as a fundamental right but in view of the Directive Principles of State Policy as contained in Article 39(d) of the Constitution "equal pay for equal work" had assumed the status of fundamental right in service jurisprudence having regard to the constitutional mandate of equality in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was further observed that equal pay for equal work and providing security for service by regularising casual employment within a reasonable period has been accepted by the Supreme Court as constitutional goal to our socialistic pattern and that it had ceased to be a Judge-made law, as it was the part of the constitutional philosophy which ensured a welfare socialistic pattern of a State providing equal opportunity to all and equal pay for equal work for similarly placed employees of the State.
It was further observed that the Supreme Court has zealously enforced the fundamental right of equal pay for equal work in effectuating the constitutional goal of equality and social justice and, therefore, the principle of equal pay for equal work even in an establishment which was an instrumentality of the State was applicable in its full vigour.
15.
In State of Himachal Pradesh v. Himachal Pradesh State Recognised and Aided Schools Managing Committees and others, 1995(4) SCC 507 : 1995(3) SCT 648 (SC), it was held that Recognised and aided private schools were entitled to parity in pay and allowance with their counterparts in Government Schools.
16.
The authorities referred to above provide a clear guideline with regard to the application of "equal pay for equal work".
The respondent- Corporation being no exception to the instrumentality of the State, can ill- afford to deny the right of equal pay for equal work as claimed by the petitioners in the present writ petition.
The writ petition could have been straightaway allowed on the basis of the ratio emerging from all the three authorities considered above, but for the fact that neither the petition nor even the material papers produced along with the petition make out a clear case of "parity" between the petitioners on one hand and the operators employed in various Government Departments and public sector undertakings on the other, and, therefore, as observed by this High Court in Mohd.
Hasanuddin's case (supra), the equation of posts and equation of pay are matters primarily for the Executive Government and expert bodies like the Pay Commission and not for Courts, but where all things were equal and all relevant considerations were the same, persons holding identical posts should not be treated differentially in the matter of their pay merely because they belong to different departments.
17.
In the case before us although the nomenclature of the post under consideration is `operator', it appears that different Departments of the Government as well as in different Public Sector Undertakings different duties are allocated to the persons employed as `operators' and, therefore, it could not be held that a complete parity existed between the petitioners of the respondent-Corporation and their counterparts in other organisations.
For the purpose of ascertaining parity or determining which particular post in which Department or public sector undertaking was, if not complete, at least substantially the same so as to give the benefit of the revised pay scales on the same basis to the petitioners before this Court, it is necessary from my point of view that the Respondent No. 1-Secretary, Revenue (T) Department, Finance and Planning, should appoint a Senior Officer closely conversant with defining job specifications for various posts, and the authority so appointed by the 1st Respondent should work out the same, after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to the petitioners or the representative of the Trade Union of which the petitioners may be members so as to arrive at the revised higher pay scale which could be made applicable to the petitioners before us.
18.
As far as the argument advanced on behalf of the respondent- Corporation that the financial position of the respondent-Corporation was dwindling is concerned, the Corporation may resort to retrenching staff, if so advised, so as to reduce the financial burden, but under the guise of weak financial position, the respondent-Corporation cannot be permitted to perpetrate and perpetuate the wrong done by declining the advantage of the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" to the petitioners in this writ petition.
19.
An argument could be advanced that the respondent-Corporation in spite of being an autonomous body was depending upon the Government for approval of pay scales for different categories of its employees, and therefore, the Corporation waived its right of framing its own pay scales, which made it obligatory upon the Corporation to straightaway adopt and apply the same pay scales as were made available to Government employees performing the same duties.
If this argument is accepted, the petitioners could be allowed the pay scale of Rs. 1050-1945, allowed to the "Operators" as extracted on Para 8 of this judgment.
It is also pertinent to note that higher pay scales to the officers of the Corporation have been allowed in accordance with the proposal made by the respondent-Corporation and approved by the Government.
There is, therefore, no reason why the Corporation should have any hesitation in adopting the pay scales applicable to the employees similarly situated in the Government.
Difficulty may perhaps be encountered in determining the "similarly situated" employees in the Government in view of the fact that under operator's nomenclature many jobs are covered and therefore, to facilitate such determination, a Senior Officer well conversant with personnel management with particular emphasis on job specifications be appointed with a view to serve the ends of justice.
20.
This writ petition, is therefore, being disposed of with a direction to the Respondent No. 1 to appoint a Senior Officer well conversant with personnel management with particular emphasis on job specifications for the purpose as stated above in the body of the judgment within one week from the receipt of this order.
After giving the petitioners or their Association sufficient opportunity of hearing, the said One Man Committee may submit his report to the Respondent No. 1, within four weeks from the date of such appointment, and with a further direction that the respondent-Corporation shall implement the recommendation which may be made by the Respondent No. 1 after considering the report of the Committee, forthwith with retrospective effect from the respective date of confirmation of each petitioner.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.