VK Gupta, J - By this common Judgment, I propose to dispose of both the petitions together.
2.
The facts and the controversy in both the petitions, being same may be briefly stated.
The petitioner completed her MD Course in Obstetrics and Gynaecology and appeared in the examination in September 1989 at Srinagar from Medical College, Srinagar under the University of Kashmir.
Eleven other candidates, whose names are mentioned in para 2 of the petition (OWP No. 800 of 1993) also appeared alongwith the petitioner in the said examination.
She was relieved by the Principal/Dean, Government Medical College, Srinagar on 1491989 after the completion of her appearance in the said examination and was directed to report to the Director, Health Services for fresh posting, as is evident by the certificate issued on 1491989 (Annexure-A).
Various other formalities followed thereafter including the communication to Deputy Registrar (Academics), University of Kashmir, Srinagar.
This is one part of the story.
3.
Jammu and Kashmir Public Service Commission issued Notification No. 16-PSC of 1992 dated 2271992 inviting applications from eligible candidates for some posts of B-Grade Specialists in Obstetrics and Gynaecology.
The last date for receipt of application forms was 3181992.
Obviously, one of the basic eligibility criteria for applying was the possession of Master's Degree in Obstetrics and Gynaecology by the candidates before the last date fixed for the receipt of applications.
The petitioner, in pursuance to this Advertisement Notification admittedly submitted her application before 3181992, saying that she is possessing the qualification of MD but that her Degree will be submitted later.
Since she could not submit the Degree in time and because the Commission would not consider her case appropriately, she filed SSWP No. 1/1993 and this Court, vide its order dated 10th March, 1993 issued an ad-interim direction permitting the petitioner to appear in the interview provisionally.
For ready reference, this order is reproduced as under:-  ``Issue notice of show cause to respondents 2 and 3 in the first instance, returnable within two weeks.
Petitioner to furnish registered covers and may serve them `Dasti' also.
Issue notice in the CMP also.
It is submitted that petitioner has successfully completed her MD Course in Gynaecology, but her original Degree has not yet been issued by respondent No. 3.
She being candidate for the post of B Grade Specialist cannot appear in the interview for want of the original degree.
It is prayed that the respondents be directed to allow her to appear in the interview and her result be made subject to production of original degree.
The prayer made is reasonable and I order accordingly.
List after the service is complete.''
4.
In the meanwhile, Principal, Government Medical College, Srinagar, respondent No. 2 issued provisional Certificate in favour of the petitioner on 15.4.1993 whereby it was certified that she had passed MD examination in Obstetrics and Gynaecology of the Kashmir University held in September 1989 as per result Notification dated 2331993.
For ready reference, the relevant text of this Provisional Certificate reads as under :-  ``This is to certify that Dr. CHANDRA LEKHA D/O SH. DINA NATH KOUL has passed MD/M.S./Diploma Examination in the subject OBSTETRICS & GYNAECOLOGY of the Kashmir University held in 1989 Session September as per the Result Notification No. F2(MD/MS) Result/Soc/Ku/93 Dated 2331993 supplied to me by the Controller of Examinations, University of Kashmir, Srinagar.''
5.
We have now reached the point of controversy.
As is apparent, the petitioner, as per the aforesaid Provisional Certificate, which is in turn based on the result Notification No. F2(MD/MS) Result/Soc/Ku/93 of University of Kashmir, is deemed to have passed her MD Examination on 2331993.
If, therefore, she is in fact actually considered and held to have passed her MD examination only on 23.3.1992, admittedly, she would not be eligible for consideration for appointment on the post of B- Grade Specialist because, her possessing this qualification before the last date for receipt of application forms by the Commission (3181992) was a necessary eligibility condition.
If on the other hand, it is found, held and declared that she possessed this academic qualification before the aforesaid last date, she can be held eligible for such appointment.
6.
In para 2 of the writ petition (OWP No. 800/93), the petitioner has given the names of 11 candidates, who appeared along with her in September 1989 in the examination conducted by University of Kashmir for MD in Obstetrics and Gynaecology.
In para 6 of the same petition, the petitioner says that her result was to be declared in October 1989 as the result of the other candidates, who had appeared along with her, was declared in that month.
Para 6 read as under:-  ``That the petitioner appeared in the examination in September 1989 and her result was to be declared in October 1989 as the result of all the candidates, who appeared along with the petitioner, was declared in October 1989 itself.''
In para 9 of the same petition, the petitioner says that as she appeared in September 1989 formed a class along with other candidates, who appeared with her in the same examination and as the result of all other said candidates was declared in October 1989, the result of the petitioner should also have been declared at the same time and, if it has been declared later on, she should be deemed to have passed the examination in October 1989.
She says that the later declaration of the result was without any fault on the part of the petitioner and that the University did so without assigning any reason whatsoever.
Para 9 being very important reads as under:-  ``That as the petitioner appeared in September, 1989 and she forms a class along with the persons who appeared with her in the same examination in the same Session, and as result of all other co-candidates has been declared in October, 1989, so the result of the petitioner, though declared at a later date, but the date of passing of the examination of the petitioner, should have also been shown along with the similarly situated candidates.
The delay in declaring the result of the petitioner was not a fault on the part of the petitioner; rather, this was a fault on the part of the University, that the result of the petitioner was declared at a later date without assigning any reason therefor, and the petitioner cannot be allowed to suffer for the default on the part of the University.
This result of the petitioner was declared only after the petitioner filed a writ petition in the Hon'ble High Court for the declaration of her result and on the direction of the order of the Hon'ble High Court passed in the writ petition.
Under no circumstances, the date of result of the petitioner, can be shown as 2331993.
By showing date 2331993 as the date of result of the petitioner, the petitioner has been separated from the class of the candidates who are similarly situated with the petitioner and form one class with the petitioner.''
As against the aforesaid specific averments of the petitioner, let us go to the reply of the University of Kashmir respondent No. 1.
In para 2, the University does not dispute that the petitioner appeared in the examination in September 1989 and that she appeared along with 11 other candidates.
Even the names of these candidates are not disputed.
In para 6 similarly, the University does not dispute that whereas the result of other candidates who had appeared with the petitioner, was declared in October 1989, the petitioner's result was not declared till 2331993.
In fact, misleading and unfounded averments have been made in para 6, as against specific and precise averments made by the petitioner in para 6 of the petition.
Para 6 of the reply of the University may be quoted with advantage to substantiate that the University has indulged in not only vague evasive reply but also has attempted to avoid the issue.
It reads as under:-  ``With regard to Para 6 of the Writ Petition, it is submitted that the contents of Para 6 pertain to declaration of the result of the petitioner regarding her examination for MD Course and in this respect, it is submitted that the date of issuance of Provisional Certificate was declared to be 2331993 when the result of the petitioner was declared vide Result Notification No. F-2(MD/MS)/Result/Sec/KU/93 dated 2331993.
The petitioner herein has not specifically mentioned about all those candidates who appeared along with her and their result was declared in October 1989 as alleged or at all.
Since the averment made is vague in nature, therefore, need no specific reply by the answering respondents in this regard.''
7.
Reply to para 9 of the writ petition as contained in the University's objections is on similar lines where they have once again reiterated what is contained in para 6 without at all refuting or denying the basic averment that the petitioner appeared in September 1989 along with other 11 candidates and, whereas the result of these 11 candidates was declared in October 1989, the result of the petitioner was not declared till 2331993.
8.
Mr. DC Raina, learned counsel appearing for the Public Service Commission has referred to a Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of J&K Public Service Commission v. Farhat Rasool and others, 1996(2) SCT 171 (SC) in Civil Appeal No. 9751 of 1995 decided on 2nd November, 1995 which arose out of a Judgment delivered by Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 259 of 1994.
The Division Bench of this Court, while dealing with the matter in controversy held that, even though the result of the writ petitioner was declared on 3131988 (last date of receipt of applications by the Commission was 10th March, 1988), the petitioner should be deemed to have been in possession of the academic qualification as on 23101987 when the Result Notification in respect of other candidates was declared but, the result of the petitioner was withheld on technical grounds.
The Division Bench found the petitioner eligible for consideration on the premises that he should be deemed to have been in possession of the academic qualification on 23101987.
9.
In appeal, the Supreme Court, however, made the following observations:-  ``A perusal of the concerned documents makes it clear that when the general results were declared on 23101987, as to the respondent it was stated ``MPS/IR''.
The acronym ``MPS'' stands for marks for previous semester(s) awaited, and ``IR'' for incomplete registration.
It thus shows that the result of the respondent had been withheld not only for incomplete registration but non-availability of marks of his previous semester as well.
On these having become available, the result of the respondent was declared vide Notification No. 55/BFF of 1987 (August) on 3131988, in which the marks obtained were also given as 5569 out of 8000.''
After making the aforesaid observations, it was held by the Apex Court that the Division Bench of the HIgh Court was wrong in taking the view that the writ petitioner should be deemed to be eligible as on 10th March, 1988 because his eligibility with reference to possessing the qualification would start from the date of actual declaration of result in his case, i.e. 31st March, 1988.
10.
The case before us is entirely different.
The aforesaid ratio in the Supreme Court Judgment is not at all applicable.
It is totally distinguishable from the facts of this case.
Here is a person who says that she appeared in the examination along with 11 other candidates in September 1989 and, whereas the result of all such candidates was declared in October 1989, her result was not declared for as long as three and a half years thereafter.
It was declared only after she had filed a writ petition in this Court (SSWP No. 1/1993).
Yes, it is open to the University to come and tell this Court as to why her result was not declared till 2331993.
Yes, again it is open to the University to come and tell the Court that the declaration of the result for three and a half years was because of some fault on the part of the petitioner or because of non-fulfilment or non-observance of some formalities or requirements by her.
The University would be well within its right to come and tell the Court that it could not declare the result for three and a half years because either the petitioner did not co-operate or she was not eligible or that she lacked on some ground or the other academic, technical or otherwise.
On said stands being taken by the University, this Court surely could have found out if the petitioner was at fault she could not be at all considered to have been in possession of the qualification at any point of time before actual date of the result.
Undoubtedly, in normal course, a person is deemed to be possessed of an academic qualification only from the date of the declaration of the result.
But there has to be an exception to this general rule because in a given case, where the University does not declare the result of a candidate, when it has declared the result of all other candidates similarly placed.
If a person appears in an examination along with a number of other candidates, she is entitled that her result is declared along with all such candidates, as and when the event takes place.
The withholding of the result is permissible only on some ground.
It is not open for the University not to declare the result at all of such a candidate, when the result of other candidates, who had appeared with her is declared and without assigning any reason whatsoever, or without there being any existence of any ground for such non-declaration.
If candidates, who appeared along with the petitioner in September 1989 get all the benefits consequent upon declaration of the result in October 1989, the petitioner cannot be deprived of that benefit for as long as three and a half years, and that too without any fault on her part.
11.
The petitioner is deemed to have passed her MD examination in October 1989 when the result of her co-examinees was declared.
Here is a case where this Court can safely say that issuance of the result Notification in case of the petitioner should be deemed to be effective from October 1989 itself and, if for the fault of the University, such issuance of Notification was postponed or delayed, the petitioner cannot be allowed to suffer for that.
12.
In the result, therefore, both the petitions are allowed.
It is held and declared that the petitioner is deemed to have passed her MD examination in Obstetrics and Gynaecology in October 1989 and, for that purpose, the Result Notification dated 2331993 should be deemed to be effective from October 1989.
Correspondingly and consequently, it is also declared and held that the petitioner was eligible for consideration by the Commission as on 3181992.
By issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, therefore, it is directed and ordered that the Commission shall, considering the petitioner to be so eligible, declare the result of her interview and take all consequential steps in furtherance thereto.
The petitioner is awarded the costs of Rs. 5, 000/- in both the petitions which shall be paid to her by the University of Kashmir, respondent No. 1 in both the petitions.
Petitions allowed.