GS Singhvi, J - In this petition filed for quashing of the order Annexure P-8 issued by the Additional Director General of Police, Punjab Armed Police, Jalandhar Cantt, the legal issue which requires adjudication by this Court it whether the petitioner has acquired a legal right to be appointed as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police against the posts reserved for sports persons and whether a writ in the nature of mandamus should be issued by the High Court directing the respondents to appoint him as Assistant Sub Inspector even though the post of Assistant Sub Inspector was not advertised by the competent authority.
2.
The facts of the case are in very narrow compass.
The petitioner applied for appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector in the Punjab Police on the basis of his alleged outstanding performance in the field of sports, namely, boxing.
His case was forwarded by the Director General of Police, Punjab to the Inspector General of Police, Punjab Armed Police and Central Sports Officer, Punjab Police, Jalandhar Cantt.
for further necessary action as would appear from the letter Annexure P-1.
One Shri Jaipal Singh, Inspector conducted the trial of the petitioner and found him fit for recruitment on the basis of his boxing background.
Thereafter the petitioner was enroled as constable.
The petitioner made representations for his enrollment as Assistant Sub Inspector.
He filed CWP No. 8674 of 1996 for directing the respondents to appoint him as Assistant Sub Inspector.
By an order dated 11.6.1996 this court disposed of CWP No. 8674 of 1996 with a direction to the respondents to consider the representations of the petitioner and decide the same within three months by the passing a speaking order.
In compliance of the direction given by the High Court, the Inspector General of Police, Punjab Armed Police issued the impugned order and rejected the claim of the petitioner on the ground that he did not make any outstanding achievement in sports at State/National/International level after joining the service.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the provisions contained in the Punjab Recruitment of Sportsmen Rules, 1988 and argued that in view of the statutory provisions incorporated in these rules, a vested right has accrued to the petitioner to be appointed as Assistant Sub Inspector because he fulfils the conditions of eligibility laid down in the rules for recruitment as Assistant Sub Inspector.
Learned counsel argued that the gazette notification dated 1221988 in which the rules have been published should be construed as an advertisement inviting the eligible persons to apply for recruitment as Assistant Sub Inspector and even though no formal advertisement may have been issued by the respondents, the petitioner's claim ought to have been accepted for appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
Learned counsel further argued that the Additional Director General of Police has committed a patent illegality in rejecting the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector even though he, i.e. the petitioner, fulfils the conditions of eligibility specified in rule 2(d) of the Rules of 1988.
4.
The Rules of 1988 have been framed by the President of India in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution for regulating the recruitment of sports persons to the State Civil Services and the posts connected with the affairs of the State of Punjab.
These rules are applicable to all the services and the posts connected with the affairs of the State of Punjab except the Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, the Punjab Public Service Commission and the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
Rule 2 of these rules defines various terms and expressions used in others parts of the rules.
Rule 3 provides for reservation of 3% vacancies for sports persons, which are required to be filled in by direct recruitment in all the State Civil Services and the posts connected with the affairs of the Punjab State.
Proviso of Rule 3(1) restricts the total number of reserved vacancies to 50% of the posts to be filled in a particular year.
Rule 3(2) empowers the appointing authority to make recruitment against the reserved vacancies which may remain unfilled due to non-availablility of eligible sports persons.
However, under proviso to Rule 3(2), the principle of `carry forward' has been made applicable to the vacancies reserved for sports persons.
Rule 4 of the Rules lays down that no person shall be eligible for recruitment to a reserved vacancy unless he possesses minimum educational qualifications and experience prescribed by the Government for direct recruitment in the relevant service rules.
Rule 5(1) lays down that in matters not specifically provided in the Rules, a person appointed against a reserved vacancy shall be governed by the relevant service rules.
Rule 5(2) makes other service rules subservient to the provisions of the Rules of 1988.
Thus, it is clear that the Rules of 1988 contain various provisions for reservation of vacancies in favour of sportsmen from the quota of direct recruitment.
However, these Rules do not contain any provision relating to the procedure which is to be followed for making appointment against the reserved vacancies.
Therefore, in terms of Rule 5(1) relevant service rules shall apply in so far as the procedure for recruitment against the reserved vacancies of sports persons is concerned.
For recruitment to various posts of the subordinate cadres in the Police Department, provisions contained in Chapter XIII of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 are applicable.
These rules were framed prior to the commencement of the Constitution of India.
Rule 13 provides for consideration of all eligible persons for recruitment on the posts of Constables, Head Constables, Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspectors of Police.
In CWP No. 13942 of 1995 Balbir Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(2) SCT 800 (P&H) decided on 1621996, this Court has held that for making recruitment to the post of Constables under the Rules of 1934, publications of the posts, so as to enable all eligible persons to apply for recruitment is sine qua non.
Moreover, after the commencement of the Constitution, the Rules of 1934 will have to be read in such a manner that they are consistent with the provisions of the Constitution.
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution contain equality clauses.
Article 14 is genus while Article 16 is a species.
Article 16(1) declares that there shall be equality of opportunity to all citizens in the matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
This necessarily means that while making appointment to any office under the State the competent authority is obliged to adopt a procedure which enables all eligible persons to compete for selection and appointment.
While dealing with the issue relating to the appointment on compassionate ground in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : JT 1994(3) SC 525, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under :-  ``............. As a rule, the appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
Neither the Governments nor the public authorities are at liberty to follow any other procedure or to relax the qualifications laid down by the rules for the post.''
In Ashok Kumar and others v. Chairman, Banking Services Recruitment Board and others, 1996(1) SCT 660 (SC) : JT 1995(8) SC 276, their Lordships negatived the claim of the appellants for appointment against the posts which had become available after the Banking Recruitment Board had finalised the selection against the advertised posts.
Their Lordships observed :-  ``Article 14 read with Article 16(1) of the Constitution enshrine fundamental right to every citizen to claim consideration for appointment to a post under the State.
Therefore, vacant posts arising or expected should be notified inviting applications from all eligible candidates to be considered for their selection in accordance with their merit.''
In Union of India and others v. N Hargopal, JT 1987(2) SC 82, their Lordship of the Supreme Court held that the restriction imposed on the public authorities to make recruitment from amongst the employees sponsored by the Employment Exchange was reasonable.
However, in the Excise Superintendent v. KV Vishweswra Rao and others, JT 1996(9) SC 638, their Lordships have held that in addition to the requirement of sending requisition to the Employment Exchange, the competent authority should call for the names by publication in the newspaper having wide circulation and also display the same on the office notice board or announcement on radio, television, and employment news bulletins and the cases of eligible candidates should be considered.
5.
It will also be useful to make reference to an often quoted judgment of the Supreme court in the State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) : JT 1992(5) SC 179.
While dealing with the question of regularisation of services of daily wagers, ad hoc and work charged employees, the Supreme Court laid down certain principles regarding recruitment to public services.
Of these, principles Nos. 1, 2 and 3 are relevant in the context of the present case and, therefore, the same are reproduced below :-  ``..................
The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may some times call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation, effort should always to be replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete along with others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the regularly selected candidate.
The appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee.
Secondly, an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange, some appropriate method consistent with the requirements of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words, there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response should be considered fairly.''
It must, therefore, be treated as a well established principle of law that the recruitment to public services and public posts cannot be made except after giving opportunity of consideration to all eligible persons.
This principle applies with equal force while making recruitment against the reserved vacancies.
This means that the appointing authority is under an obligation to intimate the reserved vacancies to the employment exchange and also to advertise the same so as to enable all eligible persons to apply for recruitment against such vacancies.
6.
In the present case, the post of Assistant Sub Inspector reserved for sports persons was neither notified to the employment exchange nor any advertisement was issued by the appointing authority.
Even while appointing the petitioner as Constable this procedure was not followed.
We, therefore, do not find any justification to accept the prayer of the petitioner that direction should be given to the respondents to appoint him as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
The issue of such direction in favour of the petitioner would amount to directing the respondents to act in violation of the constitutional provisions embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and there is no warrant for exercise of writ jurisdiction for issue of such a direction.
7.
It is necessary to emphasise that if at all the respondents wanted to make appointment on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector reserved for sports persons then they were required to send an intimation to the employment exchange and advertise the post of Assistant Sub Inspector reserved for sports persons as to enable all those who belonged to the category of sports persons and who fulfilled other conditions of eligibility to apply for competition for the purpose of recruitment against such post.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is held to be without merit and the same is dismissed.
A copy of this order be made available to the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab by the Bench Reader after due attestation under his signatures so that he may forward the same to the Chief Secretary and the Home Secretary, Punjab in order to enable these authorities to issue appropriate instructions to the departmental authorities not to make appointment against general and reserved vacancies without sending requisition to the employment exchange and without advertising the posts.