RL Anand, J - Whether the Labour Court has the power to review its award once given, like Section 47 of the CPC is the principal question involved in the present Civil Writ Petition, which is to be answered and the writ petition has been filed by the Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited, Chandigarh, (hereinafter called `the Markfed') under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of an appropriate writ for quashing the impugned award (Annexure P-7).
2.
The facts leading to the present writ can be described in the following manner:-  Respondent No. 2 Santokh Singh was appointed as Field Sub Inspector on 25.8.1973 on purely temporary basis of 89 days only vide order Annexure P.1, and after the expiry of 89 days he was reappointed after a gap of a few days for another period of 89 days and such appointments continued upto 26101975.
Thereafter respondent No. 2 was offered on regular basis a temporary post of field sub Inspector in the pay scale of Rs. 140-300 plus usual allowances at Markfed rates on the terms and conditions contained in the appointed letter dated 9121975 (Annexure P-2).
Respondent No. 2 was to remain on the probation for a period of one year from the date of joining, i.e. 10121975.
He was assigned by duty of supervising harvesting operations in the fields and to collect the harvesting charges commonly known as custom charges from the farmers and deposit the same with the District Office.
After the conclusion of the harvesting operations when the accounts were prepared certain defalcations were detected and it was found that respondent No. 2 had failed to deposit some of the amount collected by him from the farmers and had misappropriated the same for his own use.
The amount so misappropriated was Rs. 2175/-.
Since respondent No. 2 was still on probation, it was not thought necessary to hold a detailed enquiry regarding the misconduct of respondent No. 2.
His services were terminated in terms of the appointment letter vide Annexure P-3.
3.
Respondent No. 2 challenged the order of termination by raising an industrial dispute.
He served a demand notice dated 5.8.1977 and the Punjab Government vide notification dated 8.11.1978 referred the industrial dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act'), as amended upto date, by making a reference whether termination of services of Shri Santokh Singh (respondent No. 2) was justified or not.
On receipt of this reference, the Labour Court issued the notices and vide award dated 2521987 it found that respondent No. 2 did not render full accounts of the amounts recovered by the him from the farmers and embezzled a sum of Rs. 2175/-.
Resultantly, the Labour Court held the termination order of respondent No. 2 to be valid, justified and in terms of his letter of appointment and finally the reference was answered against respondent No. 2.
The operative part of the award can be described as follows:-  ``It may also be pointed out that material on record shows that Shri Santokh Singh workman did not render the full accounts of the amounts recovered by him from farmers.
He did not attend to the work sincerely.
As amount of Rs. 2,175/- was found recoverable from him and on 18th December, 1975, Santokh Singh in his letter Ex. WW 1/2 admitted that he had with him a balance of Rs. 20450 and he had desired that this amount he deducted from his pay for the month of October, 1975, meaning thereby, that the workman had misappropriated the amount and endorsement on letter of termination of his service made to Chief Accounts Officer is in the terms that the amounts payable to the workman were to be withheld and adjusted against the amount to be recovered from him.
This all shows that the work and conduct of the workman was not at all satisfactory.
He was guilty of withholding the Government funds which was a serious lapse and in view of the fact that the workman had admitted that he was having the balance of Rs. 20450 with him, recovered by him as Harvesting Custom Charges, there is no manner of doubt left that the workman was guilty of misconduct of a serious nature.
His termination of services, was thus justified and also in terms of the letter of appointment.
The reference is answered accordingly.''
4.
The award of the Labour Court was published in the Government Gazette dated 22nd May, 1987.
After the passing of the award on 2521987, respondent No. 2 filed a review petition on 2341987 (Annexure P5).
On this application the Labour Court issued notice to the Markfed-petitioner, which filed reply Annexure P-6 and the Labour Court passed the impugned award (P-7) holding that the review application filed by respondent No. 2 was maintainable and by virtue of the fresh award dated 6101987 it held that termination of the services of the workman was illegal and void.
In this manner directions were given to the petitioner to reinstate respondent No. 2 with full back-wages.
5.
In the present writ petition challenge has been given to the jurisdiction of respondent No. 1 Labour Court and to the award by the which the earlier award was reviewed on the grounds that there is no provision under the Act authorising the Labour Court to review its earlier award, which was given on merits and after hearing both the parties.
A judicial or quasi judicial authority, according to the petitioner, has no inherent power to review because once the award is delivered, the Labour Court becomes functus officio and it is left with no power, whatsoever, to recall its award and review the matter.
Earlier the Labour Court held that services of respondent No. 2 had been terminated on account of gross misconduct and it was also found that his termination was in terms of the appointment letter.
This award was published on 22.5.1987 and it became final and binding.
The Labour Court acted without jurisdiction in setting aside the said award when there was no error in it.
Such a termination could be termed as retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
The Labour Court grossly erred in law in holding that termination of respondent No. 2 was in violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
6.
With the above averments, the petitioner has prayed for the quashment of the impugned award (Annexure P-7).
7.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It was contended by respondent No. 2 Shri Santokh Singh, who tried to justify the award (Annexure P-7) mainly on the ground that the Labour Court had the jurisdiction to review its earlier award and to review its order, as it committed a patent illegality in passing the award and that it did not become functus officio because the application for review was moved by respondent No. 2 before the expiry of 30 years from the date of the passing of the award.
8.
I have heard Shri PK Mutneja, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, and Shri Dinesh Kumar, Advocate, on behalf of respondent No. 2, and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
9.
Before I advert to the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, it may be necessary for me to incorporate the reasons given by the Labour Court vide award dated 6101987 (Annexure P-7) as to why it thought proper to review its earlier award dated 2521987 (Annexure P-4).
These are as follows:-  ``Because this court lost sight of an important piece of evidence in the shape of appointment letter dated 25th August, 1973 which letter was very important and which letter clearly established that the workman had completed more than 240 days of service and, therefore, his services could not be terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and, therefore, the termination of the services of the workman was null and void.
The award dated 25th February, 1987 passed by this Court was thus clearly passed by mistake of this court, resulting in injustice to the workman and, therefore, the same has to be recalled and cancelled.
The fact that the workman was in the service of the respondent before 10th December, 1975, could not be denied and stands proved by the statement of witness examined by the management.
In A.I.R. 1978 Allahabad page 270 it was observed by the Hon'ble High Court Allahabad that:- ``Where an important piece of evidence showing the existence of the right of passage over the suit land was missed to be considered review was maintainable.
The judgment initially made held was rightly reversed.''
Missing of an important piece of evidence was considered as an error apparent on the face of record.
In this case also, this Tribunal missed really very important piece of evidence which was original letter of appointment of the workman dated 25th August, 1973.
This piece of evidence, somehow, escaped attention of this Tribunal in the award which was initially made.
This piece of evidence was an important one and was bound to have bearing on merits of the case.
As has been discussed above, it was thus clearly an error apparent on record which justifies a review.
3.
As regards maintainability of this review petition, some doubts were expressed.
The original award was made on 25th February 1987.
It was published in the Punjab Government Gazette on 22nd May, 1987.
This review petition was filed on 23rd April, 1987 which means it was filed much earlier before the award had become final and thus the review petition was within time.
This application is permissible because there is no error apparent on the face of record as pointed out above.
This error brought to the notice of this Court through this petition is of such a magnitude that it goes deep to the root of the case and the judgment and the existence of the right of the workman in the matter under adjudication.
4.
Under the Industrial Disputes Act, review petition is admissible in view of the previsions of section 11(a) and sub-section 3(d).
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India was pleased to hold in 1981 Lab.
IC page 155 that in case where there was an error apparent on the face of record, review on merits was permissible.
On the basis of observations made in 1979(2) LLJ page 65, it is to be observed that since Labour Court has trappings of a Civil Court, they enjoy the power to review even if on application is made to it.
It was also observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in 1981 LIC page 155 that section 11 sub-section 3(d) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, read with Rule 24 clearly established the review power of the Labour Court and to admit the application on the analogy of Civil Courts.
There is thus left on manner of doubt about the maintainability of this petition and powers of this court to review its award.
5.
As observed above, thus court has now discovered that a very important piece of evidence, which was of bearings on the merits of the case, escaped the attention of this court which was an error apparent on record.
The error has to be corrected and the award of this Court dated 25th February, 1987 has to be set aside, as a consequence of the discovery and correction of error in the award.
This tribunal must now face the consequence of discovery and correction of an error in the award.
Their is no other way to make amends considering that the matters on which this tribunal has gone wrong, were fundamental to the decision of the case.
Now that the facts of the case have been understood aright, this tribunal has to give effect to the correction.
The award dated 25th February, 1987 must be set aside and is hereby set aside.
I cannot think of any other way to make amends considering that the matter on which I had gone wrong, were fundamental to the decision of the case.
Now when I have understood them aright, I have to give effect to them.
This means that award dated 25th February, 1987 is set aside and in pursuance of the same, the award of today is made and it is awarded that the termination of the services of the workman was illegal and void.
The reference is found valid.
The issues framed in reference, are found in favour of the workman.
It is hereby directed that the workman be reinstated with full back wages after this award becomes enforceable.
The reference stands answered accordingly.''
10.
Learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 Shri Dinesh Kumar, Advocate, took a preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition and submitted that the present writ petition has been filed by a person not duly authorised to file it.
Mr. Dinesh Kumar submitted that the Law Officer of the Markfed was not duly authorised to file the present writ petition and moreover there is no resolution passed by the Markfed deciding to file the present writ petition giving challenge to the award (P7).
In support of his contention Shri Dinesh Kumar, Advocate, has relied upon the decision given in CR No. 2159 of 1990 Markfed through its Law Officer v. Harjit Singh and another, and submitted that in the similar circumstances this Court had already taken the view vide order dated 10121990 that any action taken by the Law Officer on behalf of the Markfed is not competent and in these circumstances the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
Importing his argument, Shri Dinesh Kumar submitted that as per Bye-Law No. 27 the Managing Director of the Markfed had the power to sue and be sued in the name and on behalf of the Markfed when authorised to do so by the Executive Committee.
Even though the Managing Director has authorised the Law Officer to sign and verify the pleadings on behalf of the Markfed, yet there is no decision by the Markfed in favour of the Managing Director by which it wsa decided to file the present writ petition in the High Court.
11.
On the contrary, learned counsel Shri PK Mutneja submitted that the citation relied upon by the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 in support of his preliminary argument has no relevancy.
Firstly, this order dated 10121990 was taken to the Hon'ble Supreme Court which passed the order dated 2541991 holding that the Labour Court before which the proceeding is pending is the appropriate court to decide this matter and the point of jurisdiction shall not be open to challenge.
He also submitted that there is a specific decision of the Board of Directors dated 4.10.1982 vide which a power had already been given to be Managing Director/Additional Managing Director to sue and to be sued on behalf of the Markfed without getting any approval of the Executive Committee in that regard and further Board of Directors had authorised the Law Officer to sign the power of attorney, petition and written statement on behalf of the Markfed.
Mr. Mutneja submitted that this power had been delegated by the Board in view of Bye-law No. 23 of the Markfed and this aspect, in fact, could not be brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Judge while deciding the civil revision.
12.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the considered opinion that the preliminary objection raised by Shri Dinesh Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent, is without any force and the case law referred to above and relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 and the other case law which has also been pressed into service by Shri Dinesh Kumar is not applicable to the facts in hand.
Bye-law No. 27 of the Markfed defines the powers and duties of the Managing Director.
According to this bye-law the Managing Director of the Markfed shall have the following powers and duties:-  ``(viii) To sue and be sued in the name and on behalf of the Federation when authorised to so by the Executive Committee.''
A reading of the above would show that if the Managing Director at this own level wants to take a decision as to whether the Markfed should file a case in a Court of law or not, such a decision can only be taken when authorised by the Executive Committee.
However, in the present case the Board of Directors had delegated one of its powers to the Managing Director/Additional Managing Director to take a decision whether to file a particular writ petition or not.
Bye-Law No. 23 deals with the powers and duties of the Board of Directors and it lays down that the powers and duties of the Board of Directors shall be:-  ``(b) to appoint the Executive Committee and Administrative Committee; (c) to delegate any of its powers and duties to the Executive Committee, Administrative Committee and local Committees or the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman, the Managing Director, Additional Managing Directors and other officers or any members of the Board of Directors consistent with the provisions of these bye-laws.''
13.
If the proceedings of the Board of Directors held on 4.10.1982, regarding which my attention has been invited during the course of arguments, are read in extenso, it would clearly emerge out that the Board of Directors in the said meeting were of the view that the Managing Director/Additional Managing Director had the power to sue and to be sued on behalf of the Markfed and to sign the power of attorneys and written statements etc.
The Board of Directors felt the difficulty on account of the multifarious duties and in view of the practical difficulties being faced by the Board, it was decided by the Board to issue directions to the various officers who were authorised to exercise the powers independently and one of the powers given to the Managing Director under Bye-law No. 23 was to sue and to be sued on behalf of the Markfed.
This power was also given to the Managing Director.
Further it was resolved that the Law Officer/Managing Director/Additional Managing Director and others officers were authorised to sign the power of attorney, petitions and written statements etc.
Thus the reading of Bye-law No. 23 read with the decision of the Board of Directors dated 4.10.1982 leaves no manner of doubt that the Managing Director/Additional Managing Director could take an independent decision with regard to the filing of a writ petition apart from the powers which might be to given to them under Bye-law No. 27 by the Executive Committee.
In the present case it was shown to me during the course of arguments by the learned counsel Shri PK Mutneja that the Additional Managing Director took a decision to file the present writ petition.
The Law Officer was authorised to file the present writ petition on behalf of the Markfed and in these circumstances it has to be held that the present writ petition is legally maintainable and it has been filed by a person duly authorised in that regard.
The preliminary objection raised by the learned counsel for the respondent is hereby repelled, being without substance.
14.
Proceeding with the merits of the case, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the learned Labour Court committed a patent illegality in passing the award (Annexure P-7).
It had no jurisdiction to review the earlier award (Annexure P-4) which had become final and this illegality committed by the Labour Court is to be remedied by issuing appropriate directions in the nature of quashment of Annexure P-7.
15.
On the contrary, the learned counsel Shri Dinesh Kumar, Advocate, appearing for the respondent No. 2, has relied upon an authority of the Supreme Court reported as Grindlays Bank Ltd v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal and others, 1980 (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 420, submitted that the Labour Court had ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary to discharge its functions and to review the award once it is satisfied that the aggrieved party was not given proper justice irrespective of the fact that there are no express powers of review in the Industrial Disputes Act.
Learned counsel for the respondent relied upon the following observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court:-  ``A Tribunal or body should be considered to be endowed with such ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary to discharge its functions effectively for the purpose of doing justice between the parties.
Although there is no express provision in the Act or the rules framed thereunder giving the Tribunal jurisdiction to set aside its ex parte award, the Tribunal should be considered as invested with such incidental or ancillary powers unless there is any indication in the statute to the contrary.''
The citation which has been relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent to my mind is not applicable to the facts in hand because a reading of the Industrial Disputes Act would show that no power of review unlike the power under Order 47 of the CPC has been given in that Act.
This authority lays down the law that so far as procedural difficulties are concerned, those can be remedied by the Labour Court while invoking the provisions of review but a review on merits is separate and distinct from the procedural reviews and such difficulties cannot be remedied by the Labour Court under the garb of review powers.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in Grindlays Bank Ltd (Supra) as under:-  ``The expression `review' is used in the two distinct senses, namely, (1) a procedural review which is either inherent or implied in a Court or Tribunal to set aside a palpably erroneous order passed order a misapprehension by it, and (2) a review on merits when the error sought to be corrected is one of law and is apparent on the face of the record.
When a review is sought due to a procedural defect, the inadvertent error committed by the Tribunal must be corrected by ex debit justitiae to prevent the abuse of its process, and such power inheres in every court or Tribunal.
The Tribunal's order setting aside its ex parte award amounts to a procedural review.''
The Hon'ble Supreme Court was dealing with a case when ex parte award was passed and it was sought to be set aside.
It was held in these circumstances that the Tribunal was competent to set aside its ex parte award if it is satisfied that the aggrieved party was prevented from appearing by sufficient cause.
This was held to be a procedural review and not a review on merits.
Under Rules 22 and 24 of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Labour Court has the power to proceed ex parte when the opposite party fails to appear in spite of notice.
Though there are no specific powers like the powers under Order 9 Rule 13, CPC, for setting aside the award, yet such powers are held to be inherent in the Labour Court and a party which earlier did not appear before the Labour Court can satisfy it that it was prevented from appearing on account of some sufficient cause and the Labour Court has the power to set aside the ex parte award provided that application was moved within 30 days from the date of the publication of the award.
Present is a case where the Labour Court vide Annexure P-7 proceeded to set aside its earlier award duly given on contest in favour of the Management and it was held at one point of time that the order of discharge of the workman did not amount to a retrenchment and was in terms of the appointment letter.
This award could not be reviewed by the Labour Court by passing the award Annexure P-7.
The remedy which was available to the workman was to give challenge to the award (Annexure p-4) but there was no remedy in his favour to apply for review nor the Labour Court had the jurisdiction once it became functus officio to review its earlier award by giving a fresh award (Annexure P-7).
16.
Mr. Dinesh Kumar, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2, also placed reliance on The Warring Co-operative Agriculture Services Society Ltd v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(3) SLR 586.
The case relied upon by the learned counsel is not applicable to the facts in hand because it was an ex parte award, which was sought to be set aside.
It was held by the Division Bench of this Court that proceedings in a reference under section 10 of the Act are not deemed to be conclud until the expiry of 30 days after the publication of the award.
Till then the Tribunal retains jurisdiction over the dispute referred to it for adjudication and upto that date it has the power to entertain an application in connection with such dispute.
Impliedly thereafter it becomes functus officio and cannot entertain an application for setting aside an ex parte award.
I have already held above that the application for setting aside of an award is to be treated differently and independently from the one by which any party to the reference wants to review the case on merits.
Once the award has been given by the Labour Court on merits, it can only be challenged and remedied in the writ jurisdiction by the High Court and this remedy was not adopted by the workman.
It has been categorically held in Patel Narshi Thakershi and others v. Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji, AIR 1970 SC 1273, that the power to review is not an inherent power, and it must be conferred by law either specifically or by necessary implication.
As we are dealing with a special legislation like the Industrial Disputes Act in which there is no specific power of review, the Labour Court was not justified in clothing itself with such powers which were never granted by the legislation.
17.
Faced with the above difficultly, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 invited my attention to the case law referred to as M Venugopal v. The Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Machilipatnam, Andhra Pradesh and another, 1994(1) SCT 858(SC) : JT 1994(1) SC 281; Syed Azam Hussaini v. The Andhra Bank Ltd, 1995(2) SCT 347(SC) : 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments 888; S Nagaraj and others v. State of Karnataka and another, 1994(1) SCT 99(SC) : 1993(4) Recent Services Judgments 655; Satnam Verma v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 294; M/s Miri Mal Jain Metal Co v. The Presiding Officer Labour Court, Patiala and another, 1992(1) Recent Services Judgments, 523; Management of Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, Bangalore v. M Boraiah and another, AIR 1983 SC 1320; and submitted that even the order of discharge passed by the management in terms of the letter of appointment amounts to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of of the Industrial Disputes Act, and that the mandatory provisions of section 25-F of the Act were not complied with and for that reason and in order to impart justice to the parties, the Labour Court thought it proper to review its earlier award.
The argument of Mr. Dinesh Kumar is fallacious.
The fallacy lies apparent in the argument as this Court in the present writ petition is to answer a limited legal point as to whether the Labour Court had the jurisdiction to review its earlier award given on merits, which is different from the procedural review and once the answer has been given in the above lines in the negative, the subsequent award (P-7) was nothing else but an act of illegality, which has to be struck down in the present writ petition.
The case law which has been relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents beyond the controversy involved in the present writ petition.
I have already made, distinction above the Labour Court has the power to set aside the award which is ex parte and it does not become functus officio with the passing of the award but specific power of review other than the procedural review has not been given in the Industrial Disputes Act.
The citation S Nagaraj and others v. State of Karnataka and another (supra) is not applicable as it was a case not under the Industrial Disputes Act.
18.
In the light of may above discussion, this writ petition is hereby allowed.
The impugned award (Annexure P-7) is hereby quashed it is declared that the management will not be implement it.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.