SS Nijjar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the proposed departmental proceedings to be conducted against him on the basis of letter No. MCO- 2335/CR No. 101/UD-14 dated 19.9.1977.
He has also challenged the action of the Respondents denying the benefit of temporary increase in pension as laid down in Government Circular dated 1101981.
He, therefore, prays for quashing of the order No. 2986/CR-6/81/6 dated 1981987.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are as under:  The Petitioner was appointed as an Internal Auditor on 1st July, 1958 in Kalyan Municipal Council and was promoted as Chief Officer in the time scale of pay of Rs. 250-500.
This was revised from time to time.
The petitioner during his career worked on various posts.
He retired on superannuation on 30th November, 1986 whilst he was holding the post of Chief Officer Class-I, Grade-II.
the pay scale of the petitioner was fixed on 29th November, 1983 as follows:-  181980 : Rs. 1300/- 1.8.1981 : Rs. 1350/- 181982 : Rs. 1400/- 181983 : Rs. 1450/- 3.
At the time of retirement the petitioner was drawing his pay in the scale of Rs. 1450/-.
On 30th December, 1987, the Respondent No. 2 addressed a letter to the Accounts Officer on the subject of extension of provisional pension in respect of the petitioner.
In this letter it was mentioned that the provisional pension sanctioned by letter dated 7th December, 1987 by the Accounts Officer at the rate of Rs. 1210/- per month to the petitioner with effect from 161987 to 31121987 has been paid to the petitioner upto 30th November, 1987.
The letter further mentions that there is a departmental enquiry pending against the petitioner in the office of Respondent No. 2.
It is stated that the departmental enquiry would take at least six months to finalise.
Therefore, it was requested to extend the time limit with effect from 111988 to 30.6.1988.
In the meantime vide Government Resolution No. Maharashtra/1187/227/Seva-10 dated 22nd May, 1987 the Respondent No. 1 was pleased to sanction an ad-hoc increase w.e.f.
1.10.1987 to the Officers in Grade-I at the rate of 20 per cent pay as on 1st January, 1986.
This decision was taken as per the Government Resolution of the Finance Department Number being Veput-1287/198/Seva-10 dated 16th April, 1987.
On the basis of the ad hoc increase the total emoluments of the petitioner would come to Rs. 2602/-.
He, therefore, claims pension at the rate of Rs. 1500/- or thereabout.
Rather than being granted the benefit of the ad-hoc increase, the petitioner was not even paid the provisional pension at the rate of Rs. 1210/-.
A perusal of the letter dated 19th August, 1987 (Annexure-VII to the petion) would show that the pension at the rate of Rs. 1210/- had been paid to the petitioner for the period from 1121986 to 3151987.
The letter further shows that the departmental enquiry which was said to be pending against the petitioner had not been concluded.
Therefore, it was stated that unless and until the departmental enquiry is concluded pension papers of the petitioner cannot be submitted for further action.
It was, therefore, requested that an authorisation letter may be issued to Respondent No. 2 authorising him to pay provisional pension at the rate of Rs. 1210/- per month to the petitioner for the period 161987 to 31121987.
The provisional pension has been granted to the petitioner only on account of a Resolution passed by Respondent No. 1 on 19th September, 1977 (as per Annexure-VIII to the petion).
This Resolution states that under an earlier Resolution dated 5th March, 1975 the departmental enquiry had been ordered against the petitioner, then Chief Officer, Kalyan Municipal Council on the charge of granting illegal building permission and thereby violating the Development Control Rules.
The Resolution further states that in addition other cases of grant of illegal building permissions have come to the notice of the Government.
The Government directed that the Special Officer for Departmental Inquires, Bombay and Poona Divisions should take into account the cases mentioned therein of illegal building permissions in conducting the departmental enquiry against the petitioner, if necessary, by serving another charge-sheet.
No action whatsoever has been taken after passing the said Resolution.
4.
The petitioner challenges the action of the Respondents in not granting the full retirement benefits to the petitioner and the holding of the departmental enquiry, on various grounds.
He contends that he is entitled to the retirement benefits under Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1982.
Rule 27(2) (b) of these Rules provides that no enquiry can be conducted after retirement of the petitioner without the sanction of the Government.
Further more, in any event departmental enquiry cannot be conducted after four years of the alleged misconduct.
If the departmental proceedings sought to be conducted against the petitioner are held to be illegal then he is entitled to full retirement benefits.
In any event the respondents are not justified in not granting to him the benefit of the ad hoc increase in pension on the basis of the ad hoc increase in pay of Class-I Officers.
Rule 27(2)(b) reads as under:  "27(2)(b): The departmental proceedings, if no instituted while the Government servants was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment:- (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government, (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution, and  (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and at such place as the Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to the departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the Government servant during his service."
The only charge against the petitioner is mentioned in letter/Resolution No. MCO-1775/2335/CR No. 101/UD-14 dated 19th September, 1977.
No chargesheet had been served on the petitioner for a long period of 11 years.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition, and on 11th April, 1989 this Court issued Rule and granted ad-interim order not to proceed with any departmental enquiry on the basis of charge contained in the letter dated 19th September, 1977.
Till 11th April, 1989 no charge had been served on the petitioner either on the basis of the Resolution dated 5th March, 1975 or on the basis of Resolution dated 19th September 1977.
A bare perusal of Rule 27(2)(b) would show that the departmental proceedings against a retired Government servant shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government.
No such sanction of the Government is forthcoming in this case.
Thus the submission of the petitioner has merit and the action of the respondents in granting only provisional pension deserves to be quashed.
Rule 27(2)(b)(ii) further provides that the departmental proceedings against a retired employee shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution.
As noticed above, the petitioner is alleged to have committed certain misconducts in the year 1975 and in the year 1977.
No charge-sheet has been issued to the Petitioner on the basis of the alleged miscconduct.
Yet he has only been granted provisional pension.
Sub-Rule 4 of these Rules provides that in the case of a Government servant who has retired on the age of superannuation and against whom any departmental or judicial proceedings are instituted or where departmental proceedings are continued under sub-Rule (2), a provisional pension as provided in Rule 130 shall be sanctioned.
Sub- Rule 6 provices that departmental proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on which the statement of charges is issued to the Government servant or to the pensioner.
Although no charge sheet has been served on the petitioner and, therefore, it cannot be said that departmental proceedings had been instituted against the petitioner, yet he has been granted only provisional pension.
The departmental proceedings can only be said to be initiated on the service of the charge-sheet on the public servant.
Thus it appears that the action of the respondents in withholding the retirement benefit of the petitioner granting only provisional pension, and continuing with the departmental proceedings are contrary to the provisions of Rule 27 as enumerated above.
5.
Rule 27 of the said Rules has been so interpreted by a Division Bench of this High Court in the case of Meshav Bhikaji Maharao v. The State of Maharatshtra, (1987 Mh.
LJ 762).
In para 2 of the said judgment it is held as follows:  "2.
The only question which falls for our consideration in the present case is whether the petitioner's case would be governed by the Pension Rules or by the Civil Services Rules.
If it is the latter, the proceedings are valid since there is no time limit prescribed for holding the disciplinary proceedings under Rule 189 of the said Rules.
If it is the former, the time limit for instituting the disciplinary proceedings being four years from the date of retirement, the proceedings will undoubtedly be invalid since they have been instituted on March 16, 1985."
It has clearly been held that if the case of the petitioner in that case was governed by the Pension Rules then the time limit for instituting the disciplinary proceedings being four years from the date of retirement, the proceedings will undoubtedly be invalid.
The Supreme court in the case of State of UP and another v. Shri Krishna Pandey, 1996(3) SCT 418(SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1656 has also considered the para materia provisions contained in Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972.
Rule 351-A of those Rules also provides that departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was on duty either before retirement or during re-employment-(sic) shall be in respect of an event which took place not more than four years before the institution of such proceedings.
Interpreting the said Rules, the Supreme Court observed in para 6 of the said judgment as under:-  "6.
It would be thus seen that proceedings are required to be instituted against a delinquent officer before retirement.
There is no specific provision allowing the officer to continue in service nor any order passed to allow him to continue on re-employment till the enquiry is completed, without allowing him to retire from service.
Equally, there is no provision that the proceedings be initiated as disciplinary measure and the action initiated earlier would remain unabated after retirement.
If Rule 351-A is to be operative in respect of pending proceedings, by necessary implication, prior sanction of the Governor to continue the proceedings against him is required.
On the other hand, the rule also would indicate that if the officer caused pecuniary loss or committed embezzlement etc., due to misconduct or negligence or dereliction of duty, then proceedings should also be instituted after retirement against the officer as expeditiously as possible.
But the events of misconduct etc. which may have resulted in the loss to the Government or embezzlement i.e. the cause for the institution of proceedings, should not have taken place more than four years before the date of institution of proceedings.
In other words, the departmental proceedings must be instituted before lapse of four years from the date on which the event of misconduct etc. had taken place.
Admittedly, in this case the officer had retired on March 31, 1987 and the proceedings were initiated on April 21, 1991.
Obviously, the event of embezzlement which caused pecuniary loss to the State took place prior to four years from the date of his retirement.
Under these circumstances, the State had disabled itself by their deliberate omissions to take appropriate action against the respondent and allowed the officer to escape from the provisions of Rule 351-A of the Rules.
This order does not preclude proceedings with the investigation into the offence and taking action thereon."
The ratio of the two judgments mentioned supra squarely covers the case of the petitioner and, therefore, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
6.
In addition to above, the petition also deserves to be allowed on the ground that there is total violation of rules of natural justice and that the respondents have acted arbitrarily and thus their actions violate Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The misconduct, if any, of the petitioner came to the Knowledge of the respondents way back in the year 1975 and then again in the year 1977.
No charge-sheet had been issued to the petitioner till the writ petition was filed.
This Court granted an interim order of injunction against holding of any departmental enquiry.
No affidavit in reply to the petition had been filed by the respondents.
No explanation, much less a plausible explanation, have been offered by the respondents for the non-issuance of the charge-sheet or delay in conclusion of the departmental proceedings.
Even at this stage the State has gone unrepresented.
None has appeared for the State.
The petitioner retired almost a decade ago.
He survives still on the provisional pension without the benefit of any revision in pension on the basis of various revisions of the pay scale.
This callous attitude of the respondents would invite adverse comments from this Court.
7.
The Supreme Court and the High Courts have repeatedly held that departmental proceedings must be conducted soon after the irregularities are committed or soon after discovering the irregularities.
They cannot be initiated after lapse of considerable time.
It is unfair both to the delinquent officer as also to the State.
Such delay makes the task of proving the charges very difficult.
This in turn enables a number of guilty Government servants to escape punishment after having caused pecuniary loss to the State.
On the other hand such delay is bound to prejudice the defence of the delinquent officer.
It is keeping the interest of natural justice in view that delayed departmental enquiry had been quashed by the Courts.
Similar situation had arisen in the State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and another, Reported as JT 1990(2) SC page 54.
In para 4 of the said judgment the Supreme Court has observed as under:  "4.
The irregularities which were the subject matter of the enquiry are said to have taken place between the years 1975-77.
It is not the case of the department that they were not aware of the said irregularities, if any, and came to know it only in 1987.
According to them even in April, 1977 there was doubt about the involvement of the officer in the said irregularities and the investigations were going on since then.
If that is so, it is unreasonable to think that they would have taken more than 12 years to initiate the disciplinary proceedings as stated by the Tribunal.
There is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in issuing the charge memo and we are also of the view that it will be unfair to permit the departmental enquiry to be proceeded with at this stage."
Thereafter the principles upon which delayed enquiry can said to be vitiated have been explained in detail in the case of the State of Punjab v. Chaman lal Goyal, 1995(2) SCT 343(SC) : (1995)2 SCC page 570.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under:  "9.
Now remains the question of delay.
There is undoubtedly a delay of five and a half years in serving the charges.
The question is whether the said delay warranted the quashing of charges in this case.
It is trite to say that such disciplinary proceeding must be conducted soon after the irregularities are committed or soon after discovering the irregularities.
They cannot be initiated after lapse of considerable time.
It would not be fair to the delinquent officer.
Such delay also makes the task of proving the charges difficult and is thus not also in the interest of administration.
Delayed initiation of proceedings is bound to give room for allegations of bias, mala fides and misuse of power.
If the delay is too long and is unexplained, the Court may well interfere and quash the charges.
But how long a delay is too long always depends upon the facts of the given case.
Moreover, if such a delay is likely to cause prejudice to the delinquent officer in defending himself the enquiry has to be interdicted.
Wherever such plea is raise, the court has to weigh the factors appearing for and against the said plea and take a decision on the totality of circumstances.
In other words, the Court has to indulge in a process of balancing.." The ratio of both these judgments has been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Shri Babu s/o Rambhau Tidke v. The Hon'ble the Chief Justice and other, Bombay (1996 1LJ 61).
The ratio of Punjab v. Chaman Lal (supra) has been analysed in para 9 of the judgment and the finding has been given in para 10.
Para 10 reads as under:-  "Undoubtedly it cannot be disputed that there has been considerable delay in initiating disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner.
However, as indicated by the aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court, mere delay cannot be conclusive but the Court in each case has to consider the balancing factors and also whether there is any explaination for the delay.
Affidavit on behalf of respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 5 to 9 has been filed by Shri Dabholkar, Additional Registrar of the High Court, Appellate Side, Bombay.
This affidavit was filed pursuant to our directions with a view that the Administration may put its case on the point of delay."
After considering the explaination offered by the Respondents, the Divisional Bench came to the conclusion that the explanation offered by the Administration for the delayed enquiry was reasonable.
Thus the Division Bench was not inclined to quash the enquiry on the ground of delay alone.
But in the present case weighing up all the factors which have been enumerated above and looking at totality of the circumstances we are of the view that it is unfair and unjust to permit the department to continue with the departmental proceedings on the basis of the charges contained in the letter dated 19th September, 1977.
It needs to be reiterated that no explanation whatsoever has been put forward.
No affidavit in reply has been filed by the Respondents.
No counsel has appeared to represent the case of the State.
In these circumstances we hold that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
8.
In the result the writ petition succeeds and the same is allowed.
Rule is made absolute in terms of prayer clauses (a)(a-i) and (b).
9.
In view of the unnecessary harassment caused to the petitioner due to the arbitrary action on the part of the respondents, the petitioner is held entitled to costs which are quantified at Rs. 5,000/-.
The respondents are directed to pay the said costs to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.