GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash the order dated 4111994 passed by the respondent-University cancelling the Entrance Test taken by the petitioner for admission to the medical courses and to direct the respondents to declare the petitioner's result and to admit the petitioner as per her performance at the Entrance Test.
2.
The petitioner passed Matriculation examination from the Central Board of School Education, New Delhi, with 84% marks.
She also passed 10+2 examination from the same Board securing 724% marks.
Thereafter, she applied for Entrance Test which was to be conducted by the respondent-University in July, 1994.
She appeared in the said examination with Roll No. 4561.
The examination held on 9.7.1994 consisted of two papers.
Examination of first paper (Physics and Chemistry) was held between 9.00 and 11.00 a.m. and the examination of second paper (Botany and Zoology) was held between 200 and 400 pm Each candidate was required to answer 75 questions in the each subject and as per the Prospectus, a total of the questions attempted had to be made after every 15 questions.
3.
After about two months of the examination, the petitioner received a show- cause notice dated 291994 alleging use of unfair means by her in the examination held on 9.7.1994.
Against this notice, she filed Civil Writ Petition No. 12324 of 1994 expressing apprehension that the Vice-Chancellor of the University was out to damage her career because of his personal prejudice and ill-will against her father, who happened to be the Deputy Registrar of the University and who was placed under suspension by the Vice- Chancellor vide order dated 1871994.
The writ petition was disposed of by the High Court on 9.11.1994 with an observation that the petitioner may file writ petition after final order was passed.
4.
From the record of the case, it is borne out that on 9.7.1994, a complaint is said to have been made by one Ms. Anupriya Malik at about 150 pm at the residence of the Vice-Chanceller alleging use of unfair means by the petitioner.
This has been stated in para 2 (Preliminary Objections) of the written statement filed by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to Civil Writ Petition No. 12324 of 1994.
On receipt of this complaint, the Vice-Chancellor directed that a preliminary inquiry be made by a committee headed by Dr. Sarvjeet Singh, Professor-Mathematics-cum-Chairman, Pre-medical Test Committee.
The Committee headed by Prof. Sarvjeet Singh made a preliminary inquiry and submitted a report to the Vice-Chancellor which ultimately led to the issue of the show-cause notice dated 291994.
The petitioner was directed to appear before the Unfair Means Committee headed by Dr. Surinder Kumar, Professor of Economics.
The Committee recorded the statements of Ms. Anupriya Malik (Roll No. 4514), Ms. Archana (Roll No. 4513), Shri Mahesh Kumar, Steno- typist, Prof. LC Dhingra, Shri VP Bhatia, Mrs. Sharda Tuli, Shri Chhabil Dass, Shri Ranvir Singh, Shri I.S Poria and also that of the petitioner on different dates.
On 24101994 and 2111994 some other witnesses were cross- examined by the petitioner.
However, the request made by the petitioner for examination of Shri VC Sharma, Vice-Chancellor; Dr. Saravjeet Singh, who had headed the preliminary inquiry Committee, and Shri Siri Ram Sharma, Assistant Registrar (Conduct).
(sic) The Unfair Means Committee submitted its report to the Vice-Chancellor, a copy of which was furnished to the petitioner.
Thereafter, the impugned order dated 4111994 came to be passed cancelling her Paper (1) in the subjects of Physics and Chemistry.
It also appears from the record that vide order dated 131994 (Annexure P2/1) issued by the Registrar of the University, father of the petitioner was posted as Deputy Registrar (Conduct).
On the very next day, father of the petitioner wrote letter Annexure P-2/B to the Registrar that additional duty of Conduct Branch may be allotted to some other Deputy Registrar because some persons in the University did not want him to look after the Conduct Branch.
This request was acceded to.
However, after about three months, father of the petitioner wrote letter Annexure P2/C dated 251994 and requested that he may be relieved from the additional duty of the Conduct Branch.
This was followed by letter Annexure P-2/D dated 1651994 by which the petitioner's father requested that the Assistant Registrar (R-II) and Assistant Registrar (Conduct) may be directed not be place any file relating to the Medical Entrance Test before him because his daughter, i.e. petitioner, was going to appear in the said examination.
Father of the petitioner was ultimetly relieved of the duties of the Conduct Branch on 651994.
5.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned decision on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice, mala fide and arbitrariness.
Her plea is that the findings recorded by the Unfair Means Committee are perverse as there is no evidence to establish use of unfair means by her.
It has been pleaded that respondent No. 2 was prejudiced with the petitioner's father and, therefore, he manipulated the complainant against the petitioner through the daughter of his friend, namely, Shri KR Malik.
6.
The respondents have stoutly defended the impugned decision.
In the written statement, the respondents have raised an objection to the entertainability of the writ petition by stating that in such like matters the High Court cannot exercise its certiorari jurisdiction to interfere with the decision taken by the University.
The respondents have referred to the decision of this Court dated 331980 recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 218 of 1980 (Surinder Kumar v. MD University).
On merits, the respondents have pleaded that the complaint Ms. Anupriya Malik did not have any malice against the petitioner and, therefore, the Unfair Means Committee has rightly believed her and the conduct of the inquiry is not vitiated by violation of any statutory provisions or the principles of natural justice.
7.
First argument of Shri Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the impugned action is vitiated due to bias and mala fide of the respondent No. 2, who bore ill-will against the father the petitioner for various reasons.
Second contention of the learned counsel is that the findings recorded by the Unfair Means Committee are perverse, inasmuch as the Committee has over-looked serious discrepancies in the evidence of star- witness, namely, Ms. Anupriya Malik.
Learned counsel read out the various portions of the statement of complainant Ms. Anupriya Malik, and pointed out that her testimony is not worthy of reliance and the career of the petitioner could not be damaged on the basis of tainted testimony of Ms. Anupriya Malik and other witnesses, who have appeared on behalf of the University.
Third contention of the learned counsel is that the Vice-Chancellor did not have jurisdiction to order action against the petitioner because power to order action by Unfair Means Committee in such like matters vests in the Superintendent of Examination.
Learned counsel referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Hari Kishan Sharma, AIR 1966 SC 1081, and Purtabpur Co Ltd v. Cane Commissioner of Bihar, AIR 1970 SC 1896, in support of this contention.
8.
He next argued that none of the members of the invigilation staff was even a Science graduate and, therefore, there could be no possibility of outside help being extended to the petitioner in the papers of Physics and Chemistry.
9.
Shri Surya Kant, learned counsel for the respondents, argued that the allegation of mala fide levelled against the respondent No. 2 is vague and there is no proximity between the so-called incident of 1993 and the impugned action.
Shri Surya Kant pointed out that if all the Vice-Chancellor was ill-disposed against the petitioner's father, he would not have entrusted the additional charge of Conduct Branch to the former.
Learned counsel further submitted that a high -powered committee constituted by the University has recorded a finding of fact that the petitioner is guilty of adopting unfair means at the examination and in the absence of allegation of mala fide against the members of the Committee, the Court cannot re- appreciate the evidence and record its own conclusion.
Shri Surya Kant further argued that invigilator Smt. Sharda Tuli has gone outside the examination hall two to three times and, therefore, even though she does not happen to be a Science graduate, it was quite possible for her to help the petitioner.
Shri Surya Kant further argued that as per Para 9-A(6) of the University Calendar, the Vice-Chancellor is the principal executive officer and in that capacity he had the power to initiate action against the petitioner.
10.
Before examinaing the rival contentions, it is necessary to state the legal position regarding Court's power to interfere with the decision taken by the Universities and other academic bodies in relation to the discipline and examinations.
Educational institutions enjoy a special status in the society and the Courts have consistently recognised their autonomy and precisely for this reason, the Courts have refrained themselves from making frequent interference in the working of the educational institutions and academic matters.
On the issues of indiscipline in such institutions as well as the conduct of the examination, interference by the Court has been very circumspect and the Courts have always avoided substitution of their opinion qua the opinion formed by the competent authorities of University etc.
However, it is one thing to say that the autonomy of the academic bodies should be respected and it is altogether different thing to say that the Court should interfere with the decision of the academic bodies.
Rather, I may say that it is the duty of the Court to exercise its jurisdiction in appropriate case where it finds patent violation of the provisions of the Constitution or statute or arbitrariness in the action taken by the educational institution.
11.
It will also be appropriate to keep in mind the well settled principle of law which governs the exercise of certiorari jurisdiction, namely that the Court should not interfere with a decision of the quasi-judicial authority unless its action is found to be without jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction or there is patent violation of the principles of natural justice or where the findings recorded by the quasi-judicial authority suffer from an error of law apparent on the face of record.
While keeping in mind the aforementioned principles, I have carefully gone through the record of this case and in my opinion the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the decision of the respondents is vitiated due to personal mala fides of respondent No. 2 does not deserves to be accepted.
The facts which have been brought on record are sufficient to establish that the impugned decision is tainted with arbitrariness and is, therefore, liable to be invalidated.
12.
The initiation of action against the petitioner is said to have been made on the basis of complaint made by Ms. Anupriya Malik.
Perusal of Annexure R-1 shows that on the basis of a complaint lodged with the respondent No. 2 on 9.7.1994 at 150 pm at his residence by a few students and parents about the help being extended to the petitioner in the morning session paper by a lady invigilator, the respondent No. 2 visited the Centre.
After about two days, he recorded a note (page 243 of the paper-book) that he had visited the Centre and on preliminary inquiry the involvement of concerned lady invigilator along with the possibility of connivance of some other member/members of the staff became almost clear.
On the basis of this, he ordered registration of a case for use of unfair means against the candidate.
He forwarded this note to Dr. Saravjit Singh, Chairman PMT Committee, along with the complaint in original.
This complaint is said to have been written by one Ms. Anupriya Malik, Roll No. 4514.
It is the case of the respondents that the complaint was made on 9.7.1994 but a look with the naked eyes shows that the date written on the complaint was 10.7.1994 and by subsequent interpolation, it was made as 9.7.1994 by attempting to score out the figure of '1' and by making the figure of '0' to look at '9'.
The Committee, headed by Dr. Saravjit Singh, took written statement from Shri Sudarshan, Shri Sish Pal Saini, Clerks of Conduct Branch, Shri VP Bhatia, Centre Superintendent, Shri Chattar Singh (Invigilator) and recorded a conclusion that there was a complaint to help the petitioner in the use of Unfair Means in the morning session during the Pre-medical Test held on 9.7.1994 and she might have been actually helped in use of unfair means.
Thereafter, the matter was referred to the Unfair Means Committee which, as already mentioned above, recorded the statements of several witnesses and gave opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine the witnesses of the University.
However, it is an admitted position that request of the petitioner for examination of Shri VC Sharma, Prof. Saravjit Singh and Shri Siri Ram Sharma was not accepted by the Unfair Means Committee.
In its proceedings held on 28101994 (Pages 122 to 124 of the paper-book), the Unfair Means Committee rejected the request of the petitioner to examine/cross-examine the three persons without assigning any reasons.
13.
Perusal of Annexures P-3 and P-4 shows that on 1871994, father of the petitioner was placed under suspension on the basis of the preliminary inquiry conducted in connection with the use of unfair means in the case of the petitioner.
Interestingly, the report of the preliminary inquiry committee is dated 2671994 and, therefore, it is difficult to comprehend as to how the order of suspension dated 1871994 could be based on the said preliminary report.
However, that it is not conclusive of arbitrariness in the action taken against the petitioner.
What is most significant is that the versions given by the so-called complainant, Ms. Anupriya Malik, on different occasions completely belie the genuineness of the complaint made by her.
In her statement dated 2091994 (page 93 of the paper-book), Ms. Anupriya Malik made a statement in response to question No. 4 that she did not herself go to the Vice-Chancellor because she had to prepare for second paper but she had informed the whole situation to her father who along with other persons met the Vice-Chancellor.
In her cross-examination dated 2111994 (Page 125 of the paper-book), this witness denied her having visited the residence of the Vice-Chancellor.
In response to question No. 7, she stated that after completion of evening session examination, a person came to her and asked her to give a complaint in writing and that she did not know that person.
In reply to question No. 18, the witness stated that she did not know Ms. Archana and in reply to question No. 19, she stated that complaint was made on 971994 after the evening session and at that time Ms. Archana had left the Centre and further that later on she was associated because the inquiry committee asked if she (complainant) knows anybody, who has seen that mal-functioning.
In reply to question No. 21, she admitted that Ms. Archana was her class-fellow.
In an inquiry held against the father of the petitioner, complainant (Ms. Anupriya Malik) appeared as a witness (PW-15) on behalf of the establishment.
The complainant stated that she gave the complaint to her father to be handed over to the Vice-Chancellor.
In cross-examination, she stated that complaint was written by her at the examination centre itself after the examination was over.
She expressed her ignorance regarding earlier statement that she had given complaint to a person who had come to her.
For the purpose of more proper appreciation, it would be profitable to reproduce the answers given by the complainant to question No. 4 (statement dated 2091994) and question Nos. 5, 7, 17, 19, 21 and 22 of her cross-examination dated 2111994 and her statement as PW-15 in the inquiry held against the petitioner's father, which has been placed on record by the learned counsel for the respondents as per Court's direction :  "Q.
4. Who were the persons who went to the Vice-Chancellor for making this complaint ?
Ans.
I did not go myself to the Vice-Chancellor because I had to prepare for my IInd paper on same day.
However, I informed the whole situation to my father and he along with some other persons met the Vice-Chancellor and apprised him of the happening.
Q 5.
(Statement dated 2111994) Have you ever visited the Vice- Chancellor residence ?
Ans.
No, never.
Q 7.
Think and tell where did you make the complaint ?
Ans.
After the completion of evening session examination, a person came to me and asked me to give a complaint in writing.
I do not know that person.
Q.
17.
I put it to you that you and Miss Archana entered the examination room at one time and deliberately occupied the two seats on the same desk.
What do you say ?
Ans.
I do not know her.
When I came, she has already occupied her seat.
Q.
19.
In your written complaint on 10th July, 1994, there is no mention of Miss Archana but in your statement before the Committee, she has been fully associated by you.
Why it is so ?
Ans.
I have made my complaint on 9th July, 1994 after the evening session.
At that time, she has already left the Centre and later on she was associated because the Enquiry Committee has asked me if you know any body who has seen this male-functioning.
Q.
21.
Do you and Miss Archana are class-fellows and are studying in the same college ?
Ans.
Yes, we are class-fellows and also studying in the same College ?
Q.
22.
Are you and Miss Archana taking tuition together from various teachers including your father ?
Ans.
No.
It is not true.
PW-15.
Statement of Ms. Anupriya Malik D/o Sh. KR Malik, student of B.Sc.
Part-III Jat College, Rohtak, on s.a.
I appeared in PMT examination held on 9.7.1994.
My Roll No. was 4514.
Ms. Shefali Goyal also took the same test and she was sitting just behind my seat.
Mrs. Sharda Tuli was the invigilator in that room and she came to Shefali Goyal several times in order to help her in solving the question paper.
To every question, four answers were written in the question paper and out of those four answers, the candidate was required to indicate the correct answer.
Sr. No. that is, 1, 2, 3, 4, used to be written against each answer and the candidate was required to write the correct number of the answer in the relevant block against that question.
Mrs. Sharda Tuli was telling Ms. Shefali Goyal the Sr. No. of the answer to be written in the block against that question.
Atleast she told Shefali Goyal four times the answers to be written of the questions.
When the time was over and almost all the candidates had left the room, Shefali Goyal was still sitting and attempting the question paper.
She also had not made the hash total when the time was over.
Mrs. Sharda Tuli was still dictating the answers to Shefali Goyal when other candidates were going out of the examination centre.
I then made a complaint about this incident addressed to the Vice- Chancellor.
Photo copy of that complaint is Exh.
PW15/A.
It is signed by me and this entire complaint is in my handwriting.
I gave this complaint to my father to be handed over to the Vice-Chancellor.
I had written this complaint after the evening season.
In both the sessions, that is, morning and evening, Ms. Shefali Goyal was sitting just behind my seat.
The abovesaid help was rendered to Shefali Goyal only in the morning session.
Cross examination.
My father is working as a Lecturer in Jat College, Rohtak.
He teaches Zoology.
I do not know the Vice-Chancellor of this University.
I never went to his house.
I cannot identify him since I never met him.
I do not know if the Vice-Chancellor also remained a Lecturer in Zoology for 13-14 years along with my father in Jat College, Rohtak.
I did not state in any other enquiry that my father and the Vice-Chancellor had worked together for 13-14 years in the same college.
I wrote this complaint in the Exam.
centre itself after the examination was over in the evening session and I gave it to my father when he had come to take me to the house.
I requested one peon to give me a paper, who got it and I then wrote a complaint on that paper.
I do not remember if I stated in an earlier enquiry that after the completion of evening session, I gave a complaint to one person who had come to me and that I did not know who that person was.
Previously I had stated that I had gone back to my house in a rickshaw of my own and not along with my father.
It is wrong to suggest that I made this complaint on 10th of July and that subsequently the date was changed from 10th to 9th of July, 1994.
I appeared in PMT examination three times.
I do not remember exactly but in the first attempt I had got more than 700 marks.
I did not enquire the marks which I secured in the subsequence two examinations.
I knew Archana because she was my class-fellow in the college.
I and Archana studied together for about a month in extra coaching.
I knew her even before 9.7.1994.
I do not remember if I stated in the earlier enquiry that I did not know Archana.
I do not know if Ms. Archana was to make a complaint or not and therefore I did not mention her name in my complaint.
When the members of the earlier enquiry committee asked me to specify the details as to how Shefali Goyal was helped, I then had stated that Archana was sitting along with me on the same desk and that she had also seen Shefali Goyal being helped by the lady invigilator.
The candidates in that room were not sitting according to any seating plan.
As a matter of fact, there was no seating plan available for that room.
The candidates occupied the desks or their seats according to their own wishes.
Since, I knew Archana, therefore, both of us occupied the same desk.
We had also deposited our admission forms together.
We did not help one another.
It is wrong to suggest that even our wrong answers tally.
My signatures were obtained on a chart during the examination.
I had also signed when the booklet of question paper was delivered to me.
The Log Table was given to me by the lady supervisor on demand.
Mrs. Sharda Tuli came to me twice or thrice to obtain my signatures as per requirement of the University rules.
I had given my statement before the department enquiry committee on 18.8.1994 and photo copy of the statement is Exh.
PW15/D I have seen photo copy of the various questions and answers given by me before the departmental enquiry committee held on 2111994 and I did give these answers at that time.
This statement of mine is Exh.
PW15/D1."
(Emphasis supplied) 14.
At the same time, it would be appropriate to reproduce the statement of Shri KR Malik, father of the complaint, which he made as PW-16 in the inquiry held against the petitioner's father.
This statement reads as under :-  "PW-16.
Statement of Sh. KR Malik, Lecturer, Jat College, Rohtak, on s.a. My daughter Anupriya Malik took PMT exam.
held on 9794 and after the examination she told me that the candidate, sitting just behind her was helped in the examinations by one lady invigilator.
She was telling her off and on, the choice of the correct answers.
At that time she did not know either the name of that candidate or that of the lady invigilator.
Just before the start of the second shift of the test, I happened to meet Shri RK Sheokand, Mr. Punia, Principal, Govt. College, Meham and Mr. Hooda, Medical Representative.
They also told me about the undue help which was being rendered in the exam.
My daughter had already told me about the unfair means.
All the us then decided to meet the Vice-Chancellor.
Consequently, we went to his residence and apprised him of the unfair means that were going on in the PMT examinations.
We met him a few minutes before 200 PM and on his asking we then gave him a complaint in writing.
That complaint was singed by me only.
I had told the Vice-Chancellor the name of my daughter and the name of the centre from where she was taking the test.
The Vice-Chancellor then left his residence and went to the exams.
centre.
Cross examination.
The complaint which I had made to the Vice-Chancellor has not been shown to me today and it is not in possession of the Presenting Officer.
My statement was not recorded earlier in any either enquiry.
It is true that I and the present Vice-Chancellor worked together for about two years in Jat College, Rohtak.
My daughter did not accompany me to the residence of the Vice-Chancellor.
I knew Archana because she was a student of Jat College but otherwise I had no family relations with her father.
I came to meet her father only casually at the time of exams.
Archana's father did not accompany me to the residence of Vice-Chancellor.
Archana also did not accompany us.
The complaint made by me consisted of few lines only and written on a small piece of paper.
I did not mention the name of Shefali Goyal in that complaint.
It is wrong to suggest that I had given a false statement at the instance of the Vice-Chancellor.
As a matter of fact, there was dispute between me and the Vice-Chancellor when we were together in the Jat College.
Shri KC Bhardwaj or any other officer did not come to my house on behalf of the Vice-Chancellor in this connection.
My daughter gave the complaint to me in writing after about half an hour of the close of the examinations, say at about 430 pm or so.
My daughter wrote the complaint just outside the examination hall, in my presence.
The paper on which she wrote the complaint was in my brief case, and I had given it to her.
After the complaint I and my daughter went together to the residence of the Vice-Chancellor."
(Emphasis supplied) 15.
From the above extracted portion of the statements made by the complainant as well as the statement made by her and her father in the inquiry held against the petitioner's father, it is more than apparent that the so-called complaint on the basis of which, the Vice-Chancellor of the University initiated action against the petitioner is said to have come into existence for the first time in the evening of 9.7.1994 and not at 150 pm as mentioned in the note of the Vice-Chancellor dated 1171994.
It is also clearly established that the complainant knew the Vice-Chancellor and as per her father, she had visited the residence of the Vice-Chancellor in the evening of 9.7.1994 although she denied having even met the Vice-Chancellor.
Lack of forthrightness on the part of the complainant to admit her association with co-examinee, namely, Ms. Archana, also shows that the complainant had not made a truthful statement during the course of inquiry and, therefore, on the basis of her testimony the petitioner could not be held guilty of having used unfair means, more so when it is an admitted position that the invigilator, namely, Mrs. Sharda Tuli is not a Science graduate and there is no evidence to link Mrs. Sharda Tuli with the petitioner or her father.
16.
The other important witness, who appeared on behalf of the University is Shri Sudarshan Kumar, Clerk of the Conduct Branch.
In his cross-examintion dated 24101994, Shri Sudarshan Kumar Admitted that he had made proposal for appointment of supervisory staff and gave it to the Assistant.
He further admitted that whatever his boss says, he had to accede to it.
In response to question No. 10, Shri Sudarshan Kumar stated that Shri RK Goyal had told him to put the duties in normal routine and he had put those people there.
This statement of Shri Sudarshan Kumar goes to show that father of the petitioner did not pressurise said Shri Sudarshan Kumar to put particular invigilators on duty.
Coming to the report of the Unfair Means Committee, I find that after making reference to the statements of various witnesses, the Committee recorded the following conclusions :  1.
The duties were assigned to the supervisory staff at the instance of the father of the petitioner; 2.
The statement given by Mrs. Sharda Tuli is false one; and 3.
The statement given by Ms. Anupriya Malik and Ms. Archana were worthy of reliance and on the basis of these statements, the charge of having used Unfair Means is established against the petitioner.
17.
Para 14 of the report submitted by the Unfair Means Committee brings out its conclusion and therefore, it is reproduced below-  "From the above discussion and findings, the standing Committee concludes that :- a) The charge (i) in the charge-sheet that Ms. Shefali Goyal in connivance with her father Shri RK Goyal, Deputy Registrar in the University (now under suspension) managed duties of the Centre Superintendent as well as invigilators by exerting influence of the official position of her father and thereby putting pressure on the University staff with a view to get undue help from within and out side the centre in solving the answers to the questionnaire is conclusively proved.
b) The charge (ii) in the charge sheet that Ms. Shefali Goyal actually received undue help during the examination and she managed extra time and favour in attempting the answers to the questions from the invigilator Mrs. Sharda Tuli is also proved beyond doubt.
All these manipulations vitiated the PMT examination of Ms. Shefali Goyal which amounts to actual use of unfair means and liable to be punished.
The Standing Committee unanimously decided to cancel the morning session paper of Ms. Shefali Goyal Roll No. 4561 PMT, exercising its powers under clause 8 of the ordinance PUNISHMENTS FOR USE OF UNFAIR-MEANS.
(Annexure VIII).
The Standing Committee further recommends that action be taken against Mr. VP Bhatia, Centre Superintendent, Mrs. Sharda Tuli, invigilator, and others who are negligent in performing their duties as per the University rules."
18.
On a comprehensive reading of the report of the Unfair Means Committee, it becomes clear that the Committee has altogether ignored the fundamental contradictions in the statement of the complainant and the note of the Vice- Chancellor.
At the same time, the Committee ignored the documentary evidence available on the record to show that father of the petitioner did not at any stage influenced the officials of the University to depute particular individuals for supervisory staff.
The report of the Committee is also silent on the most significant aspect, namely, that none of the invigilators was Science graduate and except a vague assertion by the complainant that Mrs. Sharda Tuli had gone out of examination hall 3-4 times and came back to assistant the petitioner, there is no evidence to show that Mrs. Sharda Tuli had secured help from some one else, who was standing outside the examination room and then she passed on the answers to the petitioner.
In my opinion, the finding of guilt recorded by the Unfair Means Committee is not based on any cogent evidence and is perverse.
It appears that the Unfair Means Committee had proceeded with the matter with an assumption that the petitioner did manipulate the officials of the University with the help of her father in order to secure undue advantage in the examination.
I am further of the opinion that on the basis of such report, the petitioner could not be punished by the University by way of cancellation of her examination.
19.
I also find merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that due opportunity was not given to the petitioner to defend herself.
There may be some justification for not accepting the request of the petitioner to cross-examine/examine the Vice-Chancellor and Prof. Saravjit Singh, but there was no reason to deny to cross-examine/examine the Assistant Registrar (Conduct Branch).
This person was an important witness who could have revealed truth about the procedure adopted by the Conduct Branch for appointment of the invigilation staff and the superivosory staff and there was no justification for the Committee to have deprived the petitioner to get his statement recorded.
This violation of the principles of natural justice is another reason why the impugned decision deserves to be set aside.
20.
At the cost of repetition, I deem it proper to observe that I have thought it proper to minutely examine the evidence produced during the course of proceedings of the Unfair Means Committee, keeping in view the serious contradictions in the statement of complainant and also in the light of the fact that the petitioner has got an extremely good academic record, inasmuch as she secured 84% marks in the Matriculation examination and 724% marks in the 10+2 examination, in my opinion, refusal of the Court to interfere in a matter like this, where the career of a brilliant is at stake and where no cogent evidence has been brought on record to establish use of unfair means by sher, would have resulted in manifest injustice.
21.
In view of the above conclusions, it is not necessary for me to deal with the other points urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
22.
For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned decision of the University is quashed and a direction is given to the respondent-University to declare result of the petitioner and to grant her consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.