GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash order Annexure P4 dated 431993 whereby an earlier order issued on 15.2.1993 appointing the petitioner as Block Primary Education Officer (for short, BPEO) has been cancelled.
A prayer has also been made to quash Annexure P4/A whereby respondent No. 4 has been given purely ad hoc promotion as BPEO in her own pay scale.
Yet another prayer is to quash Annexure PII which contains general instructions issued by the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Education, regarding promotion to the post of BPEO.
The petitioner has also prayed that the respondent be directed to promote her as BPEO.
2.
Some of the facts on which the parties do not have any dispute are that the petitioner joined service as JBT teacher under the Education Department of the Government of Punjab on 24.7.1959.
She was promoted as Head Teacher w.e.f.
1641982 and then as Central Head Teacher w.e.f.
29101983.
In the seniority list of J.B.T.
teachers (Women) of District Kapurthala (Annexure P1), the name of the petitioner figures at Sr. No. 25.
Respondent No. 4 who belongs to Scheduled Caste joined service as J.B.T.
teacher on 2571970.
She was promoted as Central Head Teacher w.e.f.
15.4.1982.
In the seniority list Annexure P1, the name of respondent No. 4 appears at Sr. No. 415.
However, in Annexure R1 which is a tentative seniority list of Central Head Teachers (Women) of District Kapurthala, the name of the petitioner appears at Sr. No. 11 and that of respondent No. 4 appears at Sr. No. 8.
It appears from the record that the Director, Public Instructions (Primary), Punjab had directed the District Education Officer (Primary), Kapurthala to send names of eligible persons for appointment to the post of BPEO.
Initially, the District Education Officer (Primary), Kapurthala had sent names of reserved category candidates, but, on the basis of direction given by respondent No. 2 vide Annexure P2 dated 121993 name of the petitioner was forwarded for promotion as BPEO and on that basis, order Annexure P3 came to be issued promoting the petitioner as BPEO in her own pay scale.
This order describes the promotion of the petitioner as purely temporary and provisional which could be terminated without any notice.
Another condition incorporated in this order is that if any candidate is found junior in the seniority list then she could be reverted to the post of Central Head Teacher.
After 17 days of the issue of Annexure P3, one of the impugned orders (Annexure P4) came to be issued by the Director, Public Instructions (Primary), Punjab, cancelling that order.
At the same time, another impugned order Annexure P4/A came to be issued promoting respondent No. 4 as BPEO in her own pay scale.
This promotion has also been described as on ad hoc basis by way of stop-gap arrangement and conditions similar to those incorporated in Annexure P3 have been incorporated in Annexure P4.
3.
Annexure P-11 is a letter circulated by the Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Department of Education, on 1861992.
In this letter, it has been stated that the instructions contained therein should be treated as executive instructions of the Government of Punjab, Department of Education, for recruitment/promotion to the posts of Primary School Teachers/ Head Teachers/Circle Head Teachers/BPEOs.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the legality of Annexures P4, P4-A and P-11 on the ground of violation of the provisions contained in the Punjab State Education (Class-III) (School Cadre) Service Rules, 1978 (hereafter referred to as 'the Rules') and equality clause enshrined in the Constitution of India.
5.
The first argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 4 in the cadre of JBT teachers and, therefore, without considering her candidature, respondent No. 2 could not promote respondent No. 4 as BPEO nor could he cancel the promotion of the petitioner of the said post.
Learned counsel further argued that reservation for Schedule Castes candidates is limited to 16 per cent and out of three posts of BPEOs in District Kapurthala, one had already been filled by appointing a reserved category candidate, namely, Smt. Gurdev Kaur and therefore, no further reservation could have been made in favour of a Scheduled Casts candidate and by being given the benefit of reservation, respondent No. 4 could not have been promoted as BPEO.
Yet another argument of the leaned counsel is that as per the Rules, the seniority amongst JBT teachers only could be taken into consideration for the purpose of promotion to the post of BPEO and respondent No. 2 has acted illegally by making promotion on the basis of seniority amongst Central Head Teachers.
He argued that the instructions contained in Annexure P-11 cannot be treated as executive instructions issued by the Goverment and in any case, these instructions are liable to be ignored being inconsistent with the statutory Rules.
6.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents argued that after creation of Directorate of Primary Education, the Government has up-graded 8223 posts of JBT Teachers into Head Teachers and 1500 posts of JBT teachers into Central Head Teachers which resulted in more avenues of promotion to the JBT Teachers and, therefore, it became necessary to frame rules for providing promotions to JBT Teachers against the post of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers and further promotion to the posts of BPEOs.
In order to do this, the Government has already framed draft rules and no illegality has been committed by making promotions to the posts of BPEOs from amongst Central Head teachers on the basis of draft rules which have been treated as executive instructions vide Annexure P-11.
Learned counsel argued that the instructions contained in Annexure P-11 are supplemental to the statutory Rules and they do not in any manner affect the operation of the Rules of 1978.
Learned counsel further argued that after having availed the benefit of promotion to the post of Head Teacher and Central Head Teacher, the petitioner cannot be heard to say that she has been deprived of her right to be considered for promotion to the post of BPEO because respondent No. 4 has been promoted as BPEO on the basis of her seniority in the cadre of Central Head Teachers and not on the basis of her seniority in the cadre of JBT Teachers.
The learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 4 further argued that promotion accorded to Smt. Gian Kaur on the basis of her seniority in the cadre of Central Head Teachers w.e.f.
15.4.1982 has not been challenged by the petitioner and, therefore, on the basis of her seniority position amongst Central Head Teachers, which is reflected in Annexure R1, respondent No. 4 has rightly been promoted as BPEO.
He also pointed out that the petitioner has already retired from Service and, therefore, it would be a futile exercise for the Court to quash the promotion accorded to respondent No. 4.
7.
On July 4, 1996, the judgment was reserved after hearing arguments.
At the same time, the learned Deputy Advocate General was directed to inform the Court whether the instructions contained in Annexure P-11 were issued with the approval of the Council of Ministers and/or of the Minister concerned.
In compliance of this direction, the learned Deputy Advocate General produced original file relating to Annexure P-11 and pointed out that the instructions formulated by the Education Department were approved by the Hon'ble Minister, School Education on 2551992.
8.
The point which requires adjudication by the Court is whether the instructions contained in Annexure PII are executive instructions issued by the Government under Article 162 of the Constitution of India and whether they can be acted upon in the face of the provisions of the Rules.
9.
In exercise of the powers vesting in him under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Government of Punjab framed the Rules.
These Rules which are statutory in character having been enacted in exercise of plenary power vesting in the Governor cover the field relating to the Punjab State Education Class-III (School Cadre).
Rule 2 of the Rules defines the term 'direct recruitment' to mean the appointment otherwise than by promotion within the cadre of the Service or by transfer of an official already in the service of the Government of India or of a State Government.
Rules 3 of the Rules divides the Service into two branches, namely, Men Branch and Women Branch and it shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix 'A' .
Proviso to this Rule empowers the State Government to add to or reduce the number of posts or create new posts with different designation and scale of pay.
Rule 9 specifies the method of appointment.
Clause (1) of this Rule says that the appointment in the service shall be made in the manner indicated against each post in Appendix 'B'.
Rule 11 regulates seniority of members of service.
Substantive part of Rule 11 provides that seniority in each cadre of the service shall be determined on the basis of continuous length of service on a post in that cadre of service.
Appendix 'A' as it stood prior to 2461979 contained enumeration of nine different posts including Masters or Block Education Officers and Mistresses and Block Education Officers.
As per Appendix 'B' the posts of Masters or Mistresses or Block Education Officers were required to be filled 75% by direct recruitment and 25% by promotion from trained graduates amongst JBT.
Vide notification No. GSR-81/Const./Article 309/Administration (1)79 dated 23.6.1979 published in Gazette of Punjab Government dated 2561979, the rules were amended by the Governor of Punjab in exercise of his power under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
In Appendix 'A', Sr. Nos. 7 and 8 which related to Masters or BEOs and Mistresses or BEOs were substituted by the followings :-  "7(a) Masters (b) BPEO (Men)  8(a) Mistresses (b) BPEO (Women)" Appendix 'B' has also been amended and as per the amended Appendix 'B' recruitment to the posts of Masters or Mistresses is required to be made 75% by direct recruitment and 25% from trained graduates amongst JBT Teachers.
The post of BPEO is required to be filled 100% by promotion from amongst JBT teachers on merit-cum-seniority basis.
Rule 9(1) and the relevant abstract of Appendix 'B' as amended vide notification dated 23.6.1979 are reproduced below for the purpose of ready reference :-  "9(1) Appointment to the posts in the Service shall be made in the manner indicated against each post in Appendix 'B' to these rules.
Appendix 'B' Sl No.
Designation Minimum qualifications and teaching experience Method of recruitment Promotion 1 & 2 xx  + + + + 3(a) xx + + + + 3(b) Block Primary Education Officer (i) Matriculation with knowledge of Punjabi language of such standard as may be laid down by the Government from time to time.
(ii) JBT (or JV or J.T.)
Examination of the Government or any other equivalent qualification recognised by the Government or special certificate issued by the Government for teaching all subjects in the Primary classes of schools recognised by the Government.
.. By promotion from amongst JBT Teachers on merit-cum- seniority basis.
(iii) Experience of teaching Primary Classes in a Government School in Punjab for a minimum period of fifteen years.
It is, therefore, clear that under the statutory rules the post of BPEO can be filled only by promotion from amongst JBT Teachers on merit-cum-seniority basis.
10.
Annexure P 11 has been issued by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Education and there is no reference in it to any decision by Council of Ministers or approval by the Education Minister but the record produced by Shri Tiwari shows that the instructions have been issued with the approval of the Minister of School Education.
Under Rules of Business framed by the Governor in exercise of powers under Clauses (2) and (3) of Article 166 of the Constitution of India, the cases are required to be disposed of by or under the authority of the Minister Incharge who is also entitled to issue Standing Orders for disposal of cases in the Department (Rule 18).
This power is subject to any other provision contained in the Rules of Business.
The Education Minister, Punjab, has issued Standing Orders on 1121995.
As per Annexure 'A' appended to these Standing Orders, formation or amendment of the Rules relating to the recruitment and conditions of service of the employees of various classes are to be dealt with by the Minister.
Under Rule 28(1), the cases relating to all policy matters including cases in which new policies are to be formulated or the existing policy relating to the functions of the Department is to be charged, the case is to be submitted to the Chief Minister before any order can be issued.
Therefore, even though as per the Standing Orders dated 1121995 the formation or amendment of the Rules relating to recruitment and conditions of service of employees of various classes are to be decided at the level of the Education Minister, exercise of this power will be subject to Rule 28(1) and, therefore, if Department wanted to amend the Rules relating to recruitment, the case ought to have been put up before the Chief Minister.
Then the matter should have been placed before the Governor for enactment of the amendment in the Rules.
That having not been done, Annexure P 11 cannot be treated as amendment in the Rules.
Nevertheless, it can be said that the instructions contained in Annexure P 11 are executive instructions issued by the Government in exercise of its executive powers.
11.
However, merely because Annexure P 11 contains executive instructions issued by the Government, it is not possible to accept the submission of the learned Deputy Advocate General and Dr. MS Rahi, learned counsel for respondent No. 4 that the Government was free to act on these instructions for making promotion to the posts of BPEOs because the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers were not in existence at the time of enactment of the Rules and no provision has been made for promotion to these posts under those Rules.
The post of BPEO is a cadre post and there exists provision in the Rules to fill this post by promotion from amongst JBT Teachers on merit-cum- seniority basis.
Therefore, it is not a case in which statutory rules are silent and the executive power has been exercised by the Government to fill in the gap.
Rather, the instructions contained in Annexure P 11 seek to amend the Rules by treating the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers as part of the Cadre by incorporation thereof in Appendix 'A'.
Likewise, Entry 3(b) of Appendix 'B' is sought to be substituted by providing that the post of BPEO shall be filled from amongst Central Head Teachers on merit-cum-seniority basis instead of JBT Teachers.
This, in my opinion, is not permissible because it is settled principle of law that statutory rules cannot be amended, modified or varied by executive instructions.
The Executive cannot exercise the power in a field which is occupied by statutory rules.
Only limited scope of exercise of executive power in matters governed by statutory rules is where the rules are silent or where there exists some gap or lacuna in the Rules.
Only in such cases, the executive instructions can be issued so as to carry out the purposes of the Rules by filling the lacuna.
Therefore, it must be held that Annexure P 11 contain instructions which are inconsistent with the statutory rules in so far as they provide promotion to the post of BPEO and it is inconsequential that by issuing instructions the Government is seeking to provide other avenues of promotion to the JBT Teachers namely, as Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers.
12.
In this connection, it will be useful to refer to some decisions of the Apex Court.
In Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 SC 1910, their Lordships negatived an argument that in the absence of statutory rules, the Government cannot issue instructions regulating promotion to Selection Grade posts in the Service.
While rejecting this contention, their Lordships held :-  "It is true that the Government cannot amend or supersede the statutory rules by administrative instructions but if the rules are silent on any particular point, the Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed."
(emphasis supplied)  In State of Haryana v. Shamsher Jung Sukla, AIR 1972 SC 1546, their Lordship of the Supreme Court were dealing with a situation where the Government had issued administrative instructions laying down additional qualification for the purpose of recruitment by promotion.
The Punjab Civil Sectt.
(State Service Class-III) Rules, 1952 contained provision for recruitment to the posts in the Service by promotion.
The post of Assistant was required to be filled from amongst Senior Clerks.
By administrative instructions issued on 2161958, the Government laid down that a test would be conducted for the purpose of promotion to the post of Assistant.
This Court held that the instructions were contrary to the statutory rules and, therefore, they could not be applied for the purpose of making promotion to the post of Assistant.
While upholding the judgment of this Court, their Lordships observed :-  "Where the administrative instructions issued by the Government added to the qualifications already prescribed by the rules relating to promotion framed under Article 309 of the Constitution, the instructions would undoubtedly affect the promotion of the concerned officials and they would, thus, relate to their conditions of service.
The Government is not competent to alter by means of administrative instructions the conditions of service prescribed by those rules."
In CC Padamnabhan v. DPI and others, 1980(2) S.L.R.
599, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the policy decision/executive instructions issued in violation of statutory rules does not amount to automatic amendment in the statutory rules.
In SL Sachdeva v. Union of India, 1980(3) SLR 503, the Apex Court declared that the Director General, Post and Telegraph had no jurisdiction to issue any directive prescribing an additional test for the purpose of recruitment to the cadre of U.D.C.
and that the directive issued by the Director General could not be acted upon being inconsistent with the recruitment rules.
The following observations made by the Supreme Court are quite instructive and are reproduced below :-  "It may be recalled that the Recruitment Rules only provide for a classification on the basis of the length of service in the new organisation.
Any directive which goes beyond it and superimposes a new criterion on the Rules will be bad as lacking in jurisdiction.
No one can issue a direction which, in substance and effect, amounts to an amendment of the Rules made by the President under Article 309.
This is elementary.
We are unable to accept the learned Attorney General's submission that the directive of the Director General is aimed at further and better implementation of the Recruitment Rules.
Clearly, it introduces an amendment to the Rules by prescribing one more test for determining whether UDCs drawn from the Audit Offices are eligible for promotion to the Selection Grade/Head Clerks Cadre."
In PD Aggarwal v. State of UP, AIR 1987 SC 1676, their Lordships held that an office memorandum cannot override, amend or supersede the statutory rules.
The Supreme Court declared that the memorandum dated December 7, 1961 issued by the Government of UP was nothing but an administrative order or instructions and the same cannot amend or supersede the statutory rules by adding something therein.
In Union of India v. Arun Kumar Roy, 1986(1) SCC 675, their Lordships of the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court which had relied on a Government notification for quashing the termination of service brought about in accordance with rule 5(1)(b) of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965.
While reversing the judgment of the High Court, their Lordships held :-  "A notification has no statutory force.
It cannot override the rules statutorily made governing the conditions of service of the employees.
Notification is dated 26.8.1967.
Rules 5(1)(b) was amended in 1971 with retrospective effect from May 1, 1965.
The rule has necessarily to govern the service conditions and not the notification."
In Bindeshwari Ram v. State of Bihar, 1989(4) SCC 565, their Lordships were called upon to deal with a case where the seniority of the employees determined in accordance with statutory rules was challenged on the ground that the instructions issued by the Government provided some other criteria.
While repelling the contention that the seniority ought to have been determined as per the executive instructions their Lordship referred to Rule 35 of Bihar Forest Service Rules, 1953 and held :-  "It is settled law that the provisions of statutory rules cannot be modified or altered by executive instructions and it is only in the absence of statutory rules that executive instructions have relevance.
As such even if for the sake of argument it may be accepted that on account of the memorandum to the Cabinet or any other executive instruction the appellant was to be given seniority as claimed by him, it could not be done as in case of a conflict the statutory provisions contained in this behalf in proviso (iii) of Rule 35 of the Rules shall prevail."
In Ex-Captain K Bala Subramaniam v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1991(2) SCC 708, their Lordships reiterated the principle that the administrative instructions could not alter or supersede the statutory rules.
Their Lordships held that the High Court was right in holding that the directions contained in administrative orders were invalid being contrary to the provisions of Rule 35 of the Rules which governed the seniority of the employees.
The above decisions amply buttress the conclusion already recorded by me that the instructions contained in Annexure P 11 cannot be acted upon being inconsistent with the Rules because the Rules provide for promotion to the post of BPEO from amongst JBT Teachers on merit-cum-seniority basis whereas the administrative instructions provide for promotion from amongst Central Head Teachers.
13.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the instructions contained in Annexure P 11 had to be issued in the light of the upgradation of the posts of JBT Teachers into that of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers and in order to avoid anomaly which may have arisen in the event of promotion of JBT Teachers to the post of BPEO even though such JBT Teachers may not be promoted as Head Teacher or Central Head Teacher, does appear to be attractive but on a close scrutiny I am unable to accept it.
The posts of Head Teachers or Central Head Teacher do not form part of the service because the Rules have not been amended to encadre these posts and, therefore, the promotion from the post of JBT Teachers to the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers will be treated as ex-cadre promotion and, therefore, on the basis of such ex-cadre promotion, seniority of the existing JBT Teachers could not be treated as altered and no anomaly could arise.
Moreover, it has not been shown that the promotion to the post of Head Teacher or Central Head Teacher is required to be made on the basis of merit so as to result in supersession of senior persons.
Thus the hypothetical situation pointed out by the learned counsel for the State may not at all arise.
At any rate, once it is found that the statutory rules contain provision for promotion to the post of BPEO only from amongst JBT Teachers, the so-called anomaly which may occur cannot be a ground for holding that the administrative instructions have the effect of amending the statutory rules.
If, at all, such a situation arises the Government is to blame for the same.
14.
The argument of the learned counsel for respondent No. 4 that the petitioner is estopped from challenging the promotion of respondent No. 4 because of her failure to challenge latter's promotion to the post of Central Head Teacher is without any substance.
Admittedly, the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers have not been encadred in the Service even till this date.
Therefore, when respondent No. 4 promoted as Central Head Teacher by giving benefit of reservation, the petitioner may not have felt adversely affected because her right to promotion on the post of BPEO remained unaffected.
Therefore, her failure to challenge promotion of respondent No. 4 as Central Head Teacher cannot be a ground to deny relief to the petitioner even though the Court has found that the promotion to the post of BPEO can be made only from amongst JBT Teachers.
15.
In view of the above discussion, it is held that Annexure P 11 cannot be given effect to while making promotions to the post of BPEO and the official respondents have acted illegally in promoting respondent No. 4 as BPEO without giving fair consideration to the candidature of the petitioner who was admittedly senior to respondent No. 4 in the cadre of JBT Teachers.
16.
The question now arises for consideration is as to what relief should be given to the petitioner.
Admittedly, she stands retired from service and, therefore, it is not possible to direct the respondents to give her promotion and post as BPEO.
She will at the best get notional promotion on the basis of the exercise to be undertaken by the official respondents in the light of the conclusions recorded by this Court.
Therefore, it will not be equitable to direct the respondents to oust respondent No. 4 from the post of BPEO.
Instead, it would be appropriate to quash Annexure P4-A and Annexure P 11 (partially) and to direct the respondents to undertake fresh exercise for making promotion to the post of BPEO.
Keeping in view the fact that draft rules were framed for providing channels to the posts of Head Teachers and Central Teachers as early as in the year 1992, it would be appropriate to direct that the Government should take a decision on the issue of finalisation of the rules for encadrement of the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers and other ancillary matters.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P 11 is quashed to the extent it provides for promotion to the post of BPEO from amongst Central Head Teachers.
Annexure P4-A is also declared illegal and is quashed, but it is directed that respondent No. 4 shall be allowed to continue on the post of BPEO.
Within two months from today, the Government should undertake fresh exercise for making promotion to the posts of BPEOs in accordance with the Rules.
If the petitioner is found suitable for promotion to the post of BPEO as in the year 1993, then, she should be given notional promotion and all other consequential benefits.
It is also made clear that if the Government decides to amend the Rules then appropriate amendment should be made within this period of two months.
In that event, promotion exercise should be undertaken keeping in view the amended rules.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.