Satyabrata Sinha, J.- This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 4393 passed in CO No. 14142(W) of 1990 whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by private respondents questioning an order dated 19590 passed by the Appeal Committee as contained in Annexure 'K' to the writ application was allowed.
2.
The fact of the matter lies in a very narrow compass.
3.
The appellant was appointed as an organiser teacher in Birampur Junior High School on 10.2.77.
He allegedly wanted to undergo training of B.Ed.
but the same was refused.
At the relevant time, admittedly the school was neither affiliated nor recognised.
The appellant took admission in the Teachers' Training College on his own initiation.
However, according to the appellant when he intended to join the school after completion of B.Ed.
Training, he was not allowed to do so.
His requests to the Managing Committee of the school went in vain.
It is stated that on 9779, the appellant was asked to show- cause, whereafter a resolution was adopted on 25779 purporting to terminate the service of the appellant which was informed to him on the same day.
The West Bengal Board of Secondary Education in terms of its letter dated 22681 granted recognition of the school in question with effect from 1779.
The services of some teachers whose names find place in Annexure 'F' to the writ application were approved.
However, the service of the appellant was purported to have been approved from 1179 to 30579, as would appear from the letter of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Malda dated 3282.
Such approval was made purported to be on the basis of the recommendation of the Managing Committee of the school.
The appellant preferred an appeal before the Appeal Committee which was dismissed as being not maintainable.
A writ petition was filed by the appellant and by a judgment and order dated 27789 passed in CR No.3555 (W) of 1985 as contained in Annexure 'J' to the writ application, the said writ application was allowed and the Appeal Committee was directed to re-hear the appeal on merit after giving opportunity to the parties to file additional documents and to make fresh determination in the matter in accordance with law.
The Appeal Committee allowed the said appeal in terms of its order dated 19590, inter alia, on the ground that in view of the fact that the school was recogined on 1179 and as the appellant was an organiser teacher, termination of his services having not been preceded by an equity as contemplated under Rule 28(8) of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969, (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) the said order is bad in law.
The Secretary and some members of the Managing Committee being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said order filed a writ application and by reason of the impugned judgment dated 4393, a learned single Judge of this court, inter alia, held that the order of the Appeal Committee is illegal.
4.
Mr. Sadananda Ganguli appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that no writ application was maintainable at the instance of the writ petitioners as they have no locus standi in the matter.
According to the learned counsel, there is nothing on record to show that the Managing Committee as defined under Rule 2(c) of the said Rules and section 2(d) of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, authorised the writ petitioners to file the aforementioned writ application.
It was submitted that termination of service of the appellant by the then Managing Committee was mala fide and being contrary to the provision of Rule 28(8) of the said Rules, the same was rightly set aside by the Appeal Committee.
Learned counsel submitted that the Managing Committee took 3 different stands, inasmuch as, it was stated that the appellant was either removed, or his services were terminated and/or he resigned.
In this connection our attention has been drawn to a circular bearing No. 43/October/53 dated 1.10.53 which is at page 223 of the Headmaster's Manual, 4th Edition, for the purpose of showing that the service of a temporary teacher cannot be terminated in absence of a notice covering one month or in lieu of one month's pay.
Learned counsel further submitted that appointment of another teacher was also bad in law.
Mr. Ganguli submitted that so far as the order of the Board recognising the school in terms of its letter dated 22681 with retrospective operation and retroactive action from 1179 is valid in law and in support of his aforementioned contention, reliance has been placed on the decisions reported in C.L.J.
1995(2) 309, AIR 1985 SC 111, AIR 1975 SC 1196 and 1987(2) CHN 328.
As regards alleged mala fide action on the part of the Managing Committee, learned counsel relied on a decision of the Patna High Court reported in AIR 1995 Patna 10.
5.
Mr. Ali, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners/respondents on the other hand, submitted that it will appear from the fact of the matter, that the appellant had left the school on his own volition.
According to the learned counsel, it stands admitted that the appellant without obtaining any permission, joined Teachers' Training College, and thus, equity does not lie in his favour.
In this connection, our attention has been drawn to the order of the Appeal Committee dated 29.1.85 and it has been contended on the basis thereof that the appellant during the intervening period also joined another institution and subsequently having come to learn that the school was recognised retrospectively, he came back to join the school.
Learned counsel pointed out that the said position was accepted as being correct by the members of the Appeal Committee in the aforementioned order dated 29.1.85 passed in Appeal No. 13 of 1982.
Learned counsel submitted that in this view of the matter, no illegality has been committed by the learned trial Judge.
In support of his aforementioned submission, learned counsel has relied upon Upendra Pradhan and others v. State of Orissa and others, reported in 1993(3) SCT 512(SC) : AIR 1994 SC 1198, Pulin Behari Maity v. West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and others, reported in 1996(1) CLJ 286 and Basudeb Bag v. Bhaskar Chandra Kar, reported in 1996(3) SCT 476 (Calcutta) : 1996(1) CLJ 230.
6.
The sole question which arises for consideration in this appeal is as to whether by reason of the impugned order dated 22681, whereby and whereunder recognition in respect of the school was granted from 1179, would entitle the appellant to set aside his order of termination and/or acceptance of his resignation, if any.
It is admitted that the school, at the relevant time, was not recognised and the service of the appellant was either dispended with and/or his resignation was accepted as far back as on 25779.
It is, therefore, not in dispute that the relationship of master and servant ceased to have any effect on and from the said date, and it cannot be contended that at the relevant time the appellant was enjoying any status or his services were protected under any statute or statutory rules.
Relationship of the appellant vis-a-vis the Managing Committee was governed by a contract of service which was not enforceable in a court of law and even if the termination of the appellant's service was wrongful or mala fide, the only relief which could be claimed by him was to sue the authorities of the school for damages in view of the provisions contained in section 14(1)(b) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.
A recognition is granted to the school by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
The purpose of recognising a school is well known.
By such recognition, the institution in question becomes entitled to send their students to appear in the examination conducted by the Board as regular students.
Such recognitions are granted under some terms and conditions.
In the instant case, recognition granted was a provisional one and for a period of 3 years only.
Only by reason of such recognition, the school does not become an aided institution.
As and when the school becomes an aided institution, the services of those teachers whose services are approved, are protected under the provision of Rule 28(8) of the said Rules.
As indicated hereinbefore, service of the appellant was approved on the recommendation of the school authorities only for a limited period, namely, from 1779 to 30579.
The effect of such approval is wholly inconsequential.
Approval of teachers who are entitled to protection in terms of Rule 28(8) of the said Rules can be granted to such teachers who were working in the school at the time of grant of such recognition.
There cannot, however, be any doubt that such approval can be granted with retrospective effect.
A recognition is recommended by the Recognition Committee constituted under section 19 of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act.
In terms of section 24 of the said Act, the Board is empowered to constitute various Committees and delegate its powers to perform such function or functions which are assigned to the Board itself.
An order of recognition is passed by the Committee in exercise of its executive power.
A distinction, therefore, must be drawn between retrospective operation in terms of an executive instruction by the Board and a retrospective operation given by a legislature to a statutory enactment.
By reason of statutory enactment, the provisions of an Act can be given retrospective effect and retroactive operation unless the same is ultra vires the Constitution, whereas an executive instruction is prospective in nature as the executive instruction cannot be given a retrospective effect either to confer a new right upon a person which he ceased to have or to take away the liability of a person which had been incurred by the concerned authorities.
An executive instruction or a subordinate legislation can be given a retrospective effect only in the event, thereby any benefit is conferred upon some citizens.
Such a retrospective operation is accepted by the court not because the executive authorities have a power to frame any rule or to pass an order with retrospective effect except in the case of a rule made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, but because having given such benefit upon a class of persons, the State is bound thereby and it cannot make any deviation or departure therefrom.
In Tarun Chakraborty v. State of West Bengal and others., reported in Calcutta Law Times, 1996(2) SCT 799(Calcutta) : 1995(2) HC 309, one of us while considering the effect of instructions issued to the detriment and deprivation of an employee with retrospective effect, held that no such retrospective effect can be granted, but keeping in view the aforementioned dicta it was held:  "There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that an executive instruction unless issued for the benefit of the employees cannot be given retrospective effect and retroactive operation."
7.
The decision of the Supreme Court of India in Lakshmi Narayan Guin and others v. Niranjan Modak, reported in 1985(1) RCR(Rent) 27 : AIR 1985 SC 111, was rendered in a different situation.
In the said case, the Rent Control legislation was not in operation in a particular area, and a decree was passed.
The Rent Control legislation was thereafter made applicable to that area, and in that situation, the Supreme Court held that in view of the clear bar contained in the provisions of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, no decree for eviction can be passed as the tenant is entitled to claim protection in view of the fact that the appeal is a continuation of the suit and the change in law pending any appeal is required to be taken into consideration.
In B Benerjee v. Sm.
Anita Pan, reported in 1975 RCR(Rent) 293 : AIR 1975 SC 1146, a retrospective effect was granted to the Act by inserting section 13(3A) to the original Act.
It was held to be intra vires.
In Sm.
Binapani Kundu and others v. Sm.
Saila Bala Dutta Banik and Others, reported in 1987(2) CHN 328, the Court again was dealing with a provision of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act.
This Court in the aforementioned decision, merely followed the decision of the Supreme Court in Lakshmi Narayan Guin v. Niranjan Modak reported (supra).
As indicated hereinbefore in the aforementioned case, the tenant was protected under the Act, only the operation of the Act was to be extended by way of a notification.
In such a situation, the tenant was held to be protected as the protection of a tenant extended to his eviction except by way of decree passed under the provisions of the said Act.
As the tenant was thus yet to be evicted, the amendment in the Act as also the notification issued extending the operation of the Act to the area in question was held to cover the case.
The said decision, therefore, in our opinion, has no application.
As indicated hereinbefore, the relationship of master and servant by and between the Managing Committee of the school and the appellant ceased to have any effect as far back on 25779.
The appellant accepted the said fact without any demur.
He neither filed any suit nor questioned the said order in any court of law.
Only because the school was recognised with retrospective effect from 1179, he raised a contention that his services were protected under Rule 28(8) of the said Rules.
The Managing Committee of the school while snapping the relationship of master and servant by and between itself and the appellant was not knowing that the school would be recognised, and if so from what date.
At the relevant point of time, they were not bound to follow the said Rules.
Rule 28(8) of the said Rules moreover applies to aided schools or unaided schools.
Rule 28 merely enumerates the power of the Managing Committee.
Sub-rule (8) of Rule 28 while acknowledging the power of the Managing Committee to remove or dismiss permanent or temporary teachers and other employees puts certain restrictions thereupon.
In other words, such order of removal or dismissal of a permanent or temporary employee cannot be passed unless and until the conditions imposed thereby are fulfilled.
Such a condition by way of Sub-rule (8) of Rule 28, could not have been imposed upon the Managing Committee with retrospective effect so as to make the order of termination of the appellant a nullity, Neither such is the intention of the law, nor sub-rule (8) of Rule 28 suggests the same.
As indicated hereinbefore, by reason of an executive instruction, the right of a person cannot be taken away or restricted.
It is in that sense, the executive instruction issued or subordinate legislation so made is prospective in operation unless, in terms of provisions of statute they are entitled to give retrospective effect thereto.
It is only the Perliament or the legislature who can confer a new right upon a citizen or take away any right from a citizen by giving retrospective effect or retroactive operation to a statute or by creating a legal fiction.
Rule 28(8), thus construed, in our considered opinion, cannot take away the right of the Managing Committee so as to set at naught its earlier resolution dated 25779, particularly in view of the fact that at the point of time when such resolution was passed the same was perfectly legal and valid.
It is not and cannot be the case of the appellant that he was appointed in terms of the provisions of a statute.
In fact, the appellant, at the time when he was appointed, was neither appointed upon following the provisions of a statute, nor his services were controlled by any statute or statutory rules.
In the premises aforementioned, we are of the view that while giving a retrospective effect as regards the date of recognition of the school and by granting approval to the appellant for a limited period, namely, from 1779 to 30579, the appellant's service could not have been revived, nor the termination of his services and/or acceptance of his resignation could not be set at naught only because the said order or recognition was given a retrospective effect.
If such a construction is put, the same would render Rule 28(8) ultra vires Articles 14 and 246 of the Constitution of India.
It is now well known that the court, when two interpretations are possible, should adopt such interpretation which could uphold the constitutionality of a law which we have taken becomes clear from the decision of the Supreme Court of India in Upendra Pradhan's case (supra).
In that case, in terms of the provision of section 10A of Orissa Education Act, service of a teacher of a school which was getting grants-in-aid, was protected.
The school was established in the year 1981.
It was recognised in 1983 and brought on grant-in-aid in 1988.
The service of the petitioner in that case, however, was terminated in the year 1986.
Such termination was not approved by the Inspector of Schools.
Since the order not approving termination was not given effect to by the institution the appellants approached the High Court.
The writ petition was dismissed.
The Supreme Court held, since on the date the services of the appellants were terminated the institution was recognised only and not aided the Inspector could not have exercised the power of disapproval.
It was held that consequently no right vested in the appellant which he could get enforced in a court of law.
Even by reason of the retrospective effect given by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education recognising the school provisionally from 1179, the appellant did not deriving any right, inasmuch as, the question of his derive any right would have arisen had he been in service of the school on the date of such recognition.
It will bear repetition to state that as the appellant's services were already terminated, a subsequent protection would not enure to his benefit, nor the same could operate in derogation of the right of the Managing Committee.
In the premises aforementioned, the appellant had no right to prefer any appeal before the Appeal Committee.
The order passed by this court directing the Appeal Committee to re-hear the appeal was, therefore, a nullity and consequently, the order passed by the Appeal Committee was also a nullity.
In Kiran Singh and others v. Chaman Paswan and others, reported in AIR 1954 SC 340, the Supreme Court held:  "The answer to these contentions must depend on what the position in law is when a court entertains a suit or an appeal over which it has no jurisdiction and what the effect of section 11 of the Suits Valuation Act is on that position.
It is a fundamental principle well established that a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction is a nullity and that its invalidity could be set up whenever and wherever it is sought to be enforced or relied upon, even at the stage of execution and even in collateral proceedings.
A defect of jurisdiction, whether it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether it is in respect of the subject-matter of the action, strikes at the very authority of the court to pass any decree, and such a defect cannot be cured even by consent of the parties."
This aspect of the matter has also been considered by this Bench in Basudeb Bag's case (supra).
There are various other decisions on the aforementioned point which have been noticed by this Bench in F.M.A.T.
No. 3158 of 1995 (Jadab Chandra Mukhopadhyay v. State of West Bengal and others), wherein incidentally Mr. Ganguli was appearing for the appellant and advanced the aforementioned contention.
There is another aspect of the matter.
If an illegality committed by this court is brought to its notice, this court in exercise of its inherent power and/or ex debito justitiae can recall the said order, as was done by the Supreme Court in the case of AR Antulay v. RS Nayak reported in AIR 1988 SC 1531.
This aspect of the matter has been considered in details in Jadab Chandra Mukhopadhyay's case (supra).
Mr. Ganguli raised the question of locus standi of the writ petitioners.
The learned trial Judge in his judgment clearly held that the writ petitioners had the locus standi to maintain the writ application.
However, we may consider the said question from another angle.
8.
In the case of Manmohan Singh Jaitha reported in AIR 1985 SC 364, it was held by the Apex Court that while an appeal committee exercises its statutory jurisdiction, it is a tribunal which comes within the purview of the supervisory jurisdiction of this court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
If a tribunal has committed an illegality and/or acted wholly without jurisdiction on an assumption of a non-existent fact or law, in a given case, the court can exercise its suo moto jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India and quash the said proceedings.
In view of our findings aforementioned, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the order impugned in the writ application was wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
The Appeal Committee proceeded on the basis that the purported order of termination of the appellant was not valid owing to non-compliance of Rule 28(8) of the said Rules, which in view of our findings aforementioned, cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
Thus, the order of the said tribunal being a nullity is non est in the eye of law, and by reason thereof the appellant cannot derive any benefit whatsoever.
Such an illegality can attract the suo moto supervisory jurisdiction of this court.
9.
Reliance placed by Mr. Ganguli upon the circular letter dated 1.10.53 is wholly misconceived, inasmuch as, admittedly, at the relevant time, the school being not a recognised school, the circular letter issued by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education will have no effect so far as the appellant vis-a-vis the school authorities are concerned.
In Vidyadhar Pandey v. Vidyut Grih Siksha Samity reported in AIR 1989 SC 341, the Supreme Court merely held that the regulation framed by the Board of Secondary Education has statutory force and the breach of which will entitle the aggrieved employee to get a declaration that the impugned order of termination from service is invalid and illegal and that the employee should be reinstated in service.
No exception to the said decision can be taken.
However, the said decision has no application in the instant case, inasmuch as, as has been held hereinbefore that at the relevant time, the services of the appellant were not protected under a statute.
This aspect of the matter has been dealt with by this court in Ram Saran Shastri v. State of West Bengal reported in 1995(1) CHN 419.
10.
For the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this appeal, which is accordingly dismissed, but in the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.