RL Anand, J - By this judgment we dispose of two civil writ petitions No. 14249 of 1995 and 17385 of 1995, as both of them can be disposed of by one judgment.
2.
In C.W.P.
No. 14249 of 1995 the prayer of the petitioners is that the award to the Labour Court be set aside and it may be held that the services of the workman Rakesh Aggarwal were validly terminated and that he is not entitled to any backwages which have been awarded by the Labour Court in its award dated 5.12.1994.
The prayer of Rakesh Aggarwal petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 17385 of 1995 is that by affirming the findings of the Labour Court, the management be directed to pay full backwages.
3.
Brif facts of the case are that Shri Rakesh Aggarwal was a clerk in the Marked Refind Oil and Allied Industries, Kapurthala - a unit of the Markfed.
He was appointed on 10.1.1977.
He was charge-sheeted on 1251981.
The allegations against the workman were :-  (i) During the course of audit of the cattle feed plant of Markfed Refind Oil & Allied Industries, Kapurthala for the period from June 1979 to July 1980, conducted by the internal audit staff, it has come to light that the figures of production were tampered with and reduced on different dates, details of which are mentioned in the annexure.
In this manner the production had been reduced by you in connivance with Shri Baldev Singh Bimra, Shift Maintenance Incharge, and Shri Jagbir Singh, Sales Assistant, by 240 bags of cattle feed of the value of Rs. 19,040/-.
In this manner the workman allegedly not only misappropriated the aforesaid 240 bags of cattle feed but also tampered with the official record in connivance with each other.
(ii) The second allegation against the workman was that as a result of the checking of the gunny bags issued to the production section, it has been revealed that there was a shortage of 4841 new gunny bags.
As per record, there ought to have been a balance of 7341 new gunny bags, but actually there were only 2500 new gunny bags in the stock of the Production Section and as a result of the aforesaid shortage of 4841 new gunny bags took place.
Apparently, either these new gunny bags were used in taking out the misappropriated stock of cattle feed or these were otherwise taken out surreptitiously and misappropriated, in connivance with each other.
4.
The workman submitted reply to the charge-sheet and it was found unsatisfactory.
Shri JS Sandhu was appointed Inquiry Officer, who in his report found charge No. (i) duly proved against Rakesh Aggarwal, workman (respondent No. 2 in C.W.P.
No. 14249 of 1995) and Jagbir Singh, while Baldev Singh Bimra was found responsible for the supervisory lapse.
Charge No. (ii) was not proved against any of the officials.
Shri Rajan Kashyap, Managing Director of the Markfed, agreed with the said report and vide order dated 2891981 dismissed Rakesh Aggarwal and Jagbir Singh.
The loss which was found to be the tune of Rs. 19,040/- was ordered to be recovered from their dues.
Shri BS Bimra, who was held by the Inquiry Officer to be guilty of supervisory lapse was let off with a warning and he was advised to avoid such lapses in future.
The workman Rakesh Aggarwal filed an appeal, which was dismissed on 19.1.1992.
An industrial dispute was raised by the workman.
He filed a statement of claims before the Labour Court stating that he had no concern with the matter and he was not the incharge of the stock nor he maintained any log book.
He had nothing to do with the gunny bags; that he was only dealing with the preparation of the production record.
According to the workman, the matter of issue and receipt of gunny bags was done directly in the plant by the Godown Keeper.
He was dismissed from service without any proper inquiry.
His guilt was never proved and the principles of natural justice were not followed.
The claim of the workman was resisted by the management and its stand was that Rakesh Aggarwal was a clerk in the unit at Kapurthala and he along with Jagbir Singh and B.S.Birma was charge-sheeted for the acts of misconduct and they allegedly misappropriated the stock and tampered with the record.
The Inquiry Officer gave full opportunity to the workman to produce his defence and the findings were given against the workman.
The punishing authority acted upon the report of the Inquiry Officer and rightly passed the order of dismissal.
It was also pleaded by the management that it reserved the right to substantiate the allegations in the Court.
The claim of the workman is quite stale and is liable to be rejected.
On the above pleadings of the parties, the following preliminary issue was framed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court :-  Whether domestic enquiry conducted by the management is fair and proper and effective ?
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that there was no evidence, whatsoever, of the management before the Inquiry Officer to connect the workman with the alleged lapses in any way.
The issue was decided against the management.
The management also requested the Labour Court to prove the charges attributed to the workman in the Court, but the Labour Court held that on the facts the management does not deserve this concession.
It has already proved its entire evidence before the Inquiry Officer, who gave the finding contrary to the evidence while dismissing the plea of defence.
Now the management cannot be allowed to improve its case.
Finally the reference of the workman was accepted and his dismissal order dated 2891981 was set aside and declaration was given by the Labour Court that the workman is entitled to be reinstated into service with continuity of service.
Further it was ordered that he shall be paid half of the wages from the date of dismissal and full backwages from the date of the passing of the award dated 5.12.1994.
Finding was also given by the Labour Court that since the Inquiry Officer deliberately gave wrong findings against the workman and the Managing Director has accepted the same without applying his mind and without giving a notice of hearing to the workman, therefore, the Markfed shall recover the arrears of the backwages of the workman concerned from Shri Rajan Kashyap, the then Managing Director, and from Shri JS Sandhu, Inquiry Officer, and the amount of the wages shall not be debited in the account of the Marked.
Before we enter into the argument raised by the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the considered view that the order of the Labour Court, when it directed that the recovery of the arrears of the wages would be effected from Shri Rajan Kashyap, the then Managing Director, and from Shri JS Sandhu, cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
These findings have been given beyond the scope of the reference made to the Labour Court nor the Labour Court was so competent under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') to pass such orders.
Otherwise also before passing the impugned orders, the principles of natural justice have been violated by the Labour Court.
Sarvshri Rajan Kashyap, the then Managing Director, and JS Sandhu, Inquiry Officer, were never heard before passing that order, nor these persons were party to the reference before the Labour Court.
In this view of the matter, we hold that the above observations of the Labour Court were beyond its scope and its cannot be acted upon.
5.
We have heard Shri DV Sharma, Advocate, on behalf of the management, and Shri Pawan Kumar, Advocate, on behalf of the workman, and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
Shri Sharma took lots of pains and argued at length in order to convince us that the Labour Court has misread the evidence recorded by the Inquiry Officer as well as the evidence led by the parties before him.
The charges against the workman stood proved and it was not within the scope of the Labour Court to sit as a Court of Appeal.
The findings of the Inquiry Officer were not perverse nor from any stretch of imagination it can be said that those were without any basis.
The Labour Court has wrongly held that there was not an iota of evidence to connect Mr. Rakesh Aggarwal (the workman) with the alleged embezzlement on charge No. (i).
The findings of the Inquiry Officer have been rightly accepted by the punishing authority and, therefore, the award of the Labour Court is liable to the set aside.
The second leg of his argument was that the management was entitled to lead evidence before the Labour Court in order to support the charges.
The Labour Court has not given the opportunity to the management to lead the evidence and this had led to miscarriage of justice.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the workman submitted that the award is based on the appreciation of evidence led before the Inquiry Officer and before the Labour Court.
Even if there is a wrong appreciation of evidence by the Labour Court, the award cannot be set aside.
The findings of the Inquiry Officer as well as of the punishing authority were not only erroneous but without any basis and, therefore, the award cannot be interfered.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the workman that once the Labour Court has rejected the evidence of the management and once the workman has been reinstated into service, ordinarily he is entitled to full backwages and the Labour Court made an erroneous approach when it awarded backwages at the rate of 50%.
6.
After considering rival contentions of the parties, we are of the considered view that both the writ petitions are liable to be dismissed.
The gravamen of charge No. (i) against the workman was that he tampered with the figures of production by reducing them on different dates shown in the annexure.
He tampered with the figures in connivance with Jagbir Singh, Sales Assistant, and BS Bimra, by 240 bags of cattle feed valued at Rs. 19,040/- and in this manner the workman not only misappropriated 240 bags of the cattle feed, but also tempered with the official record.
The Labour Court was not supposed to look into the sufficiency of evidence, nor it is in our domain to sit over as a Court of Appeal over the award of the Labour Court.
We have only to see whether the approach of the Labour Court to the evidence led by the management before the Inquiry Officer was palpably illegal.
If the evidence led by the management before the Inquiry Officer has been evaluated by the Labour Court, though erroneously, it is not a good ground for setting aside the award.
We have to see whether the Labour Court had exceeded its jurisdiction, as argued by the learned counsel appearing for the management, and if the answer is in the negative, we are left with no other option but to uphold the award when the Labour Court gives the finding that the finding of the Inquiry Officer was based on no evidence.
We have considered the evidence of the management and have come to the conclusion that it was not proved at all before the Inquiry Officer too that the alleged alteration in the record of the management was made by the workman.
Even the witnesses examined by the management before the Inquiry Officer have not deposed that the interpolations were in the hands of the workman.
Shri Vinod Goyal, Accountant, deposed in his statement before the Inquiry Officer that he did not see any order as to what was the duty of the workman but he was told that the workman was to record the daily production.
This can be safely said that the evidence of Vinod Goyal before the Inquiry Officer was based on hearsay and that he had no knowledge about the nature of the duties to be performed by the workman and whether the alleged cuttings were in his hand or not.
Similarly, Shri Ajit Singh, Operator, admitted in his cross-examination before the Inquiry Officer that over-writing in shift 'A' on 2131979 was done by him and that he did not initial the over-writing.
Similarly, the overwriting in shift 'B' on 1111981 was in his hand but without his initial.
Chhinder Masih the witness who was examined by the management also admitted that the overwriting in the production figure of shift 'B' on 2211981 at page 22 was done by him and that he did not initial the same.
Shri KS Nijjar, with whom the workman was attached, deposed that the duty of the workman was to prepare the returns and that he was to note down the production figures from the log book of all the plants but in the cross-examination he stated that the log book of cattle feed remained in the cabin of BS Bimra near the plant.
Shri KS Nijjar also stated that the workman had pointed out to him about the cuttings/overwritings in the production figures in the log book.
The learned Labour Court while giving the final judgment, rightly came to the conclusion that it was not the duty of the workman to maintain a log book and cuttings/overwritings in the entries made therein were not done by him.
Further we are in agreement with the observations of the Labour Court when it held that the Inquiry Officer himself took interest and he cross-examined the witnesses in order to show his anxiety in favour of the management.
Shri DV Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the management, relied much on the statement of shri Vinod Goyal, Accountant Internal Audit, and submitted that from his statement it can be safely held that there was enough evidence before the Inquiry Officer to reach a conclusion that the workman tampered with the figures and that he along with two others connived for causing loss to the management with respect to charge No. (i).
This aspect of the case was also considered by the Labour Court and it will not be proper on our part to interfere into the findings of the learned Labour Court unless it is shown that the findings were patently  perverse and without jurisdiction.
Even if the Labour Court is in error in appreciating the factual position regarding the sufficiency of the evidence whether the allegations have been proved or not, this Court while exercising the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, would not be justified in interfering into the same.
After the orders of dismissal of the workman, the management itself raised a dispute under Sections 55 and 56 of the Cooperative Societies Act before the Deputy Registrar for the recovery of Rs. 19,040/-.
In those proceedings the workman was completely exonerated and it was held in those proceedings that the workman was merely an office clerk and that the log book in question was not in the custody of the workman and that it was in the plant.
Also it was held in those proceedings that the duty of the workman was to collect those figures kept in the plant and that he was not connected with the alleged shortage of production.
Rather, the responsibility was fixed upon Shri BS Bimra, Production Incharge, and Shri Jagbir Singh, Store Keeper, who were responsible for the maintenance of the record and the log book.
The recovery proceedings were dismissed vis-a-vis the workman.
Rather a finding was given by the Deputy Registrar that the Inquiry Officer misconducted himself when he cross-examined most of the witnesses.
All these factors were considered by the learned Labour Court while passing the award and then it rightly came to the conclusion that there was no sufficiency of evidence before the Inquiry Officer when he returned the findings on Charge No. (i) against the workman.
When totally erroneous and patently wrong approach was adopted by the Inquiry Officer, the Labour Court was well justified in declaring that the inquiry conducted by the management against the workman stood vitiated and set aside the same.
The counsel for the management cited The Cooper Engineering Ltd v. PP Mundhe, AIR 1975 SC 1900, and argued that the Labour Court erred when it did not give opportunity to the management to adduce evidence when it held that the inquiry conducted by the Inquiry Officer stood vitiated.
The authority relied upon by the learned counsel for the management is not applicable to the facts in hand.
The Labour Court has rightly observed that it has perused the entire evidence before the Inquiry Officer, who returned the findings which are contrary to the evidence and wrongly dismissed the plea of the defence.
The management could not improve its case before the Labour Court.
Shri DV Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the management, also relied upon Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co v. Ludh Budh Singh, AIR 1972 SC 1031, where it was held as follows :-  "The jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal is only to satisfy itself whether a prima facie case has been made out by the employer and that the employer has not acted mala fide and that the inquiry has been held in accordance with the principles of natural justice and the procedure indicated in the Standing Orders, if any.
If once the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the management has not acted mala fide and that there has been a proper enquiry and that the conclusion arrived at by the Inquiry Officer is a possible one on the evidence led before it, the Tribunal cannot substitute its own judgment for the judgment of the Enquiry Officer, though it may have come to a different conclusion on the evidence adduced before the Enquiry Officer.
"The findings of the Enquiry Officer dealing with disciplinary proceedings can be interfered with, where the findings are not based on legal evidence or are such as no reasonable person could have arrived at on basis of the material before the Tribunal."
"A finding recorded by an Enquiry Officer ignoring the material admissions made by a party in favour of the workman, is not a question of mere appreciation of evidence, but really recording a finding contrary to the evidence adduced before him."
"When allegations of misconduct are levelled against a person, it is the primary duty of the person making those allegations to establish the same and not for an accused to adduce negative evidence to the effect that he is not guilty.
Thus in respect of charges of obstructing the mill workers and destroying mill property, the Inquiry Officer commits mistake when he proceeds on the basis that as the workman has not adduced any evidence in his defence, it is not open to him to contend that he was not responsible for the acts of obstruction and damages.
Held, on facts, that the Industrial Tribunal was perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion that the enquiry proceedings were vitiated by violation of the principles of natural justice and that the management had not made out a prima facie case for grant of the permission to dismiss the workman."
This authority is also not favourable to the management.
Equally it was held in this authority that when the findings of the Inquiry Officer are not based on legal evidence or are such as no reasonable person could have arrived at on the basis of material before the Tribunal, such disciplinary proceedings can be interfered with by the Labour Court.
The Labour Court after appreciating the evidence led by the management came to the conclusion that the findings of the Inquiry Officer were based on wrong appreciation of the evidence led before him causing prejudice to the workman.
The Inquiry Officer was showing extra interest for the management when he assumed the role of a prosecutor.
In this view of the matter, we do not see any merit in Civil Writ Petition No14249 of 1995 and the same is hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
7.
Reverting to Civil Writ Petition No. 17285 of 1995, filed by the workman, who relied upon Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 PLR 720, where it was held that ordinarily a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
There is no dispute with the proposition of law laid down by this Court.
It was also laid down in this very authority that the Labour Court can deviate from the normal rule of full backwages by establishing the circumstances necessitating its departure.
No doubt no such reasons have been given by the Labour Court in its award, but we cannot lose sight of the fact that the workman raised the industrial issue in the year 1984, after about three years of his dismissal which took place on 2891981.
Therefore, we are not inclined to interfere with the findings of the Labour Court when it awarded the backwages at the rate of 50% to the workman from the date of his dismissal till the passing of the award.
The Labour Court also awarded full backwages from the date of the passing of the award.
8.
The net result is that both the writ petitions fail and are I hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
9.
Even at the cost of repetition, we are observing that the observations of the Labour Court, when it directed the recovery of wages from Shri Rajan Kashyap and Shri JS Sandhu, shall cease to exist and would be considered as non-operative.