GS Singhvi, J - All these petitions have been filed for issue of mandamus to the respondents to give an opportunity to the petitioners to revise their option for fixation of their pay under the Revised Pay Rules.
2.
Petitioner Nand Lal and thirty others who have jointly filed Civil Writ Petition No 18380 of 1994 were/are working as Art and Craft Teachers, physical Training Instructors, Social Studies Masters, Lecturers, Drawing Teachers and Language Teachers in the Government Senior Secondary, High and Middle Schools in the State of Punjab.
They became entitled to have their pay fixed under the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988, which were promulgated by the Punjab Government vide notification dated 991988.
The mode of fixation of pay was specified in the Rules and all the existing employees were given opportunity to exercise the option under Rule 5 of the 1988 Rules.
The petitioners exercised their option under Rule 5 and accordingly their pays were fixed.
3.
The petitioners and others had also filed cases before this Court for grant of selection grade and on the basis of decision of this Court, the petitioners were given the benefit of selection grade as would appear from the letter dated 1451993 written by the District Education Officer (Schools)' Patiala to the Principals/Head Masters/Head Mistresses of Government Senior Secondary/ High Schools, Patiala.
The petitioners represented the Government for being allowed to exercise their option afresh but the departmental authorities did not take any action for permitting the petitioners to exercise revised option.
The petitioners have claimed that in Civil Writ Petition No 2587 of 1994 (Haranbir Singh v. State of Punjab and others) this Court has accepted the claim made by the similarly situated persons and, therefore, they should also be given an opportunity to exercise their revised option.
4.
Sadhu Singh and 52 others who have jointly filed Civil Writ Petition No 4197 of 1995 have made a similar claim.
They too gave their option as per the provisions of 1988 Rules but in view of the grant of selection grade on the basis of the orders passed by this Court, the petitioners have made a claim for grant of selection grade.
The petitioners have relied on the order passed by this Court in L.P.A. No. 135 of 1986 and the order dated 18.5.1993 passed by the District Education Officer (s), Sangrur for grant of selection grade.
According to the petitioners, a Division Bench has upheld the judgment of the learned Single Judge while dismissing the L.P.A. No. 135 of 1986 vide order dated 15.1.1990 and, therefore, after having got the benefit of selection grade, the petitioners are entitled to be given the benefit of revised option.
5.
Civil Writ Petition No 13604 of 1995 has been filed by Harnaik Singh and nine others.
All the petitioners are working as Classical and Vernacular Teachers/Language Teachers/ Physical Training Instructors/Drawing Teachers in the Education Department of the Government of Punjab.
They too have claimed relief similar to the relief claimed by the petitioners of two other petitions on the ground that they have been given selection grade by order dated 8121993 in view of the judgment of the Court and, therefore, they have acquired a legal and vested right to be permitted to exercise their revised option.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record of the case.
There is no controversy between the parties on the facts that the petitioners have given their option after coming into force the 1988 Rules regarding revision of pay-scales.
Parties are also not in dispute that the petitioners were given the benefit of selection grade in pursuance of the order passed by the High Court and thereafter they moved the departmental authorities for revision of their option.
The controversy is whether on the basis of the grant of selection grade to them after exercise of option under the Rules of 1988, the petitioners have become entitled to be given an opportunity to revise their option for fixation of pay under the Rules of 1988.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have argued that the petitioners had exercised their option in a particular state of things when they had not been given the benefit of selection grade and, therefore, after the grant of selection grade, the petitioners should be granted an opportunity to revise their option.
Learned counsel submitted that if the petitioners had been given selection grade prior to coming into force of the 1988 Rules and they had exercised option under those Rules, it may not have been possible for them to revise their option but as the selection grade has been granted to the petitioners in the years 1992-93, they have a legitimate claim to be permitted to revise their option.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that option once exercised by an employee under the revised Rules is final and cannot be re-opened.
8.
Although it is true that the petitioners had exercised their option after coming into force the Rules of 1988, but due to changed circumstances, the petitioners became entitled to be given an opportunity to revise their option.
A similar claim was made by the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No 2587 of 1994 (S Karanvir Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another).
While accepting the writ petition, the Court noted that the persons similarly situated, namely, Shri Gurmit Singh and Smt. Ramesh Kumari were allowed to change their option by government by exercise of the power under Rule 12 of the 1988 Rules.
After taking note of the action of the departmental authorities, the Court held :-  "Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and after going through their pleadings, we find that similarly situated employees like the petitioners were allowed to change their options on the ground that the earlier option exercised by them was resulting in hardship and financial loss to them.
There was no justification on the part of the respondents in discriminating the petitioners and not allowing them to change the option when the same relief was given to others who were similarly placed."
On the basis of above conclusion, the Court directed the respondents to permit the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No 2587 of 1994 to change their option in the revised pay-scale after relaxing the existing Rule as was done in the cases of Shri Gurmit Singh and Smt. Ramesh Kumari.
9.
When other similarly situated persons have been given permission to revise their option either by exercise of power under Rule 12 to relax the provisions of 1988 Rules or under the Court orders, there remains no justification for not giving similar opportunity to the petitioners.
As a welfare State, it was expected of the Government to have given similar opportunity to those employees who got benefit of the selection grade after they had exercised their option under the Rules of 1988.
In their cases also due to the changed circumstances, namely, grant of selection grade after they had exercised option under 1988 Rules, financial hardship would be suffered by them and, therefore, the Government should have exercised the power under Rule 12 in all similar cases instead of compelling the individuals to approach the Court for issue of similar direction.
In our opinion, failure of the respondents to pass appropriate order permitting the petitioners to revise their option is without any justification.
It must, therefore, be held that the petitioners have been discriminated vis-a-vis similarly situated persons.
10.
In the result, all the writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to allow the petitioners to revise their option under the Rules of 1988.
If for this purpose, it becomes necessary the Government should pass order under Rule 12 for relaxation of relevant Rule regarding exercise of option and its finality.
Necessary order should be passed by the competent authority within three months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
11.
Keeping in view the fact that there may be many other similarly situated persons, we deem it proper to direct the respondents in general and respondent No. 2 in particular to give similar opportunity to exercise revised option to other persons so that they may not be compelled to approach this Court and thereby unnecessarily add to the increasing number of cases.
Such a course would also be in a large public interest and would save public exchequer from the expenses etc. which are required to be incurred for defending the cases in the Court.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.