NK Sodhi, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is directed against the award dated April 1, 1991 passed by the Labour Court, Chandigarh whereby the reference made at the instance of the Pest Control Workers Union on behalf of Diwan Singh respondent (for short, the workman) was answered in favour of the latter and the order reverting him to the post of sanitary supervisor quashed.
2.
The workman was employed as a Sanitary Beldar in the office of Director Health Services (Anti Malaria Department) Chandigarh and on the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee he was promoted to the post of Sanitary Supervisor on ad hoc basis on May 16, 1986.
It is claimed that though the official gave no cause for complaint to the authorities yet by an order dated May 14, 1987 he was reverted to the post of Sanitary Jamadar/Belder without any cogent reasons.
This act of the department was challenged by the workman through the workers' union alleging the same to be illegal, arbitrary and unjustified, amounting to unfair labour practice.
A notice of demand was served by the Union and the dispute raised was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court-respondent under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act).
The prayer made by the union was that the workman be promoted to the post of Sanitary Supervisor with effect from the date when he was reverted.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the department, an objection was taken that it was not an 'Industry' within the meaning of the Act.
It was also pleaded that the workman had been promoted on ad hoc basis and, therefore, it was not incumbent upon the department to issue any show cause notice to him before reverting him to his substantive post.
It was further pleaded that the workman was not qualified to hold the post of Sanitary Supervisor.
According to the management the qualification prescribed for the post is that the incumbent should be Matric withe Science subjects and since the workman had qualified in the Prathma examination conducted by the Hindi Sahitya Samelan, Allahabad which has not been recognised as equivalent to Matric by the Chandigarh Administration the former was not eligible.
It was also averred that on receipt of a complaint from some of the employees of the department regarding ineligibility of the workman, the matter was referred to the School Education of UP Board, Allahabad in order to ascertain whether the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan was recognised by that Board.
The Administration received an intimation from the School Education Board, UP that the Prathma examination had not been recognised by the UP Board as equivalent to its High School Education.
It appears that since the School Education Board UP had not recognised the Prathma examination as equivalent to its High School Education, the Chandigarh Administration also did not recognise it as equivalent to Matric.
From the pleadings of the parties, the Labour Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the respondent is not an industry ?
OPM 2.
Whether the demands mentioned in the demand notice dated August 28, 1987 are genuine and justified ?
If so, to what effect and to what relief, the union is entitled to, if any ?
OPW 3.
Relief.
Issue 1 was not pressed before the Labour Court and consequently the same was decided in favour of the workman and against the management.
In support of issue 2 the workman and the union led evidence to show that the Prathma examination conducted by the Hindi Sahitya Samelan, Allahabad had been recognised as equivalent to Matric standard by the Punjab School Education Board.
Exhibit A-1 is the document on record in this regard.
Similarly the Panjab University, Chandigarh has also recognised this examination as equivalent to Matric.
Exhibit A-2 is a letter issued by the Registrar of the University in this regard.
The Panjab University has recognised the Prathma examination conducted by the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan as equivalent to 'Rattan' examination which in turn is equivalent to Matric.
However, the School Education Board of UP has not recognised the said examination as equivalent to its High School Education.
The Labour Court relying on Exhibits A-1 and A-2 concluded that since the Punjab School Education Board and the Panjab University, Chandigarh had recognised the Prathma examination as equivalent to their Matric examination, therefore, the said examination stood recognised as equivalent to Matric by the Chandigarh Administration and consequently held that the workman was eligible for the post of Sanitary Supervisor.
The Labour Court further held that while reverting the workman to the post of Sanitary Beldar he was not given any notice and the principles of natural justice thus stood violated.
The order of reversion dated May 14, 1987 was set aside and issue 2 was decided in favour of the workman and against the management.
Consequently, the reference was also answered in favour of the workman and the department was directed to promote him to the post of Sanitary Supervisor from the date when he was reverted with other consequential benefits, if any.
It is this award of the Labour Court that has been impugned in the present writ petition.
4.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Labour Court grossly erred in law in quashing the order of reversion because the workman was not eligible for the post of Sanitary Supervisor as he was not Matric.
There is merit in this contention.
Admittedly the workman had passed the Prathma examination conducted by the Hindi Sahitya Samelan, Allahabad.
This qualification has been recognised by some of the institutions like the Panjab University, Chandigarh and the Punjab School Education Board as equivalent to their Matric examination while some other institutions like the School Education Board UP has not so recognised the degree.
It is not the case of the workman that the Chandigarh Administration which has prescribed Matric as the qualification for the post of Sanitary Supervisor has recognised the equivalence of the degree with Matric.
The Labour Court has set aside the impugned order of reversion merely because the Prathma degree has been recognised by the Panjab University and the Punjab School Education Board but has failed to appreciate that unless the Chandigarh Administration also recognises the degree as equivalent to Matric the workman cannot be said to be qualified for the post.
The approach of the Labour Court is wholly erroneous and the finding recorded by it cannot thus be sustained.
5.
Mr. Gupta learned counsel for the workman contended that this Court should direct the Chandigarh Administration to recognise the Prathma degree as equivalent to Matric and treat the petitioner as qualified for the post.
I am afraid this cannot be done.
Each University or institution has to decide the question of equivalence at its own level and the Court cannot issue any directions in this regard nor can it sit in judgment over any such decision.
The reason is obvious.
The question of equivalence is a matter which has to be examined and decided by the experts and academicians having regard to the courses, the syllabus, the quality of teaching or instruction and the standard of examination etc. and since the Court does not possess the necessary expertise, it is not proper for it to issue any such directions.
It is understandable if there had been any rule requiring the Administration to recognise the degrees of particular institutions including that of the Hindi Sahitya Samelan, Allahabad but it is not the case here.
It must, therefore, be held that the workman was not eligible for the post and that the Administration was justified in reverting him to his substantive post.
6.
The other ground on which the Labour Court quashed the order of reversion was that the workman had not been issued any notice before the order of reversion was passed and, therefore, the rules of natural justice stood violated.
It is so.
But since I have held that the workman was not eligible for the post no useful purpose would be served in quashing the order and sending the case back to the Administration to decide afresh after affording him an opportunity of hearing.
The hearing to be afforded would be a mere formality in the circumstances of the present case because the workman is in fact ineligible.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned award of the Labour Court set aside.
It is held that the order of reversion passed by the competent authority was valid and justified and did not call for any interference.
There is no order as to costs.