GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves a challenge to the disciplinary action taken against the petitioner by the Government of Haryana, which culminated in imposition of penalty of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect and other service disabilities upon him.
The petitioner has challenged the charge sheet, Annexure P3, show cause notice Annexure P6, order of punishment Annexure P10 and the order of revisional authority Annexure P12 and has prayed that these orders be quashed and consequential benefits be given to him.
2.
While he was working as Sub Divisional Engineer, Public Works Department, Public Health Branch, the petitioner was served with a memo dated 2651986 for holding an enquiry against him under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
This was followed by an order dated 1.7.1986 whereby the petitioner was suspended during the pendency of the enquiry.
The Government appointed Shri MS Miglani, Superintending Engineer as enquiry officer.
Shri Miglani submitted his report dated 1811989.
This was followed by a show cause notice dated 27.9.1989 (Annexure P6) whereby the Government proposed imposition of penalty of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect and for treating the suspension period as not spent on duty and also for withholding of payment of salary of the suspension period except the subsistence allowance which had already been paid.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply dated 6/8.1.1990 and finally the Government passed order Annexure P10 dated 3091991 and imposed the penalties proposed earlier.
The petitioner appealed against the order of punishment vide Annexure P11 dated 28121991 but the same has been dismissed by a cryptic order dated 1131992 (Annexure P12).
3.
Even before the imposition of the punishment, the petitioner instituted C.W.P.
No. 5581 for issue of a mandamus to the respondents to pay him subsistence allowance including the enhanced subsistence allowance.
This petition was allowed by the High Court on 2811989 with a finding that the withholding of the subsistence allowance was wholly unjustified.
The Court passed the following order :  "Two claims were made in this petition.
One was that the subsistence allowance has not been paid for one year and, second, that the petitioner was entitled to an increase of fifty per cent in the subsistence allowance after six months.
Subsistence allowance has since been paid.
Regarding the second claim, the defence set up is that it was because of non-cooperation of the petitioner that the enquiry could not be completed within six months.
From the catalogue of the dates we find that it was the petitioner who did not attend on majority of the dates.
He was, however, justified in not attending the enquiry proceedings as admittedly the subsistence allowance was not paid to him.
The department, therefore, was not justified in denying him fifty per cent increase in the subsistence allowance.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed and the order dated March 24, 1987 denying the petitioner fifty per cent increase in the subsistence allowance is quashed.
The respondents are further directed to allow the petitioner increased subsistence allowance after the expiry of six months, as stated above.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are assessed at Rs.
1000/-."
4.
The impugned charge sheet, show cause notice, order of punishment and the order of revisional authority have been challenged on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice, arbitrariness and unfairness.
5.
The respondents have opposed the writ petition by pleading that a proper enquiry was held against the petitioner and he was given full opportunity of defence but he did not avail the same and did not appear before the enquiry officer compelling him to proceed ex parte.
The respondents have further pleaded that the petitioner has been punished for proved acts of delinquency and, therefore, this Court should not exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
6.
The first contention urged by learned counsel for the petitioner is that the initiation of enquiry against the petitioner after a lapse of almost one decade from the year of incidence should by itself be sufficient to quash the charge sheet.
7.
The second contention of Shri Jagia is that the enquiry officer was not justified in proceeding ex parte against the petitioner.
He submitted that the petitioner could not appear in the enquiry due to the non-payment of the subsistence allowance.
Learned counsel contended that the enquiry officer has acted in gross violation of the principles of natural justice by holding enquiry against the petitioner ignoring the fact that the Government had not paid him the subsistence allowance.
8.
The third contention of Shri Jagia is that the orders passed by the punishing authority and the revisional authority are non-speaking orders and, therefore, they are liable to be voided on that ground alone.
9.
Shri RN Raina, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, on the other hand, argued that the Government's power to initiate enquiry against a delinquent employee is unlimited and mere delay in the initiation of the enquiry cannot be a ground to quash it, particularly when the petitioner did not appear in the enquiry.
Shri Raina submitted that the petitioner was not at all justified in not appearing in the enquiry on the plea of non-payment of subsistence allowance.
According to the learned Deputy Advocate General, the petitioner is to blame himself for non-appearing in the enquiry and the enquiry officer was left with no option but to proceed ex parte.
It has further been submitted by Shri Raina that the punishing authority and the revisional authority have considered various aspects of the case while punishing the petitioner and while rejecting his revision petition and the orders Annexure P10 and P12 cannot be quashed merely because the concerned authorities have not passed the orders in the form of a judgment.
10.
In regard to the first contention of Shri Jagia pertaining to the delay in initiation of the enquiry, I am of the opinion that in the absence of any proof of prejudice suffered by the petitioner due to the time gap between the date of alleged delinquency and the initiation of the enquiry, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of Shri Jagia that the enquiry proceedings should be declared as arbitrary and should be quashed on the ground of delay alone.
11.
The second contention of Shri Jagia relates to the holding of ex parte enquiry by the enquiry officer.
A look at the report of the enquiry officer shows that the petitioner had made a grievance of non-payment of the subsistence allowance by the Department and his inability to participate in the enquiry due to financial difficulties.
This is evident from the following observations of the enquiry officer :  "On both these occasions, Shri RK Goel made the submission that he is not paid the subsistence allowance by the Department and because of the financial difficulties, he was not able to participate in the enquiry proceedings against him."
Not only that the petitioner had expressed his inability to appear before the enquiry officer due to non-payment of subsistence allowance, I find that he had moved this court by filing CWP No. 5581 of 1987 and this Court upheld his claim for payment of the subsistence allowance.
The observations made by this Court that the petitioner was justified in not attending the enquiry proceedings on account of non-payment of subsistence allowance, have acquired finailty.
Therefore, there is no escape from the conclusion that the action of the enquiry officer in holding ex parte proceedings against the pertitioner is vitiated due to the violation of the principles of natural justice.
It is a case in which the delinquent, namely, the petitioner was prevented from attending the enquiry due to omission of the Department to pay him the subsistence allowance.
It is, therefore, clear that the petitioner was not to be blamed for not attending the enquiry.
This being the position, all other actions taken by the respondents, namely, the finalisation of the enquiry proceedings, issue of show cause notice and imposition of punishment on the petitioner will be deemed to have been vitiated.
12.
In Ghansham Dass Srivastava v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1973 SC 1183, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have laid down the proposition of law that when an employee is placed under suspension it is the duty of the employer to pay him the subsistence allowance and if the employee fails to attend the enquiry due to paucity of funds resulting from non-payment of the subsistence allowance and the enquiry is held ex parte, the action of the Government would stand vitiated.
In that case also, the delinquent had specifically communicated his inability to attend the enquiry due to paucity of funds.
He challenged his dismissal before the High Court but could not succeed.
A constitution bench of the Supreme Court upheld his claim by observing that the action taken against the appellant was contrary to the principles of natural justice.
13.
Apart from the legal principle enunciated by the Supreme Court, I find that even on facts the aforementioned decision is fully applicable to the case of the petitioner.
The petitioner had also expressed his inability to appear in the enquiry proceedings due to non-payment of the subsistence allowance.
He had also filed writ petition and questioned the action of the respondents in withholding his subsistence allowance and this Court upheld his claim.
In view of this, it is held that the enquiry proceedings held against the petitioner are vitiated due to the patent violation of the principles of natural justice.
14.
The argument of the learned counsel regarding invalidity of the orders passed by the disciplinary authority and the revisional authority also merit acceptance.
Perusal of order Annexure P10 shows that after making reference to the factum of initiation of enquiry and quoting the charges levelled against the petitioner, the disciplinary authority referred to the fact that the second show cause notice along with the enquiry report has been served upon the delinquent.
Reference has then been made to the reply of the petitioner and thereafter the disciplinary authority straghtway concluded that the work had been got done after the receipt of the complaint to cover the lapse.
The relevant abstract of the order Annexure P10 which is quoted below will show the total non-consideration by the disciplinary authority of the various points raised by the petitioner in his reply to the show cause notice :-  "After considering the enquiry report the second Show Cause Notice along with the enquiry report of the Enquiry Officer had been served upon Sh. RK Goel, Sub Divisional Engineer vide Govt.
Memorandum No. 4/27/86- PH(1) dated 27989.
In this respect Sh. RK Goel submitted his defence reply.
The defence reply submitted by Sh. RK Goel, Sub Divisional Engineer and enquiry report submitted by the enquiry offcer were carefully examined and found that the work had been got done after receipt of complaint to cover the lapse.
After taking a lenient view in the matter it has been decided in consultation with Haryana Public Service Commission that following penalties be imposed upon Shri RK Goel.
(a) Stoppage of the two annual increments with cumulative effect.
(b) His suspension period may not be treated as duty.
(c) That for the suspension period Sh. RK Goel, will not be paid anything other than subsistence allowance.
Consequently, the Governor of Haryana is pleased to impose the following penalties upon Sh. RK Goel, PWD, Public Branch.
(a) Stoppage of the two annual increments with cumulative effect.
(b) His suspension period may not be treated as duty.
(c) That for the suspension period Sh. RK Goel will not be paid anything other than subsistence allowance."
If this order is considered in the light of the document Annexure P7 which is the reply filed by the petitioner (running into eight typed pages) in response to the show cause notice, it is clear that the disciplinary authority has miserably failed to apply its mind to the various important points raised by the petitioner.
In his reply, the petitioner had pointed out that the enquiry officer had relied on the log book which was never produced before him.
He further pointed out that the enquiry officer did not keep in mind the fact that the loss of quotations had taken place after his transfer on 661977.
He also stated that the enquiry officer ignored the material evidence, namely, the statement of Head Clerk Shri Som Nath Malik.
Similarly, he pointed out that the enquiry officer ignored the statement of Shri K.L.
Sehgal.
The petitioner stated that the findings recorded by the enquiry officer were perverse.
He further submitted that the enquiry proceedings were held without giving him a reasonable opportunity of defence and that there was no justification for the enquiry officer to have proceeded ex parte even when the Department had not paid him the subsistence allowance and had successfully prevented him from attending the enquiry due to financial constraints.
None of these points have been dealt with by the desciplinary authority.
The perusal of the impugned order leaves no manner of doubt that disciplinary authority has decided the matter with closed mind and has recorded one line conclusion that the work had been got done after the receipt of the complaint to cover the lapse.
The manner in which the disciplinary authority has passed the order of punishment leaves much to be desired.
15.
Even Shri Raina did not dispute that the punishing authority was exercising quasi judicial powers while passing the order of punishment.
Therefore, it must be held that it was obligatory for the punishing authority to have passed a reasoned order.
The requirement of passing of a reasoned order/speaking order is a part and parcel of the requirements of the natural justice and, therefore, when it is said that an order is non-speaking order it is implicit in it that the order is contrary to the principles of natural justice.
To be a speaking order, the order in question must contain reasons indicating the objective application of the mind by the quasi judicial authority to the subject matter placed before it, the material placed by the contesting parties and it should also be indicated in to what manner the quasi judicial authority has dealt with the matter.
Recording of one line conslusion like the one in the present case cannot be a substitute for speaking order.
The order passed by the disciplinary authority does not contain even a single word to the effect that the disciplinary authority has considered the various objections raised by the petitioner in his reply to the show cause notice and did not find any merit in any of them.
Rather there is a casual mention of the reply filed by the petitioner and its perfunctory examination by the disciplinary authority.
This, in my opinion, is nothing more than the use of a stock phrase by the disciplinary authority and the impugned order cannot in any manner be termed as one satisfying the requirements of the principles of natural justice.
16.
Shri Raina's argument that the disciplinary authority is not required to pass a reasoned order where it issues a show cause notice after accepting the findings of the enquiry officer now deserves to be considered.
17.
In disciplinary matters where an order is passed by the disciplinary authority after considering the report of the enquiry officer who is other than the disciplinary authority, it is always necessary for the disciplinary authority to give a copy of the enquiry report to the delinquent and call upon him to make his representation against the findings recorded by the enquiry officer.
At that stage, the delinquent is in a position to point out the irregularities/illegalities committed in the holding of the enquiry.
He can also point out that the enquiry officer did not consider the material evidence or that it considered irrelevant and extraneous material.
The delinquent can show that the enquiry proceedings have been held in violation of principles of natural justice.
He can also show that appreciation of evidence made by the enquiry officer is not correct or that the findings recorded by the enquiry officer are perverse.
All such objections are required to be considered and analysed by the disciplinary authority before it can pass an order of punishment.
18.
If the Court was to accept the argument of Shri Raina that the disciplinary authority is not required to record reasons while awarding punishment, the requirement of giving a copy of the enquiry report to the delinquent or show cause notice for punishment, where such requirement is still contemplated by the rules, would be reduced to an empty formality.
In that event, the making of representation by the delinquent against the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer and the finding recorded by him would become meaningless.
If only acceptance of the enquiry report can be treated as sufficient for awarding punishment, there is no logic in laying down the requirement of giving a copy of the enquiry report and/or giving the show cause notice regarding punishment as a part of the compliance of principles of natural justice.
I, therefore, do not find any substance in the contention of Shri Raina that it was not necessary for the disciplinary authority to record reasons in support of its order.
19.
The law on the subject of speaking order is well settled by now.
In matters relating to government servants and in other matters, the Courts have time and again dealt with this issue and the consistent view is that except in a case where the statute excludes the requirement of the passing of a speaking order, every quasi judicial authority is under a duty to record reasons in support of its order and communicate the same to the concerned employee.
In Hari Nagar Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Shyam Sunder, AIR 1961 SC 1669 a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court while dealing with an order passed by the Central Government in exercise of its appellate powers under Section 111(3) of the Companies Act, 1956, held that if the Central Government acts as a Tribunal exercising quasi-judicial powers and the exercise of those powers is subject to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, it would not be possible for the Supreme Court to exercise its power effectively if the Central Government was not to give reasons in support of its order.
The same view has been reiterated in Bhagat Raja v Union of India, AIR 1967 S C 1606 and Travancore Rayon Ltd v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 862.
In Travancore Rayon Ltd's case (supra), the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "The Court insists upon disclosure of reasons in support of the order on two grounds; one, that the party aggrieved in a proceedings before the High Court or this Court has the opportunity to demonstrate that the reasons which persuaded the authority to reject his case were erroneous; the other, that obligation to record reasons operates as deterrent against possible arbitrary action by the executive authority invested with the judicial power."
In Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar v. State of UP, AIR 1970 SC 1302, their Lordships of the Supreme Court indicated the necessity of recording of reasons and communication thereof by making the following observations :  "Recording of reasons in support of a decision on a disputed claim by a quasi-judicial authority ensures that the decision is reached according to law and is not the result of caprice, whim or fancy or reached on grounds of policy or expediciency.
A party to the dispute is ordinarily entitled to know the grounds on which the authority has rejected his claim.
If the order is subject to appeal, the necessity to record reasons is greater, for without recorded reasons the appellate authority has no material on which it may determine whether facts were properly ascertained, the relevant law was correctly applied and the decision was just."
In Siemens Engineering and Manufacturing Co. of India Ltd v. Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1785, the Supreme Court reiterated the well settled principle and held as under :-  "It is by now settled law that where an authority makes an order in exercise of a quasi-judicial function it must record its reasons in support of the order it makes.
Every quasi-judicial order must be supported by reasons."
In various subsequent decisions, the same principle has been reiterated.
The same subject has been dealt with at length in SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984 : 1991(1) SCT.
241 wherein a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has held that except in cases of express exclusion, the quasi judicial authority must pass a reasoned order indicating the application of mind in the process of decision making.
In State of Gujarat v. Patel Raghav Nath and others, AIR 1969 SC 1297, their Lordships of the Supreme Court quashed the order by pointing out distinction between conclusion and reasons.
In para 4 of the judgment, their Lordships quoted the order passed by the Commissioner under Section 211 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, which reads as under :-  "From this inspection the contentions of the Municipality as to the existence of the various roads as well as the nature of the Kharaba land have been proved beyond doubt.
In light of the above arguments as well as the site inspection and the papers of the case, I set aside the order of the Collector granting NA Permission.
I consider, on weighing all evidence cited above, that the land does not belong to Shri Raghav Nath."
While quashing the aforesaid order of the Commissioner, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "We are also of the opinion that the order of the Commissioner should be quashed on the ground that he did not give any reasons for his conclusion.
We have already extracted the passage above which shows that after reciting the various contentions he baldly stated his conclusions without disclosing his reasons.
In a matter of this kind the Commissioner should indicate his reasons, however, briefly, so that an aggrieved party may carry that matter further if so advised."
In view of the above explained legal position, I do not have any hesitation in holding that the order passed by the punishing authority suffers from gross violation of the rules of natural justice because the said authority has completely failed to abide by the requirement of the passing of a speaking order.
20.
The order passed by the revisional authority is worst.
It only contains one line that the representation has been considered by the Government and it has been decided that it may be filed.
This order can appropriately be described as a dumb order.
It is arbitrary and cryptic to the core, an expression used by the Supreme Court in Bhakhtawar Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1972 SC 2083 for quashing an order passed by the Government of Punjab to remove a member of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
the enquiry report, Annexure P6, order of punishing authority Annexure P10 and the order passed on the revision of the petitioner, Annexure P12 are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits - monetary and others.
Though I am not restraining the Government from proceeding afresh against the petitioner from the stage of enquiry, I deem it necessary to observe that before taking any decision to hold fresh proceedings against the petitioner, the Government must consider the desirability of taking action at such a belated stage and also consider whether in the light of the subsequent record of the petitioner it will be fruitful to hold fresh proceedings against him.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.