Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner challenges the selection of Dr. Sandeep Mahajan, Respondent No. 2 for the post of Assistant Professor (Bio-Chemistry) (Non-Medical).
The challenge is two fold.
Firstly, it is urged that the petitioner was wrongly excluded from consideration in spite of the fact that he was fully eligible for the post.
Secondly, the selection of respondent No. 2 had been challenged on the ground that he was ineligible for the post as he did not possess the qualification of MSc.
in any of the subjects as mentioned in the advertisement.
2.
Civil Writ Petition No. 2276 of 1995 has also been listed for hearing alongwith this petition.
An additional ground of challenge to the selection of Dr. Sandeep Mahajan, who has been impleaded as respondent No. 4 in this petition, has been raised.
It has been urged that the selection committee was not validily constituted as respondent No. 3 who was the guide of Dr. Mahajan and was, thus, interested in him, was a member of the Committee that interviewed the candidates.
The petitioner in this case who is working on ad hoc basis, has also prayed that he should be allowed to continue till the post is filled up on regular basis.
3.
Written statements have been filed on behalf of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research as also the selected candidate.
The claim made in the petitions have been controverted.
The question that emerge for consideration are :-  (i) Is the selection vitiated on account of thre exclusion of an eligible candidate ?
(ii) Is Dr. Sandeep Mahajan ineligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor (Bio-Chemistry) (Non-Medical) at the Respondent- Institute ?
(iii) Is the selection vitiated on account of the inclusion of Dr. GKK Khullar in the selection committee ?
(iv) Has the petitioner in CWP 2276 of 1995 a right to continue in spite of the fact that the period of ad hoc appointment has expired ?
Re : (i) 4.
Mr. Amarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the advertisement and contended that the petitioner was wrongly excluded from consideration in spite of the fact that he fulfilled the prescribed qualifications.
Is it so ?
5.
A copy of the advertisement has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
For Non-Medical post, the essential qualification was a Master's degree.
The relevant provision in the advertisement is as under :-  "Bio-chemistry" MSc.
(Medical Bio-Chemistry) on MSc.
in allied subjects like Organic Chemistry, Physiology, Allied Physiology, obtained prior to 1978.
2.
PhD Degree in the subject concerned/allied subject of an Indian University or its equivalent PhD Degree from a foreign University recognised as such by the University Grants Commission."
A perusal of the above extract from the advertisement shows that a candidate must possess the qualification of MSc.
and PhD in the subject concerned or an allied subjects like Organic Chemistry, Physiology etc.
He should have obtained the Post Graduate Degree of MSc.
prior to 1978.
Admittedly, the petitioner, Dr. Madan Mohan Gupta was awarded the degree of MSc.
in Organic Chemistry in the year 1977.
He had done his PhD in Bio-Chemistry in 1983.
He, thus, fulfilled the prescribed qualifications.
In spite of this, he was not called for interview.
It has been averred in the written statement that "the scrutiny committee did not find him eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor as he passed his MSc.
in Organic Chemistry".
On a perusal of the advertisement, it is clear that MSc.
in Organic Chemistry is one of the prescribed qualifications.
In such situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications or that he was ineligible.
The action of the respondents or the scrutiny committee in excluding the petitioner from consideration was not just and valid.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not called for interview.
He was, thus, deprived of the chance to competent for the post and prove his merit.
Mr. Rajesh Garg, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, urged that the petitioner was actually aware of the fact that he was not being called for interview.
In spite of this, he did not approach the Court prior to the meeting of the selection committee.
He is, thus, estopped from challenging the selection.
7.
We are unable to accept this submission.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner was ever informed that he was ineligible for the post or that his application had been rejected.
He was entitled to wait for the respondents to consider his claim.
It is only when he came to knew that the selection had been made without calling him for the interview that the cause of action occurred.
He challenged the selection soon thereafter.
In any case, respondent No. 2 is not shown to have been appointed.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner had waived his right or that he is not entitled to challenge the selection.
Even otherwise, the State is bound to ensure the grant of equality of opportunity to the candidates.
In the present case, this guarantee was violated by the Institute.
Accordingly, we answer the first question in the affirmative and hold that the petitioner was wrongly excluded from consideration and the selection is vitiated.
Re : (ii)  8.
It was urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 2 was not eligible for the post of Assistant Professor (Bio-Chemistry) (Non-Medical) as he did not possess one of the prescribed qualifications namely MSc.
in Bio-Chemistry or the other allied subjects as mentioned in the advertisement.
On the other hand, Mr. Rajesh Garg, learned Counsel for respondent No. 2 contended that the respondent who had passed the MSc.
examination in Micro-Biology and had been awarded the degree of PhD in Bio-Chemistry, was eligible for the post.
9.
A perusal of the advertisement which has been extracted above, shows that a candidate is required to possess the qualifications of MSc.
(Medical Bio- Chemistry) or MSc.
"in allied subjects like Organic Chemistry......" The list of the subjects given in the advertisement does not appear to be exhaustive.
It is only illustrative.
A person who possesses the qualification of MSc.
in an allied subject, is eligible for the post.
Even those like the petitioner who have qualified the MSc.
examination in Organic Chemistry, are considered eligible.
In this situation, if the members of the selection committee decided that a degree of MSc.
in Micro-Biology, fulfilled the requisite requirement, it cannot be said that their action was illegal or contrary to the stipulation in the advertisement.
10.
The prescription of qualifications for various faculty posts in the Respondent-Institute is primarily a matter for the experts to consider.
While prescribing the qualifications, it was specified that a candidate should have the Post Graduate Degree of MSc.
in the particular subject or in an allied subject.
The Courts are not equipped to examine the qualifications for technical posts especially in subjects like Bio-Chemistry etc.
It is a duty which the experts can perform better.
In such situations, the courts are reluctant to enter academic thickets.
The experts having taken the view that the respondent was eligible, no ground for interference by this Court under Article 226 is made out.
Accordingly, the second question in answered in the negative and it is held that respondent No. 2 was eligible for the cost of Assistant Professor (Bio- Chemistry) (Non-Medical).
Re : (iii)  11.
It was contended by Mr. BS Walia, counsel for the petitioner in CWP No. 2276 of 1995 that respondent No. 3 who is the Head of the Department of Bio-Chemistry was the internal expert for the post of Assistant Professor.
He was also the guide under whom Dr. Sandeep Mahajan had done his PhD in 1985.
Accordingly, the selection of Dr. Mahajan was the "direct outcome of the considerations other than merit".
He also submits that the facts came to his knowledge only after the declaration of the list of selected candidates.
12.
It is true that bias invalidates the proceedings.
However, on the facts as disclosed in the petition, we are unable to hold that a teacher who has merely guided a student in a research project leading to the award of the decree of PhD would be disqualilfied from participating in a selection committee where the candidates are being considered for appointment to various faculty positions.
It is reasonable to presume that teachers of eminence would guide a number of students in various research projects.
If all such persons were to be disqualified and excluded from inclusion in selection committees, it may become impossible to find a suitable number of experts for manning the selection committees.
For upholding the plea of bias, there must be some element of personal interest.
More association as a guide or a teacher shall not be enough to disqualify the person from inclusion in the selection committee.
In the present case the mere fact that respondent No. 3 was the guide of Dr. Sandeep Mahajan in his research for the award of the degree of PhD is not enough to vitiate the proceedings of the selection committee.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that even the other members of the selection committee found the respondent to be more suitable than the petitioner.
Accordingly, we answer the third question in the negative and hold that the proceedings of the selection committee are not vitiated.
Reg : (iv)  13.
The petitioner in Civil Petition No. 2276 of 1995 was appointed as an Assistant Professor on ad hoc basis for a period of three months vide order dated December 9, 1993.
A copy of this order has been appended as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
A perusal of this letter shows that the petitioner was appointed on the recommendation of the Head of the Department.
The appointment was for "a period of three months or till such time the post is filled up on regular basis........which ever is earlier".
The appointment could be terminated at any time "without any notice on either side.. " It was renewed periodically.
The last renewal was for a period of "six months beyond December 23, 1994 or till such time the post is filled up on regular basis, whichever is earlier....." It was made by the Director of the Respondent- Institute.
14.
The Institute was constituted under the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Act, 1966.
Under Section 32 of the Act, the Central Government is competent to frame regulations.
These regulations were framed and published in the Gazette of India on April 18, 1967.
The powers of the Director etc. have been enumerated in Schedule I A perusal of the entries in the Schedule shows that the Director is competent to make appointments on ad hoc and temporary basis to the faculty positions for a period not exceeding one year.
This provision has a salutary purpose.
The Institute must make recruitment, selections and appointments in accordance with the regulations.
However, in order to tide over a situation, a power to make ad hoc or temporary appointment for a period not exceeding one year has been conferred on the Director.
It is in exercise of this power that the petitioner was appointed on a purely ad hoc basis for a period of three months.
The appointment has been extended from time to time.
The last extension has already expired.
In this situation, the petitioner has no right to claim that he is entitled to continue to hold the post of Assistant Professor till such time as a regularly selected candidate is appointed.
We are unable to uphold this submission.
The petitioner's right is determined by the terms of is appointment.
A perusal of the letter of appointment shows that the authorities are competent to terminate his service at any time.
Under the regulations, the Director's power is limited to a period of one year.
Even if, it is assumed that the Director is competent to grant extension even beyond that period, it cannot be said that he is bound to do so.
The mere existence of the post or vacancy also confers no right on the petitioner.
It is matter to be considered by the competent authority.
We cannot force the Director to continue to employ the petitioner.
15.
Mr. Walia submitted that in various cases, directions for continuation in service till the regular selection is made have been given by the courts.
It is undoubtedly so.
However, we find that such a practice has been deprecated by the Apex Court in the State of Punjab and others v. Surinder Kumar & others, 1992(1) S.C.T.
538 : 1992(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 327 : 1992(2) R.R.R.
529, Civil Appeal No. 5060 of 1991 which was decided on December 20, 1991.
The High Court vide its order dated April 4, 1991 had disposed of the writ petition with the following order :-  "On the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the just and fair order should be that the petitioners who have been appointed on part time basis should be continued until the Govt. make regular appointments on the recommendations of the Public Service Commission.
Meanwhile, the petitioners will get their salary for the period of the vacation."
This order was challenged before their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
Their Lordships observed as under :-  "It is not contested that an instruction by the Education Department was issued in pursuance of which the appointments of the respondents in question were made as part time lecturers.
It is also not suggested that the respondents accepted the terms set out in annexures P/1 and P/2 under mistake.
We, therefore, do not find any reason as to why the specific terms on which the appointments were made could not be enforced.
We have gone through the special leave petition, the respondents' counter affidavit and the other affidavits filed by the parties, and do not find any relevant material or tenable plea in support of the claim in the writ petition filed in the High Court.
The learned counsel for the respondents also could not suggest any ground for sustaining the impugned order except contending that this Court has issued directions for absorption of temporary or ad hoc Government servants on permanent basis in several cases.
It has been argued that if this could be done by this Court without assigning any reason, it should be open to the High Court as well to allow writ petitions in similar terms.
We are not in a position to a agree."
Similar is the position in the present case.
It has not been suggested that the petitioner accepted the terms of appointment under a mistake.
We.
therefore, find no ground which may persuade us to hold that the employer is not entitled to enforce the terms of appointment.
Accordingly, the question is answered in the negative and it is held that the petitioner, Dr. Kamlapati Mishra has no right to continue on the post of Assistant Professor till regular appointment is made.
We, accordingly, hold that the selection of the respondent-Dr. Sandeep Mahajan is vitiated as the petitioner (Dr. Madan Mohan Gupta) who was one of the eligible candidates was wrongly excluded from consideration.
The other three questions are answered in the negative and it is held that Dr. Sandeep Mahajan was eligible for the post.
The inclusion of Dr. GK Khullar in the selection committee was legal and valid and the petitioner, Dr. Kamlapati Mishra in CWP 2276 of 1995, has no right to continue to hold the post of Assistant Professor (Bio-Chemistry).
Civil Writ Petition No. 6127 of 1995 is, accordingly, allowed.
Civil Writ Petition No. 2276 of 1995 in so far as it challenges the selection of respondent No. 4 (though on different grounds) is rendered infructuous.
In other respects, the Writ Petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.