Satyabrata Sinha, J - This application is directed against an order of transfer which is contained in Annexure "C" to the writ application.
Mr. Sen, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner, submits that one of the daughters of the petitioner is appearing in the Higher Secondary Examination which would start on 30th of this month and another son of his who is reading in Class XI Eco-Science Course in St Xavier's College whose session would be over by December 1995.
The learned counsel, therefore, submits that keeping in view the fact that in the event the order of transfer is effected, the children of the petitioner would suffer immensely, the impugned order should be quashed.
The learned counsel, however, very fairly states that the petitioner is not averse to transfer and he undertakes to join the transferred post in January 1996.
2.
The learned counsel in support of his submission has placed before me a decision of the Supreme Court of India in Director of School Education, Madras & Ors. v. O.Karuppa Thevan and another, reported in 1994 Supp(2) Supreme Court Cases 666 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
402.
In the said decision, the Supreme Court held- " However, the learned counsel for the respondent, contended that in view of the fact that respondent's children are studying in school, the transfer should not have been effected during mid academic term.
Although there is no such rule, we are of the view that in effecting transfer, the fact that the children of an employee are studying should be given due weight, if the exigencies of the service are not urgent.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant was unable to point out that there was such urgency in the present case that the employee would not have been accommodated till the end of the current academic year.
We, therefore, while setting aside the impugned order of the Tribunal direct that the appellant should not effect the transfer till the end of the current academic year.
The appeal is allowed accordingly with no order as to costs".
3.
In terms of the Police Rules mid-term transfer is not prohibited.
The guideline has only been issued to the effect that as far as practicable no such mid-term transfer should be effected.
The said guideline is contained in Police Order No. 2 of 1980 dated 22280.
The Apex Court in a number of decisions had clearly held that High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot interfere with an order of transfer, except on the ground of mala fide or violation of mandatory provisions of Statute.
The Supreme Court held that the right of an employee is to bring his difficulties to the notice of the employer by filing an appropriate representation wherein a contention can be raised that such order of transfer has been passed in violation of such guidelines.
Reference in this connection may be made to AIR 1981 SC 1433; (2) AIR 1989 SC 1477; (3) AIR 1993 SC 1236; (4) AIR 1993 SC 1608; (5) AIR 1993 SC 2444; (6) 1994 Vol. 6 SCC 98 and the recent decision of this Court in C.O.
No. 1714(W)/94, Prabhu Nath Singh v. Union of India, disposed of on 1621995.
4.
In the aforementioned Supreme Court decisions it has also been laid down that such guidelines are directory in nature and not mandatory and violation of such guidelines, therefore, does not confer any legal right upon the petitioner to question the order of transfer.
It appears that the petitioner has already filed a detailed representation before the Director General and Inspector General of Police.
West Bengal which is contained in Annexure 'D' to the writ application.
The petitioner, Mr. Sen states, has not yet been communicated with any order of the Director General and Inspector General of Police on the said representation.
The petitioner has, thus, already taken recourse, to a remedy to which he is entitled to in law.
I have no doubt in my mind that the Director General and Inspector General of Police, West Bengal shall sympathetically consider the predicament of the petitioner and pass an appropriate order in accordance with law at an early date, preferably within a period of two weeks from the date of communication of this order.
In the meantime, if some order has already been passed, it would be open to the petitioner to approach the said Home Secretary, who, I am sure, would consider the matter afresh and if possible after giving an opportunity of hearing to him.
5.
The decision in Director of School Education, Madras case, upon which strong reliance has been placed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, is an order under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
Such a decision, in view of the aforementioned binding precedent of the Supreme Court of India which have been rendered under Article 141 of the Constitution of India does not create any binding precedent on this Court.
In fact, the Supreme Court times without number clearly stated that the High Court cannot exercise such jurisdiction which the Supreme Court does in exercise of its power under Article 162 of the Constitution of India Reference in this connection may be made to 1994(2) SCC 630.
6.
However, it goes without saving that while considering the representation of the petitioner, the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police or the concerned authorities shall consider all aspects of the matter including the public purpose and urgency.
Mr. Sen submits that the petitioner shall file a separate writ representation before the Home Secretary, Government of West Bengal also.
It will also be open to the petitioner to pray for some interim order before the appropriate authorities.
7.
This writ application is disposed of with the aforementioned observation.
The learned counsel for the petitioner is permitted to note down the gist of this order and communicate the same to the concerned respondents who are directed to act upon such communication.