VK Jhanji, J - In Civil Writ Petitions No. 16351 and 16105 of 1994, petitioners who initially were appointed through open selection as lecturers between the years 1973 to 1980, presently are working as Professors and Readers in various departments of the Panjab University, Chandigarh, whereas petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 481 of 1995 were appointed as Teaching/Research Assistants.
Petitioners in the first two writ petitions shall hereinafter be referred as `petitioners' and the respondents in these two writ petitions who were initially appointed as Teaching/Research Assistants and petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 481 of 1995 shall hereinafter be referred as `respondents'.
2.
In the petitions, petitioners are aggrieved of the decision of the House Allotment Committee-I taken in meeting held on 11111994 whereby the Committee unanimously approved the recommendations dated 2111994 of the Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor for finding, only as one time exception, an amicable solution to the problem in regard to allotment of T-II, E and E-I type of houses.
The Committee appointed by the Vice Chancellor had approved that on the basis of list of houses prepared by the office in February, 1993, all those persons who had been offered T-II and E type of houses in the past be offered these houses again, upto the last person (in the list) who had declined, as per allotment procedure and rules of the university, only as one time exception, being a measure to arrive at an amicable solution to solve the problem and secondly, the people having notional pay fixation would be allotted E-I type of houses as per their seniority and only according to the actual pay drawn by them.
3.
Before the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties are considered, it is necessary to notice few facts which are relevant for the purposes of decision of writ petitions.
4.
Panjab University, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the University) has constructed certain houses in the premises of the University in Sector 14, Chandigarh, and also in Sector 25, Chandigarh.
These houses have been built up for the benefit of its employees and are allotted in accordance with rules contained in the Panjab University Calendar (in short the Calendar).
Authority to allot the residential accommodation is with the House Allotment Committee (in short the Committee) to be appointed by the Syndicate.
Houses to be allotted have been categorised as A/T-IV, B, C, D, E/EI/T-II, G and teachers' flats.
Rules 22, 23 and 24 relevant for the decision, read as under :-  ``22.
Allotment of residential accommodation to the University employees shall be as follows:  Sr. No.
Type of House.
Basic Pay Maximum monthly rent  1.
A/T-IV Up to Rs. 109 Rs. 12 2.
B Rs. 110 to Rs. 200 Rs. 20 3.
C Rs. 201 to Rs. 300 Rs. 30 4.
D Rs. 301 to Rs. 400 Rs. 40 5.
E/EI/T-II Rs. 400 to 800 Rs. 80 6.
F/T-I Rs. 801 to Rs. 1000 Rs. 100 7.
G Rs.1001 and above Rs. 180 8.
Teachers' Flats (a) University Teachers drawing a (a) basic pay of Rs. 300 pm or more (a) 10 per cent of basic pay or Rs. 40 whichever is less in addition Rs11 pm for furniture and Rs. 4 pm for water.
(b) If a flat is available after all (b) eligible persons (a) have been accommodated University Research scholars, drawing less than Rs. 300 pm Rs. 41 pm including furniture and Rs. 4 pm for water.
``Provided that when a house to which a teacher is entitled is allotted to him, on the basis of his pay, he shall either surrender the flat or shall pay rent at the rate of 10 percent of his basic pay.
23.
The date of entrance of an employee into the pay slab fixed for a house shall be the basis of allotment.
If the date of entry into a pay slab is the same in the case of more than one employee, the date of entry into the lower pay slab will be the criterion for determining seniority.
If a case does not fall within the scope of the foregoing provision, the criterion for determining seniority will be the age, i.e. the older employee shall be senior.
24.
If a house in the category to which an employee is entitled to not available, he may be allotted a house in the lower category, i.e. one step below the one to which he is eligible.
For this purpose, the date of entry into the lower pay slab shall determine his seniority vis-a-vis others entitled to a house of that category.''
Rule 23 provides that the date of entrance of an employee into the pay slab fixed for a house shall be the basis of allotment, meaning thereby that seniority is fixed as per pay slab in which a person enters, whereas Rule 24 provides that if a house in the category to which an employee is entitled to not available, he may be allotted a house in the lower category, i.e. one step below the one to which he is eligible.
For this, the date of entry into the lower pay slab is taken for determining seniority of an employee, vis-a-vis others entitled to a house of that category.
It is the case of the petitioners that in accordance with the rules, the names of the petitioners were entered in the seniority list prepared for allotment of houses, but later on this list was sought to be altered for accommodating Teaching Assistants/Research Assistants/Pandits/Instructors by giving them benefit of pay on the assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturers without payment of any arrears on account of this notional refixation.
In order to understand as to how the pay of the respondents was fixed in the revised pay scale notionally and retrospectively, it becomes necessary to notice that in pursuance of recommendations of the University grants Commission (in short the UGC) and acceptance and implementation thereof by the Government of India.
The pay scales of University and College lecturers were revised by the Punjab Government first w.e.f.
141975 and later w.e.f.
1.1.1977 vide notification dated 25.2.1977.
Following the Punjab Government, the University too revised the pay scales of its lecturers.
Petitioners who were university lecturers accordingly became entitled to the revised pay scale of Rs700-1600, while the respondents who at that time were Teaching Assistants were not covered by the afore-mentioned revision of pay scales and therefore, the petitioners were placed senior to them.
It has been averred that the petitioners continued to be placed senior to the respondents till the year 1980 when on the basis of some recommendations, the syndicate of the University took a decision to give to the Teaching Assistants/Research Assistants/Pandits/Instructors, who were in position on 25.3.1979, the revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 w.e.f.
141980.
This decision was approved by the university Senate at its meeting held on 23121979.
Vide its subsequent decision dated 21121980, the Senate resolved that as in the case of Punjabi University, Patiala, the fixation of pay of the aforesaid academic personnel in the revised pay scale of Rs. 700- 1600 be allowed w.e.f.
141975 instead of 141980 on the assumption of notional date of appointment and on the stipulation that no arrears would be paid for the period with effect from 141975 to the date these posts were placed in the revised pay scale, viz. 3131980.
Later, vide decision dated 1531981 the Senate resolved that all Teaching/Research Assistants, Pandits and Instructors in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 be designated as lecturers with effect from 16.2.1981, provided they fulfilled the conditions laid down by the UGC for the appointment of lecturers or had passed M.A./M.Sc.
with first or high second class and had a consistently good academic record and did their PhD within five years from the date they were designated as Lecturers.
The Syndicate on 17.6.1981 further decided to refix w.e.f.
141975 the pay of such Teaching Assistants, Research Assistants, Pandits and Instructors who were in position on 141975 but had been appointed as lecturers in open selection prior to 25.3.1979 on the assumption of a notional date of appointment as lecturers again on the stipulation that no arrears would be paid w.e.f.
141975 to the date such incumbents were appointed to the posts of lecturers through regular selection.
This decision of the Syndicate was approved by the Senate on 4.10.1981.
Subsequently, on 11.6.1983 the Board of Finance of the University authorised the Vice Chancellor to take similar action in respect of any Research Assistant who was on a time scale of pay even prior to 141975 so as to allow the benefit of refixation of pay on the assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturer w.e.f.
any such date prior to 141975.
This decision of Board of Finance was approved by the Syndicate on 271983 and by the Senate on 1471983.
On 1461985, a sub- committee appointed by the Board of Finance recommended to the Syndicate that such incumbents from amongst the Teaching Assistants, Pandits and Instructors as were on a time-scale of pay ever prior to 141975 (whose minimum starting pay was not less than Rs. 300/-) be allowed the benefit of pay on the assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturers with effect from any such date prior to 141975 but not earlier than 111973.
No arrears on account of notional refixation of pay could, however, was to be paid.
This recommendation of the board of finance was accepted by the Syndicate on 3061985 and by the Senate on 481985.
It was because of this notional fixation of pay of Teaching Assistants/Research Assistants/Pandits/Instructors that a controversy was raised with regard to eligibility for house allotment on the basis of notional of actual pay fixation/revision of pay scale.
The Registrar of the University circulated letter dated 14.2.1990 addressed to All Heads of Teaching Departments of University, all the Heads of Branches in the Main Office of the University and Wardens of Hostels, for preparation of Master Waiting Lists for allotment of houses to the university employees.
For the purpose of preparing list for the period from 111973 to 31.12.1977, it was proposed to adopt the following slab on account of revision, for allotment of E, T-II, E-I F, T-I and G types of houses :  Type of house.
Basic pay (old) Basic pay (revised) T-II Rs. 400 to Rs. 800 Rs. 700 pm E -do- -do- E-I -do- -do- F Rs. 801 to Rs. 1000 Rs. 1020 pm T-I -do- -do- G Rs. 1001 and above Rs. 1200 and above Further, as per this letter the staff members, Administrative and Technical staff and Class-IV employees whose pay scales had been revised w.e.f.
111973 were to continue to be governed by the old slab.
A sub- committee was appointed to advise in the task of preparation of waiting-lists which were accordingly drawn-up and circulated vide letter dated 161990.
Thereafter, waiting-list for `E' and `T-II' type of houses was periodically prepared and circulated vide letters dated 591991, 1921992, 2081992 and 15.2.1993.
In all these letters, all those teachers whose pay had been fixed/revised notionally, were included in the list for `E' and `T-II' types of houses.
The action of the Committee in including the names of the employees whose pay had been notionally fixed was not to the liking of the petitioners and accordingly, a representation in this regard was submitted by NK Ojha, Lecturer, Department of Correspondence Studies of the university questioning the entitlements to allotment of `E' and `T-II' type of houses to certain empolyees on the basis of notional fixation of their pay.
The matter was examined by the Committee in its meeting held on 2261993 and 14.10.1993 wherein it was decided that the names of the employees who had got the benefit of notional fixation of pay be included in the waiting-lists at appropriate places on the basis of pay actually drawn by them and not on basis of notional fixation.
This decision excluded the names of teachers whose pay had been notionally fixed.
Due to exclusion, a number of representations were made against the waiting-lists issued on 18.10.1993.
The House Allotment Committee decided to review this decision in its subsequent meeting held on 6121993 and a sub-commitee of 10 members was constituted for the purpose of advising the House Allotment Committee so that the delay in allotment of houses could be avoided.
The recommendations made by the Sub-Committee were discussed by the House Allotment Committee in its meeting held on 2931994 wherein it was resolved that the matter be referred to Legal Experts for their opinion in the first instance and the recommendations of the Sub-Committee be accepted subject to legal opinion.
In order to avoid rift among the teacher, the House Allotment Committee in its meeting held on 471994 resolved that the President and Secretary of the Panjab University Teachers' Association (in short the PUTA) and Dr. PP Arya be requested to talk to both factions for finding out an amicable solution to the problem.
Since the efforts of PUTA to evolve an amicable negotiated settlement between the two factions did not prove successful, the House Allotment Committee in its meeting held on 23.8.1994 again resovled to make another attempt to find out an amicable solution by using the good offices of Dr. P.P.Arya, failing which it resolved that the matter be referred to two Legal Experts, approved by the Vice Chancellor, for their opinion.
In its meeting held on 1291994, the House Allotment Committee was informed by Dr. PP Arya that in spite of best efforts made by him he could not bring both the parties to some amicable solution.
The matter, thus, was referred to two Legal Experts who opined that for the purposes of house allotment, the seniority will be determined on the basis of actual pay drawn and not on the basis of notional pay.
The cases of employees whose pay was fixed notinally but without payment of any arrears were resolved to be considered for allotment of houses in their respective old categories.
The President and Secretary of PUTA protested and demanded that the House Allotment Committee should not go by the opinion given by the legal experts.
Representations from some of the teachers who were going to be adversely affected too were received.
In view of this dis-affection voiced, the Vice Chancellor constituted a committee headed by Dr. KN Pathak, D.U.I.
for looking into the matter afresh.
The Committee unanimously resolved to recommend that on the basis of waiting-list of houses prepared by the office in February, 1993, all those persons who had been offered T-II and E-type of houses in the pastbe offered these houses again, upto the last person in the list who had declined, as per allotment procedure and rules of the University.
This decision was taken by the Committee as a one-time exception, being a measure to arrive at an amicable solution.
The Committee further resolved that the employees having notional pay fixation would be allotted `E-I' type of houses as per their seniority according to the actual pay drawn by them.
These recommendations of the Committee were considered by the House Allotment Committee at its meeting held on 11111994 and the same were unanimously approved.
Copy of the minutes of the meeting of the House Allotment Committee has been attached as Annexure R-51 in C.W.P.
No. 16105 of 1994.
This decision has been challenged in these writ petitions.
Petitioners are not satisfied with the decision because the respondents have been included in the list of three categories of houses namely, E, E-I and T-II and the respondents are not satisfied because to them, these categories of houses have been offered only as a one time exception.
According to the stand of the University, the decision has been arrived at after due deliberations in the best interest of teaching community and is just and rational.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have contended that seniority of an employee for the purpose of house allotment is to be reckoned in accordance with rules 22. and 23 of the Calendar, i.e. from the date of entry of an employee into the pay slab for a house.
According to them, entry into the pay slab would be from the date the employee actually starts drawing pay as the rule does not purport to give any notional or fictional seniority, whereas the the argument of counsel for the respondents is that under the rules, an employee becomes entitled to a particular category of house the moment he is put into the pay slab fixed for that category, irrespective of the fact whether the pay has actually been drawn by him or has been fixed notionally.
Some of the petitioners and the respondents have also argued in person and I have heard them at length.
6.
A reading of rule 23. shows that the criteria for a basis of allotment of a house is the date of entrance of an employee into the pay slab fixed for it.
When one enters into the pay slab ?
In my view, entry into the pay slab would be from the date when the employee starts drawing pay in the scale sanctioned for the post against which he is working.
For example, the basic pay fixed for type E/E-I and T-II houses is Rs. 700-1600.
For these categories of houses, an employee would make an entry into the slab when he starts getting and withdrawing pay between Rs. 700 to Rs1600.
The word `pay' means the amount drawn monthly by an employee as the pay which has been sanctioned for the post held by him substantively or in a officiating capacity and includes special pay or a personal pay if any, but no other allowance (Regulation 2 (ix) Chapter IV of Calender, Volume-I (1989).
It is, thus, obvious that the actual amount which has been sanctioned and drawn by an employee for the post held by him is `pay'.
The pay scale of the petitioners who were appointed as lecturers in an open selection was revised with effect from 111973 in pursuance of the recommendations of UGC They were actually paid arrears of pay with effect from the date their pay scale was revised.
In the case of respondents, because of decision of the Senate the Teaching Assistants (35), Research Assistants (13), Instructors (2) and Pandits (2) who were on position on 25.3.1979 were placed in the pay scale of Rs700-1600 (same as for college lecturers) w.e.f.
141980 and this revision was made personal to them.
It was on account of subsequent decision that Research Assistants, Teaching Assistants, Pandits and Instructors who were on a time- scale of pay were allowed the benefit of refixation of pay on assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturers with effect from any such date prior to 141975 but not beyond 111973.
Arrears for the period from 111973 to 3131980 were neither sanctioned nor drawn or ever paid to these academic personnel.
Vide decision of the Senate taken in its meeting held on 1531981, all Teaching Assistants, Research Assistants and other similar academic personnel in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 were designated as lecturers with effect from 16.2.1981 provided they fulfilled certain conditions.
In this situation, is it correct for the respondents to contend that they would be deemed to have entered into the pay slab w.e.f.
111973 when their pay was refixed on assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturers ?
My answer is `No.'.
Respondents made their entry into the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 only when their pay scale was actually revised, sanctioned and salary paid to them.
Refixation of pay on assuming the notional date of appointment as lecturers was only in name and not in reality.
Chambers' English Dictionary defines `notional' as - theoretical, ideal, fanciful, imaginary, unreal.
The Oxford Dictionary (of current English) (Sixth Edition) defines `notional' as - speculative, imaginary.
7.
Apart from this, in a series of judgments the Apex Court has deprecated the practice of fixation of seniority by conferring notional seniority.
In this connection, reference may be made to decisions of the Apex Court in Dr. Pushpa Vishnu Kumar Guru v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1995(2) SCT 92(SC) : 1995(2) S.L.R.
87, and Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1990(2) S.L.R.
SC 769, where it is stated that ``once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment.
Even the claim that seniority was linked to the date of confirmation was negatived.''
In State of M.P. and another v. Prem Parkash and others, (1994) 1 Supreme Court Cases 432, respondents therein challenged the validity of part of order dated 12.5.1960 by which the appellant therein was appointed as Foreman in Cycle Parts factory on 12.5.1960 w.e.f.
4.1.1957.
It was pointed out on behalf of said respondents that order dated 12.5.1960 appointing the appellant as Foreman was on the basis of an advertisement issued in the year 1959 and recommendation made by the Commission thereafter.
As such on the basis of said recommendation, the appellant could not have been appointed w.e.f.
4.1.1957.
It was also pointed out that till 1521959, the post of Foreman was a non-gazetted post and it was only on 16.1.1959 when by the Government order dated 18.12.1959 the said post was made a gazetted one, necessitating the appointment on the basis of recommendation.
The High Court held that the State Government could not have appointed the appellant on 12.5.1960 w.e.f.
4.1.1957 from a date not only prior to the date of the recommendation made by the Commission but even prior to the date of advertisement in respect of the said post.
In appeal, the Supreme Court held that ``notional seniority cannot be given from a retrospective date especially when this process affects the seniority of those who have already entered into service.
The Apex Court in K Narayanan and others v. State of Karnataka and others, 1993(4) SCT 302(SC) : AIR 1994 SC 55, reiterated the principle that ``an employee occupying a higher post in different cadre may on regularisation be entitled to claim his seniority from the date he was holding the post but giving a higher post in different cadre in which the employee has never worked either as officiating or temporary or even ad hoc because the employee became eligible earlier would be violative of the right of equality.
The methodology adopted in the rules by transferring such a person and placing him in the category of direct recruits from the date of acquiring the degree the Government could be said to have violated the basic norms of appointment and recruit ment to any particular service.
.....''.
``It would result in artificially making unequals as equals.
Any person entering the service can justly feel secure of equality in continuance, promotion etc. Any executive action violating it cannot be upheld.
Seniority is an incident of service which cannot be eroded or curtailed by a rule which operates discriminately.
The purpose of opening evening classes and permitting diploma-holders to study was to improve efficiency in service and provide better service conditions.
When rules were framed and provision for appointment by transfer was made both these objectives were achieved.
But operation of the rule with retrospective effect has no nexus with either except that it may result in undue benefit to one class of employees over the other.
The Court further held that ``the rule making authority should not be permitted normally to act in the past.
....''.
``Appointing a person to a higher post in a different cadre in which he has never worked is violative of constitutional guarantee of those who are working in the cadre.
It is against basic principle of recruitment to any service.
Absence of nexus apart, no rule can be made retrospectively to operate unjustly and unfairly against other.''
8.
Rule 23. if interpreted in the light of judgments of the Apex Court referred to above would lead to the conclusion that refixation of pay of the respondents on assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturers cannot affect the interest of the petitioners who were already working as lecturers, duly selected and appointed in accordance with rules and regulations of the University.
Their pay scales had not only been revised but they were actually paid the arrears.
It is also not acceptable that it would amount to interference if decision taken by the House Allotment Committee on the basis of recommendations made by the Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor is interfered with.
The House Allotment Committee has to act in accordance with rules and any decision taken by the Committee on the recommendations made by the committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor cannot be sustained if it is in contravention of the rules.
A sympathetic consideration cannot be allowed to impinge upon the rights of the persons who have become entitled to allotment of houses in accordance with rules.
9.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for respondents urged that the names of the respondents remained on the waiting-list of E, E-I and T-II type of houses for a considerable period and because of this inclusion they were deprived of from allotment of `D' type of houses.
In order to test this argument, the University was asked to place on record the list of employees who otherwise were not entitled to allotment of this type of houses but have been allotted because of inclusion of names of the respondents in the category of E, E-I and T-II type of houses.
Counsel for the University had promised that after vacations the list would be placed on record, but till date no such list has been brought that on record.
Even otherwise, the contention is without any merit because it has come on record that waiting-list only upto 31121972 for `D' type and `E', `E-I' and `T-II' type of houses has been exhausted.
It is nowhere the case of respondents that they became entitled to `D' type of houses prior to 1972.
10.
Another argument which was raised by the counsel for the petitioners though is not available, but since it has been raised the same deserves to be noticed.
Counsel contended that the respondents cannot be allowed to urge that they are entitled to all benefits which have become available to them on refixation of their pay on assumption of notional date of appointment as lecturers because their appointment/designation as lecturers was against the rules and regulations of the University.
A reference was made to Regulations 2 and 4 contained in Chapter-V(A) of Calendar, Volume-I(1989) which provides that no new appointment of a Professor, Reader, Lecturer or any other teacher shall be made unless the Senate has previously sanctioned the creation of the post and whenever there is a vacancy, the post shall be advertised and applications invited before it is filled.
No rule or regulation providing for appointment as Teaching/Research Assistants as lecturers has been pointed out.
A reference was also made to decision of Division Bench of the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Writ Petition No.222 of 1987 (Dr. SR Mehrotra v. HP University and others) decided on 21121994, wherein appointment by designating as Research Associates and Evaluators as lecturers was quashed becuase there was no procedure anywhere in the Statute or Act providing for appointment by redesignating the posts as lecturers.
The Court thus, issued a direction to the University to take regular appointment against the posts of Research Associates and Evaluators in accordance with the provisions of the Act It is not necessary for me to test the legality and validity of the action of the University in designating the Teaching/Research Assistants as lecturers with retrospective date by assuming the notional date of appointment as no challenge in these petitions with regard to their appointment has been made.
Moreover, since the Teaching/Research Assistants were designated as lecturers in the year 1981, I have my doubts that challenge can be made to these appointments after so many years.
11.
Resultantly, Civil Writ Petitions No. 16351 and 16105 of 1994 shall stand allowed and the decision of the Committee taken in meeting dated 11111994.
(Annexure R-51 in CWP No. 16105 of 1994) is quashed.
The House Allotment Committee, Panjab University, Chandigarh through its Chairman is directed to allot houses to its employees in accordance with seniority to be determined by taking into consideration the actual pay drawn and not by taking into account the pay scale given on notional basis with retrospective effect.
As a consequence thereof, Civil Writ Petition No. 481 of 1995 shall stand dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.