Paritosh Mukherjee, J - In my view this is a fit case for passing interim order staying the operation of the impugned order dated March 1, 1993 passed by the Superintendent, Central Jail, Jhansi being respondent No. 2.
2.
In the instant writ petition, petitioner is challenging the order of punishment, contained in impugned order dated March 1, 1993 passed by the Superintendent, Central Jail, Jhansi being respondent No. 2.
By the aforeaid order the petitioner's pay scale was reduced for minimum five years.
3.
On a statutory appeal being preferred, the appellate authority, Deputy Inspector General of Police (Jail), Kanpur Region, Kanpur being respondent No. 1 has affirmed the aforesaid order by appellate order dated October 20, 1994.
4.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner at the time of admission of this writ petition submits that enquiry was held ex parte and, on the basis of alleged period of absence for one day, the punishment imposed is disproportionate to the charge, and, as such this Court is fully justified to interfere with the matter.
5.
In this connection learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has placed strong reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court, reported in AIR 1983 SC 454, Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh which has been already followed at a subseqent stage in the case of Ranjeet Thakur v. Union of India, (Para 9).
reported in AIR 1987 SC 2386.
6.
This court is aware of the aforesaid two judgments which were based on the judgment of House of Lords, in the case of Council of Service Union v. Minister for Service, (1984) 3 WLR 1174 (HL), wherein Lord Diplock observed that "anything disproportionate should be discarded."
7.
Although the aforesaid judgment of Surpeme Court which was based on view expressed by House of Lords has been sought to be distinguished in the later judgment of Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v Parmanand reported in AIR 1989 SC 1185 wherein Supreme Court was of the view that power which can be exercised by Supreme Court in a proceeding under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, can be exercised by High Court in exercising powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
8.
In view of the pronouncement of Supreme Court, this court is of the view that the aforesaid judgment in case of Parmanand (supra) arose out of the proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution from High Court, and, as such, in that view of the matter I do not find any reasons that the Court is powerless to interfere with the extreme punishment which is "too harsh", at the admission stage of this writ petition.
9.
Accordingly, this Court proposes to pass an interim order to stay both the impugned orders dated March 1, 1993 (Annexure 7) and October 20, 1994 passed by the respondent Nos. 2 and 1, respectively to the writ petition and the petitioner will be entitled to receive full back wages without reduction of scale of pay in accordance with the orders of this Court.
10.
Counter affidavit is to be filed within five weeks from today.
Rejoinder affidavit, if any, may be filed within two weeks thereafter.
11.
List this writ petition for admission immediately after the expiry of the aforesaid period.
12.
Let a certified copy of this order be issued to the learned counsel on payment of usual charges which will be communicated by the petitioner to the respondents.
Order accordingly.