GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has challenged the legality of the orders Annexure P-18 dated 741992 and Annexure P-20 dated 2291992, which have been passed on the basis of disciplinary inquiry held against him in respect of the charges contained in the notice (Annexure P-6) dated 27.6.1989.
He has prayed that the order of punishment as well as the order passed by the Appellate Authority be quashed and he be ordered to be re-instated in service with consequential benefits.
2.
The Batala Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd, Barnala is a co-operative society registered under the Punjab Co-operative Society Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The Punjab Co-operative Spinning Mills Federation Ltd, Ropar (for short, the Federation) is also a cooperative society registered under the Act.
The Barnala Mills well as the Federation are separate legal entitles and have their own bye-laws.
The petitioner was appointed as Chief Executive of the Barnala Mills by an order (Annexure P-1) dated 2031985 on the basis of the resolution passed by the Administrator, the Barnala Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd, which was duly approved by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies.
The posts of the Chief Executive of the various co-operative societies were subsequently designated as Managing Director.
The petitioner also came to be designated as Managing Director of the Barnala Mills.
While the petitioner was holding that post, a preliminary inquiry was held against him by Shri SS Paul, Executive Director of the Federation on the basis of the directions issued on 251989 by the Managing Director of the Federation.
After receipt of the preliminary inquiry report, the Managing Director of the Federation issued an order dated 1671989 in pursuance of the decision of the Administrative Committee and placed the petitioner under suspension.
This was followed by notice dated 2571989 for a regular inquiry against the petitioner under the Punjab Co-operative Spinning Mills Federation Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1989.
The petitioner filed a civil suit in the court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Barnala, against his suspension as well as the charge-sheet.
An order of injunction was passed by the learned Additional Senior Sub Judge on 591989.
On 691989, the petitioner was once again placed under suspension.
He, therefore, filed another suit in the court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Barnala and once again applied for injunction.
His prayer was accepted and an order of injunction was passed on 2591989.
This injunction order was vacated by the Additional District Judge, Barnala, vide his order dated 2111989, which he passed on an appeal filed by the respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
The petitioner filed revision petition No. 3535 of 1989, which was admitted by the High Court on 13111989.
During the pendency of the revision petition, the petitioner withdrew his suits.
Consequently, the revision petition was also dismissed as having become infructuous.
3.
The petitioner contested the charge levelled against him vide his reply (Annexure P-7) dated 2671989.
Another charge-sheet dated 1381989 was served upon him by the Managing Director of the Federation.
Thereafter, the Additional Registrar, Co-operative Societies, was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report to the respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
Respondent No. 3 issued a show-cause notice dated 811992 proposing dismissal of the petitioner from services.
The petitioner made more than one applications for grant of time to file reply and ultimately submitted his reply on 741992.
On that very date the respondent No. 3 passed the order (Annexure P-18) and dismissed the petitioner from services.
Against his dismissal from service, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Board of Directors.
That appeal has been dismissed vide Annexure P-20.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the legality of the inquiry proceedings on the ground that the respondent- Federation did not have any jurisdiction to take disciplinary action against him because he was an employee of the Barnala Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd Barnala.
His contention is that the Common Cadre Rules framed by the respondent-Federation are not applcable to the employees of the Barnala Mills because Barnala Mills itself is an apex society as defined under section 15-A of the Act and is possessed with the powers to make rules under section 84-A of the Act.
Another ground of challenge to the order of punishment is that in respect of the incident which took place prior to the framing of common cadre rules by the Federation, no action could be taken against the petitioner under the Rules of 1989.
The petitioner has also questioned the authority of the Managing Director of the Federation to issue charge-sheet, the show-cause notice and the order of punishment.
His contention is that under the Rules of 1989, only Administrative Committee is competent to initiate disciplinary action against the Chief Executive (Managing Director and only where Administrative Committee does not exist, the Managing Director of the Federation gets powers to take disciplinary action against an officer.
The petitioner has also challenged the proceedings held by the Inquiry Officer on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice and arbitrariness.
The petitioner has pleaded that copy of the preliminary inquiry report was not made available to him, witnesses listed by him were not summoned, witnesses of the management were examined after close of evidence, original documents were not produced, he was not allowed an affective opportunity to cross examine the witnesses and no effective opportunity was given to him to submit reply to the show-cause notice.
The Appellate order has been challenged on the ground that it does not contain reasons and is, therefore, not a speaking order.
5.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondent Nos. 2 to 4, who have raised several preliminary objections to the entertainability of the writ petition.
Their case is that the petitioner has not come to this Court with clean hands, inasmuch as he has concealed the fact that he was in employment of respondent No. 5 and, therefore, he should not be heard on the merits of the case.
Another objection raised by the respondents is that the petitioner has acquiesced in the proceedings of the inquiry and is, therefore, not entitled to challenge the orders passed by the disciplinary authority as well as the appellate authority.
Yet another preliminary objection raised by the respondents is that after having withdrawn the suit filed by him without permission to file fresh one, the petitioner cannot challenge the legality of the inquiry proceedings initiated against him.
Respondents have also raised an objection of delay on the filing of the writ petition and have contended that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed only on the ground of laches.
On merits of the case, the respondents have pleaded that although the petitioner was an employee of the Barnala Mills, after the framing of 1989 Rules, he shall be deemed to have become an employee of the Federation and the Federation had full authority to take disciplinary action against him.
It has been asserted by the respondents that Barnala Mills cannot be treated as an apex society because many individuals are its members and a society of which individuals are members cannot be treated as an apex society for the purpose of section 84A of the Act.
It has also been pleaded by the respondents that the inquiry proceedings were held against the petitioner strictly in accordance with the Rules and the principles of natural justice and as all the objections raised by the petitioner were dealt with by the disciplinary as well as the appellate authority, the petitioner cannot have any grievance against the order of punishment as also the order passed by the appellate authority.
6.
Argument of Shri Rajiv Atma Ram that the petitioner is guilty of concealment of material facts and, therefore, he should not be heard on the merit of the case is not worth acceptance.
Though Shri Atma Ram has orally stated that the petitioner had sought employment during the period of suspension and had taken subsistence allowance from the Federation as well as as salary from the new employer, I find total absence of any averment in the reply showing that the petitioner had secured fresh employment during his suspension and had derived monetary benefits from two sources.
In the absence of a specific plea to this effect the petitioner cannot be held guilty of making a misstatement or concealment of material facts.
7.
Objection of delay in the filing of the petition is also without any substance.
In this regard it is important to note that the order of punishment was passed by the Managing Director of the Federation on 741992 and appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed on 2291992.
The order passed by the appellate authority was conveyed to the petitioner on 10121992.
He filed the writ petition on 26.5.1993, i.e. just after six months of the receipt of the copy of the order passed by the appellate authority.
This delay of six months cannot be treated as sufficient to non-suit the petitioner in a case like the present one where order of dismissal has the direct effect of depriving the petitioner of the source of his livelihood.
(sic) Rights of third party has not intervened in between and, therefore, it cannot be said that quashing of the order of punishment and the order passed by the appellate authority would bring about an inequitable situation and on that account the Court should not entertain the petition by holding the petitioner guilty of laches.
8.
Argument of Shri Atma Ram that the petitioner should be denied relief on the grounds of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence as well as his argument that the petition should be held as barred by the principle of res judicata are without substance.
No doubt, the petitioner had challenged his suspension as well as charge-sheet by filing two civil suits and he withdrew those suits without permission to file fresh suits, it is clear from the record of this case that the petitioner did not challenge the order of punishment and the order of the appellate authority by filing a civil suit.
In fact, he could not have challenged these orders because the same did not exist on the date of filing of the suits.
Therefore, withdrawal of the earlier suits filed by the petitioner without express liberty to file fresh one cannot disentitle the petitioner from instituting this writ petition involving a challenge to the order of dismissal as well as the order passed by the appellate authority.
Similarly, the petitioner cannot be held guilty of estoppel, waiver or acquiescence because from the very beginning, the petitioner has challenged the jurisdiction of the Federation to initiate an inquiry against him.
The petitioner had not only filed two civil suits to challenge his suspension as well as the charge-sheet, but had also objected to the initiation of inquiry by raising a specific objection to this effect in his reply to the charge- sheet as well as reply to the show-cause notice and the Memorandum of Appeal.
If at all the petitioner had challenged the inquiry proceedings at the intervening stages, the Court may have non-suited him by observing that he should raise his objection to the jurisdiction of the Federation by filing reply to the charge-sheet etc.
Repeated objection raised by the petitioner against the authority of the Federation to hold inquiry against him shows that the petitioner never acquiesced in the proceedings of inquiry.
Rather he had participated in the proceedings of the inquiry under protest.
Therefore, he cannot be denied relief in case he is able to show that the proceedings held against him suffer from any legal infirmity.
9.
On the merits of the case, Shri D.V.
Sharma has advanced many-fold contentions involving challenge to the jurisdiction of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 as also the merits of the inquiry proceedings and the findings recorded by the inquiry officer as well as the disciplinary authority.
However, after having thoughtfully considered the various contentions advanced by the learned counsel, I am of the opinion that it is not necessary for me to decide all those contentions which relate to the merits of the inquiry held against the petitioner because in my opinion the impugned action is liable to be quashed only on the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
10.
Argument of Shri Sharma is that on the basis of his appointment as Chief Executive of Barnala Mills, the petitioner became an employee of the said Mills and his service could not have been transferred to the respondent- Federation without his consent.
Shri Sharma argued that even under Section 84-A of the Act, the respondent-Federation did not get any authority to change the employer of the petitioner without his consent.
Learned counsel argued that after the coming into force the 1989 Rules, the petitioner had not given any option to become an employee of the respondent-Federation and in the absence of such option having been exercised by the petitioner, he continued to be an employee of the respondent No. 4.
Shri Sharma argued that as an employee of respondent No. 4, the petitioner cannot be made subject to the disciplinary control of the respondent-Federation and, therefore, the order of the dismissal passed by the Managing Director of the respondent-Federation should be declared as void.
On the other hand, Shri Atma Ram argued that Rules of 1989 have been framed by the respondent-Federation under section 84-A of the Act and, therefore, they have the force of law and by virtue of para 16 of the Rules, the petitioner will be deemed to have become an employee of the Federation.
According to the learned counsel being an employee of the Federation, the petitioner was subject of the disciplinary jurisdiction of the competent authority specified in the Rules of 1989, and therefore, the action taken by the Federation cannot be termed as illegal and without jurisdiction.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Wing Commander J Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1982(1) SLR 715.
He also relied on decisions of this Court in Madan Lal v Registrar, Co-operative Societies, 1974 SLWR 887 and the Ferozepur Central Co-operative Bank v. Registrar, Co-operative Societies, 1993(3) SCT 374 (P&H) : 1993(3) SLR 293.
11.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions, I find force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner did not become an employee of the Federation merely because the Federation had framed Common-Cadre Rules of 1989.
Learned counsel is right in contending that the petitioner was an employee of the respondents Barnala Mills and his status as an employee of the said Mills did not get obliterated merely because the respondent-Federation framed 1989 Rules, which contains a provision that the employees in the Common-Cadre shall be deemed to be in the service of the Federation.
There is no dispute between the parties that the Barnala Co-operative Spinning Mills Federation Ltd as well as the Punjab Co- operative Spinning Mills Federation Ltd are co-operative societies registered under the Act and both of these bodies are separate juristic persons.
There is also no controversy between the parties that Barnala Mills continued to exist even after the enactment of the Punjab Co-operative Spinning Mills Federation Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1989, which came into force on 651989.
Indeed, it is also not in controversy that after the coming into force the 1989 Rules, the petitioner was not called upon to give his option to become an employee of the Federation and, therefore, he had no occasion to give his choice to become an employee of the Federation.
In the absence of such option having been exercised by the petitioner, he cannot be treated as an employee of a different employer.
The service of the petitioner from the employment of the Barnala Mills could not have been transferred to the service of the Federation without his consent and, therefore, even though the Rules of 1989 may have statutory character, the petitioner could not automatically be treated as an employee of the Federation.
Paras 15, 16, 18 and 110 of the Rules of 1989 framed by the respondent-Federation read as under :-  "15 These rules shall apply to the employees of the Mills, included in the Common Cadre, as given in Annexure-`I', or as may be amended from time to time.
Control over the employees in  Common Cadre:- 16 All the employees in the common cadre shall be deemed to be in the service of the Federation.
Salaries of employees in Common Cadre :- 18.
(a) Pay of employees of the Federation and Mills, who are taken on the Common Cadre, shall be fixed in the grade specified in Annexure-`I' according to the principles for fixation laid down in the Punjab Civil Service Regulation Vol.I Part-I.
(b) When a Spinning Mill's employee holds current charge of another post in addition to his own substantive post, the competent authority may, in such cases, allow suitable honorarium (allowance), which, ordinarily, should not exceed 10% of the substantive pay of such employees or 5% of the officiating pay, if he has no substantive pay.
Financial Liabilities of the Federation and the Mills towards the service:- 110 (a) Salary for the period of duty, including all allowances, shall be paid to the employees in common cadre by the Federation or by the Mills for which the duty is performed.
(b) For the period of leave, the leave salary along with allowances shall be paid by the Federation.
(c) The Mills concerned shall pay to the Federation contribution in respect of the leave salary, inclusive of all allowances, provident Fund and Gratuily and Bonus, at the rates intimated from time to time by the Administrative Committee or in its absence the Managing Director.
The Federation shall maintain Leave Salary Contribution Fund and Grantuity Contribution Fund for the contribution received from the mills and these funds shall be administered by the Managing Director.
(d) On transfer of an employee from one mill to another mill or from the Federation to a Mill or vice-versa, the transfer travelling allowance and joining time salary shall be paid by the Mills or the Federation, as the case may be to which the employee has been transferred.
(e) During the period of any training to which an employee is deputed by the Federation, the salary, allowances, stipend, TA etc. shall be paid by the Federation.
Such expenditure shall be reimbursed to the Federation and shall ultimately be borne by the Mills in which the employee serves subsequent to training.
(f) In case of any doubt or dispute as to whether a particular period of duty relates to one Mill or another and the Federation, the matter shall be decided by the Managing Director and his decision shall be final."
12.
Though in terms of Para 16 of the 1989 Rules, employees in the common cadre are to be treated in the service of the Federation.
Para 110 of the Rules clearly indicates existence of separate services of the Federation and the Mills.
Therefore, by mere framing of the Rules, the employer of the petitioner cannot be treated as having changed.
The petitioner continued to be an employee of the Mills and, therefore, the respondent-Federation did not acquire any disciplinary control over him and it could not hold disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner in respect of the charges contained in Annexure P-6.
13.
In Jawahar Lal Nehru University v. KS Jawalkar and others, 1989(3) SLR 730, their Lordships of the Supreme Court had considered an almost identical issue involving the transfer of an employee of the JLN University to the Institute of Post-Graduate Studies at Imphal.
Respondent, who was an employee of the Department of South-Eastern Studies, a school of International studies, JLN University, was posted at the Centre of Post-Graduate Studies, Imphal.
In the year, 1980, the Imphal Centre was transferred from the JLN University to the Manipur University.
For effecting this transfer, the Syndicate of the Manipur University passed a resolution dated 19121981.
A corresponding resolution was passed by the JLN University on 321980.
In the meantime, the Manipur Legislature passed the Manipur University Act, 1980.
Section 1(4) of that Act provided that on and from the date on which the Act came into force in respect of the Post-Graduate Studies and Research, the JLN University would cease to exercise jurisdiction over the Centre of Post-Graduate Studies at Imphal and that the State Government of Manipur may make provision for transfer of the employees from the JLN University, Centre of Post-Graduate Studies, Imphal to the Manipur University.
Thereafter, the Governor of Manipur passed an order on 31.3.1981 and declared that the members of faculties of the JLN University, Centre of Post-Graduate Studies, Imphal would become members of the staff of the Manipur University on the same terms and conditions of service.
Resolution passed by the JLN University on 321981 also contained similar provisions.
Challenge made by the respondent to his transfter from the service of the JLN University to the Manipur University was upheld by the Delhi HIgh Court.
In appeal, the Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the High Court and held:-  " In this appeal the main contention of the appellant is that the respondent was appointed at the Centre of Post-Graduate Studies, Imphal and when the Centre was transferred to the Manipur University, his services were automatically transferred to the University, and consequently he could not claim to be an employee of the appellant University, the argument proceeds on the assumption that the Centre of Post Graduate Studies at Imphal was an independent entity which existed by itself and was not a department of the appellant University.
The submission proceeds on a fallacy.
The Centre of Post-Graduate Studies was set up at Imphal as an activity of the appellant University.
To give expression to that activity, the appellant University set up and organised the Centre at Imphal and appointed a teaching and administrative staff to man it.
Since the Centre represented an activity of the appellant University the teaching and administrative staff must be understood as employees of the appellant University.
In the case of the respondent, there can be no doubt whatever that he was, and continues to be, an employee of the appellant University.
There is also no doubt that his employment could not be transferred by the appellant-University to the Manipur University without his consent, notwithstanding any statutory provision to that effect whether in the Manipur University Act or elsewhere.
The contract of service entered into by the respondent was contract with the appellant University and no law can convert that contract into a contract between the respondent and the Manipur University without simultaneously making it, either expressly or by necessary implication, subject to the respondent's consent.
When the Manipur University Act provides for the transfer of the services of the staff working at the Centre of Post-Graduate Studies, Imphal to employment in the Manipur University, it must be construed as a provision enabling such transfer of employment but only on the assumption that the employee concerned is a consenting party to such transfer.
It makes no difference that the respondent was not shown in the list of Assistant Professors of the appellant University or that the provision was not indicated in its budget; that must be regarded as proceeding from an erroneous conception of the status of the respondent.
The position in law is clear, that no employee can be transferred, without his consent, from one employer to another.
The consent may be express or implied.
We do not find it necessary to refer to any case law in support of this conclusion underlining is mine."
In my opinion, the principle of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case fully applies to the case of the petitioner.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Wing Commander J Kumar v. Union of India (supra) and the two decisions of this Court on which reliance has been placed by Shri Rajiv Atma Ram do not help the case of the respondents.
In J Kumar's case (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the President of India has the power to amend the rules in exercise of his power under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and that an employee cannot make any grievance on the ground that he was not given opportunity of hearing before the rules were amended.
That case did not relate to the transfer of services of one employee from one employer to another employer without his consent.
In Mohan Lal Gupta v. the Registrar, Co-operative Societies (supra) the question which arose for determination before a Division Bench of this Court was as to whether the employees who became part of the common cadre could continue to remain under the control of two different Administrative Committees.
The Division Bench held that after the Senior Accountants in the Central Bank came on the strength of the common cadre, the Administrative Committee of the erstwhile authority ceased to have any power of punishment, demotion etc.
The same view has been reiterated in the Ferozepur Central Co-operative Bank v. Registrar, Co-operative Societies (supra).
In neither of the above referred case this Court dealt with a situation where the employee had claimed that he could not be transferred from the service of one employer to the other by virtue of the provisions in the Rules of 1989.
14.
Shri Atma Ram's argument that option is not required to be given in a case where transfer of service is brought about by a statutory instrument like the Rules of 1989 deserves to be rejected in view of the unequivocal pronouncement of the Supreme Court in KS Jawalkar's case (supra).
The underlined portion of that judgment shows that the Supreme Court was in fact dealing with a case involving change of employer by a statutory enactment.
15.
Thus, it is held that the petitioner continued to retain his status as an employee of the Barnala Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd As a logical corollary it will have to be further held that the officers of the respondent-Federation did not have the jurisdiction to pass order of punishment against the petitioner.
Consequently, the order (Annexure P-18) passed by the Managing Director of the Federation is declared as void.
The appellate authority (Annexure P-2) did nothing more than to affirm the order passed by the Managing Director of the respondent-Federation and, therefore, the order passed by the appellate authority is also liable to be nullified on the same very grounds on which the order Annexure P-18 has been found to be illegal.
16.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders (Annexures P-18 and P-20) are hereby declared illegal and are quashed.
It is, however, made clear that this decision shall not in any manner affect the right of the Barnala Mills to take appropriate action against the petitioner.
It shall also be open to the Barnala Co-operative Spinning Mills to dispense with the services of the petitioner in case the post held by him is no more available with the respondent-Mills.
This will be in tune with the observations made by the Supreme Court in para 8 of its judgment in Jawahar Lal Nehru University v. KS Jawalkar (supra).
Parties are left to bear their own costs.