GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has challenged his dismissal from service brought about by order Annexure P-1 dated 20.10.1992 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran, as well as dismissal of his appeal by order Annexure P-3 passed by the Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar.
2.
The facts which are borne out from the record show that the petitioner was recruited as Constable in the Police Department of the State of Punjab on 3.6.1971.
While the petitioner was posted as Driver at Judicial Guard, Amritsar, he was placed under suspension by an order dated 2231991 of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran on account of his wilful absence from duty with effect from 2121991.
At the same time, Inspector Santokh Singh, Anti-Smuggling Staff, Tarn Taran, was directed to hold departmental enquiry against the petitioner.
While that enquiry was still in progress, respondent No. 3 passed the impugned order Annexure P-1 and dismissed the petitioner from service in exercise of the powers vesting in him under rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules read with section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 and Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Against his dismissal from service, the petitioner filed an appeal under rule 169 of the Punjab Police Rules.
That appeal has been rejected by the Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar.
Petitioner has challenged the impugned orders on the ground of non-application of mind and arbitrariness.
His case is that respondent No. 3 had no material available with him on the basis of which he could from an opinion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules.
3.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents, who have in their written statement alleged that the petitioner was placed under suspension for misuse of Government vehicle and was awarded punishment of `censure'.
Respondents have also charged the petitioner with the allegation of having remained absent on various dates between 1741974 to 20.11.1992.
Their assertion is that the petitioner has raised a false plea of his alleged illness in order to cover up his long absence from duty.
They have stated that the petitioner was relieved from duty on 2121991 to report for duty at Police Lines, Tarn Taran, but he did not do so and, therefore, the competent authority placed him under suspension.
Respondents have alleged that the petitioner was found mixed up with the extremists inasmuch as he was supplying them information relating to the Police Department and was carrying their arms and ammunition from one place to another.
On the basis of these facts, the competent authority dismissed him from service by invoking the powers vesting in it under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Respondents have pleaded that it was not practicable to hold a regular inquiry because the petitioner was associated with the extremists and no witness was prepared to depose against the petitioner because of fear.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has not appeared to argue the case.
I have heard learned Assistant Advocate General and perused the record which she has placed before the Court.
This record shows that a regular departmental enquiry was pending against the petitioner at the time of the passing of the impugned order.
That enquiry related to his wilful absence from duty.
The record further shows that in the Daily Diary Report No. 36 dated 761992 of Police Lines, Tarn Taran, the Lines Officer has reported that the petitioner was one of the many police personnel who were absent from duty without information and permission.
On 12.11.1992 the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Lines), Tarn Taran, prepared a note that Constable Sangram Singh has not reported for duty.
He observed that this long absence by the Constable was a serious violation of the police discipline.
He also recorded that through secret sources it had come to notice that by remaining absent Sangram Singh was in league with the active militants and he was supplying them information relating to police and they were getting benefit out of that and he is also helping them in the transport of arms and ammunition.
He, therefore, recommended petitioner's dismissal from service under Article 311(2).
This note of the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Lines), Tarn Taran, is based on another note prepared by the Lines Officer, Police Lines, Tarn Taran dated 11111992, in which also similar allegation has been recorded against the petitioner.
The file also contains an order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tan Taran, Dismissing the petitioner from service.
Order passed by the Inspector General of Police Border Range, Amritsar, dismissing the appeal filed by the petitioner is also available on record.
5.
The only point which requires adjudication is as to whether the order of dismissal passed by respondent No. 3 by invoking proviso (b) to Article 311 (2) of the Constitution of India is legal or not.
Article 311 of the Constitution reads as under :-  Article 311 - Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacites under the Union or a State.
(1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges  (Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed: Provided further that this clause shall not apply-- (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or  (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or (c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final."
6.
Article 311(1) is couched in negative form and it protects the holder of civil post against dismissal or removal from service by an authority who is subordinate to the authority that appointed him.
Article 311(2) is also couched in negative form and lays down that a member of civil service cannot be dismissed or removed from service without an inquiry and without a reasonable opportunity of hearing to him.
Clauses (a) to (c) contained in the second proviso to Article 311(2) contain three exceptions to the provision contained in Article 311(2).
Clause (a) lays down that inquiry as envisaged in Article 311(2) will not be necessary where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
Clauses (b) and (c) empower the competent authority and the President or Governor, as the case may be, to impose the penalty of dismissal or removal if it is satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to do so or where it is not expedient to hold such inquiry in the interest of the security of the State.
Being in the nature of exceptions to the general rule, these clauses have to be construed strictly and when an order for dismissal or removal from service passed under any of these three clauses is challenged in a court of law, it has to be shown that the conditions for exercise of the power under clauses (a), (b) or (c) did exist.
7.
While dealing with a case arising under clause (c) in Bakshi Sardari Lal v Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 1547, the Supreme Court held that the satisfaction contemplated by Article 311(2)(c) must be the personal satisfaction of the President.
This judgment was overruled in Shamsher Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1974, SC 2192.
A even Judges Bench held that the power exercised under Article 311 is executive in nature and the satisfaction envisaged therein need not be the personal satisfaction of the President or the Governor.
The Supreme Court declared that the President and the Governors have to act on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers and that an order passed by the President on the advice of the Council of Minister does not contravene Article 311(2)(c).
8.
In Union of India and another v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416 their Lordships of the Supreme Court over-ruled an earlier decision in Union of India v. TR Chellappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, wherein the Supreme Court held that even in cases covered by clauses (a) to (c) of Article 311(2) the competent authority is required to give a notice to the concerned employee before inflicting a particular penalty.
However even while over-ruling its earlier decision in Chellappan's case (supra), the Constitution Bench held that even though it may not be necessary to give a notice and an opportunity of hearing to the concerned employee, the conditions enumerated for exercise of the powers under clauses (a) to (c) must be satisfied.
9.
In Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1356, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court quashed the order passed by the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent of the Northern Railways who exercised power under proviso (b) to Article 311 of the Constitution of India on the ground that no material was available with the said authority for satisfying itself that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
10.
In Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 125 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 385, the Supreme Court dealt with the scope of Article 311(2)(b) and held:  "The decision to dispense with the departmental inquiry cannot be rested solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned authorities.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the out-come of the whim and caprice of the concerned officer.
In the instant case it was alleged that the delinquent police officer instead of replying to show cause notice instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the superiors.
It is also alleged that he threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, if any Departmental enquiry was held against him.
No particulars were given.
It was not shown on what material the concerned authorities had come to the conclusion that the delinquent had thrown threats.
The satisfaction of the concerned authority was found to be based on the ground that the delinquent was instigating his colleagues and was holding meetings with other police officials with a view to spread hatred and dissatisfaction towards his superiors.
It was not shown that the concerned authority had verified the correctness of information leading to the said allegation."
11.
In Chief Security Officer and others v. Singasan Rabi Das, 1992(1) SCT 595 (SC) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
140, the Supreme Court held that there was no justification to dispense with the enquiry merely because the disciplinary authority thought that it was not feasible or desirable to procure witnesses of the security/other railway employees since that will expose these witnesses and make them ineffective in future and if these witnesses were asked to appear at a confronted enquiry they were likely to suffer personal humiliation and insults and even their family members may also become targets of violence.
12.
In Kedarnath Singh v. Union of India and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
347, a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court interpreted rule 47 of the Railway Protection Force Rules, 1959 which is pari materia with proviso (b) to Article 311(2) and rejected the contention of the employer that the inquiry was not reasonably practicable because the only eye-witness to the alleged incident was not willing to come forward and give testimony against the delinquent.
Their Lordships held -  "In our opinion the term reasonably practicable has nothing whatsoever to do with the prospects of success of the enquiry for the department should an enquiry be held as contemplated under Rule 44.
`Practicability' is not to be confused with the expediency or the chances of success of the enquiry contemplated against the delinquent member of the Force.
Rule 44 embodies a sound principle of natural justice providing for a full and fair opportunity to the employee against whom it is proposed to award a major penalty which includes dismissal or removal from service.
Rule 47(b) has, therefore, to be construed strictly as it enables the disciplinary authority to give a complete go-bye to the aforesaid principles of natural justice embodied in Rule 44 and straightaway, on the material collected ex- parte and behind the back of the delinquent member, to remove or dismiss him.
In view of what has been stated above we are clearly of the view that Rule 47(b) was illegally applied in the case of the petitioner.
The grounds disclosed by the Assistant Security Officer were not germane to the considerations on account of which enquiry under Rule 44 could be dispensed with."
13.
In MK Kunjappan v. President of India, 1984(2) S.L.R.
669, a learned Single Judge of the Kerala High Court quashed the dismissal of an employee from service which was brought about by invoking proviso (c) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India on the ground that the petitioner believed in the philosophy of violence and was also an accused in a murder case and the commission of murders was a part of his philosophy.
The learned Judge held that there was nothing to show that holding of an inquiry into the conduct of the petitioner was reasonably linked with the interest of security of the State.
This judgment of the learned single Judge has been upheld in President of India v. Kunjappan, 1985(1) S.L.R.
494, by a Division Bench which observed:  "The High Court has the power to ascertain whether the opinion formed by the authority has any factual basis and the conditions precedent to its formation were there.
In this case the President of India has no doubt powers under clause (c) of the 2nd proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution to dismiss a member of the Civil Service of the Union without an enquiry if and only if he is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold an enquiry into the charges against him.
So, two conditions must exist, namely: (i) the security of the State is involved; and (ii) in view of that it is inexpedient to conduct enquiry.
In this case the respondent is only Watcher in a Post and Telegraph Depot.
The allegations against him are that he preaches violence, is a member of a political al group which was once banned and that he is an accused in a murder case pending trial.
In a case where the allegations against civil service personnel in question have nothing to do with the security of the State and he is not one holding a sensitive post there is no justification whatsoever in invoking clause (c) of the 2nd proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
The conditions precedent for the exercise of the power under clause (c) of the proviso are absent here and hence there is no justification for invoking the powers under the clause.
If for example, the respondent was involved in spying the position would have been different.
As long as the activities of the respondent have nothing to do with the security of the State, if action is to be taken against him and if his services are to be dispensed with that can only be after an enquiry as insisted by Article 311(2) and not in exercise of the powers under Article 311(2) clause (c) of the proviso.
The right conferred by Article 311 of the Constitution on the civil service is a valuable right.
It cannot be given the go-by like this.
The clauses (b) and (c) of the 2nd proviso to sub-article (2) can be invoked only if the situation really warrants and enquiry cannot be held, because the rule is that a member of the civil services can be dismissed only after a full- fledged enquiry."
14.
In Union of India v. Subramanian, 1985(1) S.L.R.
238, the action taken by the employer to dispense with the enquiry by declaring it to be reasonably impracticable to hold, was declared to be invalid.
The Court held that the constitutional requirement of Article 311(2) cannot be converted into a dead letter for the simple reason that the employees have developed class or group feelings.
15.
In Shri Naresh Kumar v. Commissioner of Police, 1992(7) S.L.R.
177, it has been held that dismissal of Constables without holding a regular enquiry on the ground that the employees were allegedly of desperate character and their continuation in service was hazardous to police was unsustainable with reference to Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
16.
From the above quoted decisions it is clear that an order of dismissal or removal passed under Article 311(2)(b) is open to judicial review and can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant consideration.
Validity of an order passed under Article 311(2)(b) can be challenged on vstioud grounds including the following ones :-  (1) Where the authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations.
(2) Where its satisfaction is based on considerations, which are not relevant.
(3) Where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked.
(4) Where the satisfaction is not grounded on materials which are of rationally probative value.
(5) Where the exercise of power is not in good faith.
17.
I shall now consider as to whether in this case the competent authority has exercised its power under Article 311(2)(b) in accordance with the settled lrhsl parameters.
A look at the impugned order shows that the respondent No. 3 has passed the order of dismissal solely on the basis of the note dated 11111992 of the Lines Officer as also the note dated 12.
11.
1992 of the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Lines).
During the course of hearing the court enquired from the learned Assistant Advocate General as to whether there existed any report about the petitioner's link with extremists.
Mrs. Tuli made a statement that the respondents do not have any record to establish petitioner's nexus with extremists.
She also stated that there is nothing on the record to show that the respondent No. 3 had made any verification about the correctness of the statement contained in the two notes prepared by the Lines Officer and the Deputy Superintendent (Lines).
It must therefore be said that except the two notes no material was available with the respondent No3 for passing the impugned order nor did he make any attempt to verify the truthfulness or otherwise of the contents of the two notes.
There is nothing on the record to show that respondent No. 3 himself applied his mind to the record of the case and felt satisfied that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
In fact, respondent No3 had signed the order of dismissal on dotted lines.
In the absence of any material placed before the Court showing that there was some basis of the noting recorded by the Lines Officer and in the total absence of anything on the record to show that respondent No. 3 him self considered the entire matter and recorded reasons for taking the view that it was not reasonably practicable to hold enquiry, the impugned order has to be declared as illegal.
18.
In so far as the appellate order is concerned it is merely an order of affirmance and when the original order has been found to be illegal, the appellate order is also liable to be quashed.
19.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexures P-1 and P-3 are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
This shall, however, not entitle the petitioner to be reinstated in service.
Instead, he should be deemed to be continuing under suspension.
It shall be open to the respondents to hold enquiry against the petitioner in accordance with the law and pass a fresh order of punishment.
Since the petitioner was absent from duty he shall not be entitled to salary or other monetary benefits between the date of his dismissal and the date of reinstatement.
As to what treatment should be meted out to the period of his suspension, shall be decided by the competent authority at the time of the passing of the fresh order.
20.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed