TS Doabia, J - This order shall dispose of writ petitions No. 68 of 1992 (CIMMCO Ltd Birlanagar v. Nandkishore and others) and 199 of 1992 (Nand Kishore v. Factory Manager, CIMMCO Ltd and others).
Both the petitions arises out of the same order passed by the Industrial Court and the Labour Court under the Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act').
The facts have been taken from writ petition No. 68 of 1992 which was preferred by the employer.
2.
The facts out of which this petition arises may be noticed as under.
3.
The employer in this case has a factory at Birlanagar, Gwalior.
The respondent No. 1 (Nand Kishore) (hereinafter referred to as the `workman') is said to have been employed as Peon.
According to the petitioner, the workman worked from 5th of June, 1976 to 4th of July, 1976.
Thereafter, he left the job on his own accord.
The case of the workman is that the plea taken by the management with regard to abandonment of service is not correct but this is a case where the services of the petitioner were illegally terminated.
As there was failure to comply with the provision of section 25-F of the Act, he was entitled to reinstatement with backwages.
4.
The Labour Court allowed the application of the workman.
It directed his reinstatement with 50 per cent backwages.
In the alternative, an option was given to the management to pay a sum of Rs. 70,000/- by way of compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
Both the parties were aggrieved by the order so passed by the Labour Court on 19th January, 1985.
The management did not want to pay a lump sum amount of compensation whereas the workman was aggrieved against the direction by which an option was given to the management to decline reinstatement by paying a lump sum amount.
5.
The Industrial Court considered the matter and came to the conclusion that the management was unable to substantiate the plea of misconduct and the option contained in the order of Labour Court regarding payment of compensation in lieu of reinstatement was not justified.
It was accordingly ordered that the workman would be entitled to reinstatement but the relief of grant of full backwages was declined.
This order passed by the Industrial Court on 1st November, 1989 was challenged by the management in MP No. 336 of 1990.
This court came to the conclusion that the Industrial Court was not right in coming to the conclusion in setting aside the option given to the management.
The observations made by this Court may be noticed.
These are as under.
"Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that the industrial Court could not have set aside the option given to the petitioner for payment of compensation in lieu of reinstatement on the ground mentioned by it in paragraph 7 of its impugned order.
Domestic enquiry was not believed by the Labour Court.
The employer was given an opportunity to prove the alleged misconduct.
Respondent No.1 had an opportunity to demolish the case of misconduct set up by the employer and he did avail of that opportunity.
After taking into account the evidence led by the parties the Labour Court also came to the conclusion that the alleged misconduct was not proved by the petitioner and accordingly it made the order for reinstatement with 50% back wages.
However, as the evidence disclosed that the petitioner had lost confidence in respondent No.1 and therefore it could not be compelled to reinstate the respondent No.1 against its wishes.
Under these circumstances, option was given to the employer to pay compensation of Rs. 70,000/- to respondent No. 1 in view of reinstatement.
In these circumstances the order made by the Labour Court giving option to the employer to pay compensation in lieu of reinstatement could not be said to be illegal and without jurisdiction and, therefore, it could not have been quashed by the Industrial Court in an appeal filed u/s 65 of the said Act.
Accordingly the impugned order of the Industrial Court deserves to be set aside.''
(Emphasis supplied) The further observations made with regard to the appeal preferred by the workman may also be noticed.
These are as under :  "Because the appeal filed by the respondent No.1 was allowed by the Industrial Court it did not have an occasion to examine or decide the points raised by the petitioner in its appeal against the quantum of compensation fixed by the Labour Court in case the petitioner decided to pay compensation in lieu of rein-statement.
(Emphasis supplied) 6.
The matter was accordingly remanded to the Industrial Court.
The Industrial Court examined the matter afresh and gave its decision on 3rd October, 1991.
It is against this order, both the parties have preferred this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
The counsel for the management had submitted that the Industrial Court has not given consistent findings.
In this regard, following inconsistencies have been pointed out:  (i) that, in para 23 of the order it is mentioned that the workman is entitled to be compensated and he should be paid Rs. 70,000/-;  (ii) that, as the management has been complying with the provisions of section 63 (3) of the Act, therefore, the amount so paid would be adjusted;  (iii) that, the workman should not be deprived of backwages, as the two concepts that is payment of backwages and compensation in lieu of reinstatment are different;  (iv) that, in the matter of calculating the backwages a sum of Rs. 250 per day be deducted while calculating the backwages; and  (v) that, while making payment of Rs. 70,000/- the payment made in terms of section 65 (3) of the Act may be deducted.
8.
The petitioner management has challenged the order on the following grounds:  (i) that, the workman was not entitled to reinstatement;  (ii) that, nothing has been disclosed for fixing the lump sum compen-sation by awarding Rs. 70,000/-.
(iii) that, backwages could not be granted unless and until there was a positive averment and finding with regard to the employee being not gainfully employed; and  (iv) that, compensation could not be in addition to backewages  9.
I have considered the matter and I am of the view that the order passed by the Industrial Court calls for no interference.
It is brought on the record that the workman had worked for more than 240 days and his services were terminated without compensation.
Therefore, the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of The State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111 would be attracted and the workman is entitled to reinstatement.
This view has been reiterated in number of cases.
These are L Robert D'Souza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railways, AIR 1982 SC 854, Mohan Lal v. Management of M/s Bharat Electronics Limited, AIR 1981 SC 1253, M.D.
Singh v. Reserve Bank of India, AIR 1986 SC 132, Punjab Land Development Reclamation Corpn Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh, (1990) 3 SCC 682.
11.
So far as the question as to whether workman is entitled to backwages or not is concerned this matter has again been settled by the Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, AIR 1979 SC 75.
The Supreme Court has said in categoric terms that the burden to prove that the workman is gainfully employed elsewhere or not is on the management.
The normal rule is to grant full backwages.
The effect of an award of reinstatement is merely to state that under the order of wrongful dismissal of the workman by the employer and to reinstate him in the services of the employer and to restore to his normal position and status as it is in the contract of appointment originally entered into has been continuing.
Thus, no exception can be taken to the grant of backwages.
12.
The question as to whether the workman was entitled to lumpsum amount of compensation in addition to the amount of backwages and as to what should be the quantum of this compensation may also be examined.
13.
There is hardly any doubt that whenever compensation is granted in lieu of reinstatement then this is in addition to the backwages till the date of reinstatement.
If any authority is needed reference may be made to the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Ruby General Insurance Co Ltd v. PP Chopra, (1970) I.L.L.J.
63.
14.
As to what should be the quantum of compensation, the Patna High Court in the case of B Choudhury v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Jamshedpur, (1983) Lab.
IC 1755 has laid down various criteria.
These are as under :  "(i) the backwages receivable; (ii) compensation for deprivation of the job with future prospect and obtainability of alternative employment; (iii) employee's age; (iv) length of service in the establishment; (v) capacity of the employer to pay and the nature of the employer's business; (iv) gainful employment in mitigation of damages; and  (vii) circumstances leading to the disengagement and the past conduct.
15.
The Supreme Court has also dealt with this aspect of the matter in the case of SS Shetty v. Bharat Nidhi Ltd, (1957) II LLJ 696.
The observations made by the Supreme Court may be noticed with advantage.
These are as under:  "The Industrial Tribunal would have to take into account the terms and conditions of employment, the tenure of service, the possibility of termination of the employment at the instance of either party, the possibility of retrenchment by the employer or resignation or retirement by the workman and even of the employer himself ceasing to exist or of the workman being awarded various benefits including reinstatment under the terms of future awards by Industrial Tribunal in the event of industrial disputes arising between the parties in the future.
In computing the money value of the benefit of reinstatement, the Industrial Tribunal would also have to take into account the present value of what his salary, benefits etc. would be till he attained the age of superannuation and the value of such benefits would have to be computed as from the date when such reinstatement was ordered under the terms of the award.
Having regard to the considerations detailed above, it is impossible to compute the money value of this benefit of reinstatement awarded to the appellant with mathematical exactitude and the best that any tribunal or court would do under the circumstances would be to as correct an estimate as is possible bearing, of course, in mind all the relevant factors pro and con."
16.
In view of the above, the Industrial Court was justified in granting lumpsum compensation in lieu of reinstatement as this is done with a view to compensate the workman for his having been deprived the job which held some future prospects for him.
The workman may also be not in a position to obtain alternate employment.
It would not be out of place to mention that the management did not raise any argument with a view to contend that the quantum of compensation was not rightly awarded.
17.
In any case, in view of the judgment given by the Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of India and others v. Samarendra Kishore Endow and another, 1994(2) SCT 250 (SC) : 1994 AIR SCW 1465, the High Court under Article 226 would not sit as a Court of Appeal with a view to examine as to whether the quantum fixed by the Industrial Court is right or wrong.
The same view has been expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Parma Nanda, AIR 1989 SC 1185 and in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. S Sree Rama Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1723.
18.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in the contention raised by the management.
Similarly, the order passed by the industrial Court denying the relief of reinstatment and grant of compensation is held to be valid.
The writ petitions filed by the management and workman are found to be without merit and the same are dismissed.