VK Bali, J - Petitioner Dr. Renu Bansal through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India takes exception to the admission criteria to MD/MS 40% non-PCMS quota candidates, according to which, it is pleaded, merit list is not prepared strictly as per merit position of the candidates in the competitive entrance examination.
The regulations determining admission criteria as contained in Regulations 12, 61 to 65 in the prospectus for Competitive Entrance Test, 1993, need an immediate notice.
"12 Admission Criteria :-  Admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses shall be combiningly determined on the basis of the result of the Entrance Test (80 marks) and the academic achievements of the candidate for 40% quota candidates/weightage given for the length of service in PCMS/PCMS (Dental) for 60% quota candidates (20 marks).
Emphasis supplied).
61.
A combined merit list on the basis of performance of entrance test will be prepared.
62.
The final merit of a candidate will be determined on the basis of performance of entrance test (80 marks) and previous record of MBBS/BDS course non-PCMS/PCMS (Dental) graduate/weightage of length of service for PCMS/PCMS (Dental) doctors (20 marks).
63.
The selection in each speciality and institution will be based on merit-cum-choice of each candidate.
For each discipline a waiting list of 25% of the available seats will be prepared and vacancy/ies, if any, will be filled latest by 31.8.1993 from amongst the candidates on the waiting list.
No admission will be made after 31.8.1993.
64.
There will be separate merit list for 40% and 60% quota candidates.
65.
Determination of inter se merit of candidates obtaining equal marks : In case of two or more candidates obtaining equal marks computed out of 80 marks secured in the entrance test and 20 marks of MBBS/BDS examination for fresh graduates/weightage of length of service for PCMS/PCMS (Dental) candidates, the inter se merit of such candidates shall be determined as under : (i) candidates obtaining higher marks in entrance test; (ii) candidates obtaining higher marks in paper-II; (iii) candidates obtaining higher marks in paper-I; (iv) according to age-older getting preference over younger."
From amongst the regulations 12 to 65 in the prospectus of Competitive Entrance Test, as have been reproduced above, the offending regulations are pleaded to be 12 and 62.
In so far as regulation 65 is concerned, contention of the petitioner is that if regulations 12 and 62 are held to be illegal, consequential changes in clause 65 would be necessitated.
2.
Even though the precise grievance of the petitioner is as noticed above, yet the material facts culminating into this petition need a necessary mention.
3.
Petitioner passed her MBBS examination from Government Medical College, Patiala, in the year 1992.
She successfully completed her internship at Rajindra Hospital, Patiala, in February, 1993.
She qualified the All India Entrance Examination held by All India Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi.
She intended to do higherstudies and accordingly filled the examination form for Competitive Entrance Test-1993 (hereinafter to be referred to as CET) to be conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar for admission to the Post graduate Medical/Dental Course.
In the State of Punjab only two Government Colleges conduct Post graduate Medical/Dental Course, namely, the Govt. Medical College, Patiala and Govt. Medical College, Amritsar.
In May, 1993, she filled the examination form and date of CET was fixed as June 13, 1993 for which she had already received the admit card.
However, when the prospectus for CET-1993 containing the clauses, referred to above, came to her notice, she enquired from respondent-Colleges to know as to what was the exact number of seats available in different subjects so that she could come to know whether there were sufficient number of seats for admission in the speciality she wanted to do.
None of the Medical Colleges obliged her with the information so required.
When oral requests made by the petitioner to know the number of seats available in different subjects brought no tangible results, her father represented in writing to the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, for removing the discrepancy in the prospectus.
It was highlighted in the prospectus aforesaid that allocation of 20% marks for academic achievements for non-PCMS candidates was unwarranted and need to be removed.
It was also pointed out that the students who achieved high position during MBBS course were mainly sons and daughters of the doctors, who are well placed in Hospitals and Medical Colleges.
This favoured group created frustration amongst the meritorious candidates as in most of the cases the top positions were unfairly cornered by the sons and daughters of serving doctors.
It was further pointed out that the so-called top rank as in the MBBS examination appear nowhere in the CET.
Attention of respondent No. 1, was invited to the fact that no such provision of marks for academic achievements was provided by AIIMS, New Delhi or PGIMER, Chandigarh or M.D.U., Rohtak.
It is pleaded that no other University in the country adds marks obtained in MBBS degree to the marks obtained in the CET for preparing final merit list, and the very object of CET would be defeated if the marks of qualifying examination are taken into consideration for preparing final merit list.
It is further stated that provision of giving 20% marks was mischievously made under the head "Academic Achievements" whereas the prospectus would manifest that this academic achievement has no special honour or high distinction conferred on any particular candidate.
4.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it requires to be mentioned that Competitive Entrance Test for admission to post graduate Medical/Dental Degree Courses (Three years Residency System) in the Government Medical/Dental Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar is held for in-service candidates for whom quota fixed is 40 whereas remaining 60% seats are filled from amongst those who are not in service i.e. who are not serving as PCMS/PCMS (Dental).
In so far as in-service candidates arc concerned, for whom as mentioned above, quota is fixed as 40%, weightage is for length of service in PCMS/PEMS (Dental).
In so far as CET is concerned, the same is of 80 marks.
5.
The basic contention of learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner is that admission to MD/MS has necessarily to be governed on the basis of Competitive Entrance Test and no credit could be given to the academic achievements of the qualifying examination.
The differing standards adopted by various colleges in so far as studies, the course to be followed, examinations, standard of marking and many other things are entirely different in the country and a student achieving higher marks in the qualifying examination because of different standards laid down by different Colleges/Universities, cannot be said to be necessarily a better candidate than the one who has obtained lessor marks.
It is further contended that the Apex Court in numerous decisions rendered by it has already held that admission has to be governed on the basis of CET and no credit can be given to the academic achievements of the qualifying examination.
The mandate of the Supreme Court has been meticulously followed by all the Institutions, Universities and Colleges located in the Country like AIIMS, New Delhi, PGIMER, Chandigarh and MDU, Rohtak whereas the Punjab Government has innovated a method to dilute the decisions of the Supreme Court.
It is further the case of petitioner that very rational of CET would be lost if the marks of qualifying examination are taken into consideration.
If the qualifying examination reflects the academic achievements of the candidates, then there is no use of holding Entrance Test and inasmuch as the qualifying examination does not reflect the real merit of a candidate, Entrance Test has been provided for and once that has been provided for, there cannot be any scope whatsoever for still recognising the merit in the qualifying examination, even though to the extent of 20%.
6.
This writ was admitted on August 24, 1993 when after hearing the matter on five consecutive dates, the reply was not filed.
On September 23, 1993, learned counsel for the parties informed the Court that Guru Nanak Dev University was a necessary party and yet no notice had been issued to it.
That being so, notice was ordered to be issued to Guru Nanak Dev University through its Registrar for October 20, 1993.
7.
Neither the State of Punjab nor the Guru Nanak Dev University has filed written statement.
The matter has been contested only by respondent No. 4 i.e. Government Medical College, Amritsar.
In so far as grievance of petitioner with regard to number of seats available in different subjects is concerned, it is pleaded in the written statement that PG Entrance Test for admission to Post graduate courses Session-1993, was conducted by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and the fist regarding number of seats available in each Post graduate courses/College was published in the Indian Express newspaper dated July 9, 1993 by the Co-ordinator, PG Entrance Test, 1993, as addendum to prospectus (Annexure R-2).
Nothing on that count was, thus, argued by learned counsel for the petitioner.
However, in so far as main point involved in the case is concerned, all that respondent No.
I has to say in the written statement is that the authorities apprehended that by eliminating 20 marks of academic career for fresh graduates under 40% quota, would eliminate the academic charm during under-graduate course/studies resulting into fall of standard in undergraduate teaching.
It is further the case of respondent No. 4 that the Medical Colleges at Amritsar and Patiala, where the facilities exist, are maintained and financed by the Punjab Government and it is the prerogative of the Government to formulate policy for admission of candidates to the said Institutions.
As per notification dated February 8, 1993, the Government with a view to determine the merit of the candidates, had fixed 80 marks for PG Entrance Test and 20 marks on the basis of academic achievements during MBBS studies.
In so far as legal proposition, as has been noticed above, is concerned, all that respondent No. 4 has to say is, that the same is legal and this Court may decide the matter.
8.
From the perusal of the written statement, it is, however, apparent that whereas, the proposition of law as canvassed by the petitioner has not been seriously disputed, yet a two-fold defence has been projected.
In the first instance it is stated that it was apprehended that by eliminating 20 marks of academic career for fresh graduates under 40% quota, will eliminate the academic charm during undergraduate course/studies resulting into fall of standard in undergraduate teaching and secondly, that it is the prerogative of the Government to formulate policy for admission to Medical Colleges, Amritsar and Patiala.
9.
In so far as State of Punjab is concerned, as mentioned above, the matter has not been contested as no written statement was filed either when the matter was at motion stage or even after the writ was admitted.
10.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. RS Bains, Advocate, as noticed above, in the very nature of things has to be tested on the basis of Article 14 of the Constitution of India which strikes at arbitrary action and, thus, necessarily results in negation of equality.
The doctrine of classification maybe a judicial formula for determining whether the legislative or executive action is arbitrary and, therefore, results in denial of equality.
If the classification is not reasonable or does not satisfy the two conditions referred to above, the impugned legislative or executive action would plainly be arbitrary and the guarantee of equality under Article 14 would be breached.
In view of the settled law, as noticed above, the only question that requires consideration is as to whether by providing 20% marks for the qualifying examination, the students competing for post-graduate courses have been treated differently, thus, violating the equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11.
The entrance test facilitates the assessment of comparative talent of the candidates by application of a uniform standard and is always preferable to evaluation of comparative merit on the basis of marks obtained at the qualifying examination, when the qualifying examination is held by two or more different authorities.
This was said by the apex Court for the first time in Ajay Hasia and others v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others, (1981)1 SCC 722.
The observations as mentioned above, came to be made by the Supreme Court while considering the challenge of students to the entrance test and ignoring the marks obtained by them in the qualifying examination.
The petitioners in the said case had applied for admission in the College to the first semester of the BE course in response to a notice issued by the College for such admission.
They appeared in a written test consisting of 100 marks as well as an interview consisting of 50 marks but could not be selected for admission.
They, therefore, filed petitions contending that the selection was violative of Article 14 on the ground that the Society acted arbitrarily in the matter of granting of admissions, first by ignoring the marks obtained by the candidates at the qualifying examination; secondly, by relying on viva voce examination as a test for determining comparative merit of the candidates; thirdly, by allocating as many as 50 marks for the viva voce examination as against 100 marks allocated for the written test; and lastly, by holding superficial interviews lasting only 2 or 3 minutes on an average and asking questions which had no relevance to assessment of the suitability of the candidates with reference to the factors required to be considered at the viva voce examination.
It is while considering the challenge of the candidates to the entrance test that the Supreme Court observed that "the entrance test facilitates the assessment of comparative talent of the candidates by application of a uniform standard and is always preferable to evaluation of comparative merit on the basis of marks obtained at the qualifying examination".
Although, no written statement has been filed by the State of Punjab and it is only the Guru Nanak Dev University which has filed the written statement, yet it has not been denied that the candidates, who competed for the post-graduate courses in open category, had passed their qualifying examinations from different universities located in India as also within the State of Punjab itself.
12.
Different standard of education adopted by various universities in the courses, examinations, standard of marking and other factors were perhaps the basic determining factors for holding an entrance test.
It was felt that in some universities courses that were followed were far easier as compared to other universities as also that standard of teaching and marking was entirely different.
It is for that precise reason that the Supreme Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar and others v. Motilal Nehru Medical College and others, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 1059, ordered that "no State Government or University or Medical College shall grant admission to students to fill the minimum 30% open seats not reserved on the basis of residence requirement or institutional preference for the MBBS course or to 50% open seats not reserved on the basis of institutional preference for post-graduate courses such as, MD, MS and on the basis of comparison of the marks obtained by them at different qualifying examinations held by different State/Universities and that admissions must be based on evaluation of relative merits through an entrance examination which would be open to all qualified candidates throughout the country".
It requires to be reiterated that this Court is dealing with the admissions to post-graduate courses i.e. M.D./M.S.
In so far as super-specialities of M.D./M.S.
are concerned, reservations have almost been done away with by judicial pronouncements and with regard to specialities of M.D./M.S.
also, effort should be to get best candidates The class of doctors as a whole and specialists in particular, are dealing with human fives and anything that might prevent the best talent to come up should not be accepted easily.
Even though, an entrance test has been provided but allocation of 20 marks for academic career i.e. giving preference to the students on the basis of their qualifying marks, would, in considered view of this Court, be arbitrary.
It cannot be denied that with the kind of competition amongst the students that is prevalent these days, one mark or even fraction of a mark makes all the difference between admission and denial thereof.
That apart, if the criteria for admissions based upon entrance examination is arbitrary, the same would be true even with regard to a part of the same.
The principles that govern the admissions based entirely on qualifying marks would apply to a part of the said criteria i.e. to the extent of 20%.
13.
Single Bench of Jammu and Kashmir High Court in Miss Anjum Afshan v. State of J&K, AIR 1994 NOC 313, adversely commented upon giving of weightage to qualifying exam and reserving 25 points for the same and held the same to be illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It is not clear from the judgment as to what were the total points but it is rather certain that 25 points were not total points fixed for selection.
14.
In so far as the two fold defence projected by respondent No. 4 is concerned and which has been noticed above, suffice it to say that the same cannot hold any ground in view of the settled law on the point as noticed above.
Elimination of 20 marks of academic career for fresh graduates under 40% quota cannot possibly eliminate the academic charm during undergraduate course/studies.
Those who are really interested in teaching or the students who are desirous of excelling in their career cannot be expected to work less simply for the reason that the marks obtained by them in the qualifying examination would not carry any weight in the entrance test.
The stand of respondent No. 4, as noticed above, does not go beyond the realm of conjectures and has, thus, to be repelled.
In so far as providing of 20 marks for the academic career based upon prerogative of the Government to formulate a policy for admission to Medical Colleges is concerned, it can easily be held to be hardly any defence that can possibly come in the way of petitioner in challenging the admission criteria.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds.
Regulations 12 and 62 in so far as they earmark 20 marks for academic achievements, which undisputedly is with regard to qualifying examination, as is also clear from Regulations 62 and 65 are quashed.
Consequent changes for determination of inter se merit, as mentioned in regulation 65 shall have to be made thereby ignoring 20 marks for MD/MS courses.
No meaningful relief can, however, be granted to the petitioner inasmuch as the entrance test was held as far back as in June, 1993 and based upon the said test, number of students, who secured admission, must have undergone a substantial part of their course.
It is only for future admissions that the respondents are directed not to take into consideration marks obtained by the students in MBBS/BDS i.e. qualifying examinations.
This writ is allowed in the manner and to the extent as indicated above.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.