TS Doabia, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, an effort has been made by the petitioner trust to continue in an accommodation, which is primarily meant for public servants.
These are known as "pool" residential accommodation and employees of Madhya Pradesh Government, for whose benefit these accommodations have been built, are entitled to its allotment.
Legality of action taken under the MP Lok Parisar (Bedakhali) Adhiniyam, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Adhiniyam') is one of the issues but the larger issue is as to whether an accommodation built for a specific purpose can be allowed to be occupied by persons and organisations who have no right and thus depriving the legitimate claim of the persons for whose benefit these constructions have been raised.
2.
The brief facts are as under :  There is an accommodation bearing No. 38 on Race Course Road, Gwalior.
It is built for occupation of Government servants.
This was, however, handed over to the petitioner trust.
An order, copy whereof is Annexure P/2, was passed by the Deputy Secretary of the Government of Madhya Pradesh in the Department of Home Affairs on 30th September, 1983.
The Deputy Secretary, Government of MP, Bhopal issued instructions to the Commissioner, Gwalior Division, Gwahor to allot house referred to above to the petitioner trust in accordance with the rules.
However this order was given effect to at once and possession handed over to the petitioner trust without going into any further formality.
As to whether the rules permitted passing of such an order or as to what further formalities were required to be gone was not considered.
Even the quantum of rent was not fixed.
On 5th November, 1984 an intimation was sent to the petitioner to deposit a sum of Rs. 7,350/-.
The rate of rent being Rupees 525/- pm, the petitioner did not comply with this demand.
Later on 2nd April, 1990, a letter was issued intimating that the rent payable from 15th September, 1983 to 31st March, 1990 has reached the figure of Rs. 1,24,122/-.
The rate of rent was mentioned as Rs. 1,485/-.
This notice was also ignored by the petitioner trust.
Later, proceedings were initiated for seeking vacant possession of the premises and a notice was issued under the Adhiniyani of 1974.
This notice issued under Section 4 of the Adhiniyam has been placed on record as Annexure P/7.
The petitioner trust was duly served with the notice.
3.
The record indicates that the petitioner did put in appearance.
The proceedings have been placed on the record as Annexure P/8.
On 10th January, 1991 there was failure on the part of the petitioner to appear and plead its cause.
Order of eviction, copy whereof is Annexure P/9, was passed.
It is mentioned therein that as no reply had been filed and no valid cause has been shown to the notice issued under Section 4, the final order is being passed.
This order Annexure P/9 was challenged in this Court by filing the present writ petition.
This writ petition was filed on 6th February, 1991.
The motion Bench on 7th February, 1991 directed maintenance of status quo.
The petitioner, therefore, continued to be in possession, without paying a single paisa to the Government towards rent or for use and occupation.
4.
On 25th August, 1994 when this petition was taken up for hearing it having been brought to the notice of this Court that the petitioner has not deposited any rent, an order was passed recording an undertaking given by the petitioner that it would deposit upto date rent by 26th September, 1994.
It was made clear that in the event of non-deposit the stay order passed on 7th February, 1991 would automatically stand vacated.
The petitioner submits that he has deposited the rent at the rate of Rs. 525/- pm even though it is the case of the State that the rate of rent is Rs. 1,425/- month.
5.
The petitioner had a right of appeal under the Adhiniyam, 1974.
This right has not been availed of but as this petition has remained pending in this Court for more than four years, it would not be proper to non-suit the petitioner on this ground alone.
The fact that the remedy of appeal has become barred by limitation during the pendency of this petition is a factor to be taken note of.
The Supreme Court in the case of L. Hirday Narain v. Income-tax Officer, Bareilly, AIR 1971 SC 33, held that if a writ petition has been entertained and the limitation for resorting to the alternate remedy of appeal, etc., comes to an end then the writ petition should not be rejected on that ground and it should be decided on merits.
It was observed - "If the High Court had not entertained his petition, Hirday Narain could have moved the Commissioner in revision, because at the date on which the petition was moved the period prescribed by Section 33-A of the Act had not expired.
We are unable to hold that because a revision application could have been moved for an order correcting the order of the Income-tax Officer under Section 35, but was not moved, the High Court would be justified in dismissing as not maintainable the petition, which was entertained and was heard on the merits."
In this view of the matter, the fact that alternative remedy is available is of no consequence and I have proceeded to deal with the matter on merits.
6.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has made the following submissions :  (a) that, the allotment was made by the Government and it could be cancelled only by the Government; (b) that, the Deputy Collector was not competent to take proceedings under the Adhiniyam; (c) that, no effective opportunity was given to the petitioner; (d) that, the trustees should have been given notices and as individual notices were not given to the trustees, proceedings taken.
(e) that, no notice was given to the petitioner before cancellation of the lease; and, (f) that, the power to initiate proceedings vests with the Collector and these powers could not be delegated to the Deputy Collector.
7.
The respondents-State has denied all the legal and factual assertions made by the petitioner.
It is also contended that the allotment of the house to the petitioner could not be made because this accommodation is meant for Government servants and in the matter of allotment it is governed by the rules framed for 'pool' accommodation.
Under these rules, allotment can be made categorywise to the eligible Government servants depending upon their salary.
The petitioner trust is not such a person and it falls outside the purview of the rules referred to above.
It has further been pointed out that the allotment which was initially made vide order Annexure P/2 was cancelled on 31st October, 1990 by the Deputy Secretary for the Department of Home, Government of Madhya Pradesh.
Copy of this order is Annexure R-2.
Formal communication was sent on 20th November, 1990 vide Annexure R-3.
It has further been brought out that even though under the Act, Collector is the authority competent to take action but the Collector is empowered to delegate his powers to the Deputy Collector.
It is said that this power has been rightly delegated.
It is accordingly submitted that the order passed by the Deputy Collector vide Annexure.
P/9 is perfectly in accordance with law.
8.
It is the case of the State that action has been taken by the competent authority.
Competent authority has been defined in Section 2(a) of the Adhiniyam.
Section 5 provides that an Assistant Collector and a Deputy Collector can be designated as competent authorities.
Section 17 deals with power to delegate.
For facility of reference Sections 2(a), 3 and 17 may be noticed.
These read as under :  "2.
Definition :- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) "Competent authority" means an authority appointed as such by the State Government under Section 3 3.
Competent authority :- The State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, - (a) appoint such person being an officer not below the rank of Assistant Collector or Deputy Collector as competent authority for the purposes of this Act; and, (b) define the local limits within which, or the categories of public premises in respect of which, the competent authority shall exercise the powers conferred, and perform the duties imposed, on competent authority by or under this Act.
17.
Delegation of powers :- The State Government, by notification in the official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification be exercisable also by an officer of the State Government."
9.
So far as factual aspect is concerned the Collector Gwalior vide notification Annexure R-4 delegated the powers of the competent authority to Shri Akhilendra Arjariya.
This delegation is permissible in terms of Section 17 of the Adhiniyam.
The relevant notification in this regard is Annexure R-5.
This is dated 11th October, 1990.
10.
It is the case of the respondent that valid order of eviction was passed on 22nd January, 1992.
The petitioner appeared on 27th December, 1990.
Case was adjourned to 10th January, 1991.
There was no appearance thereafter.
11.
A plea has also been taken in the return that there was failure on the part of the petitioner to execute regular lease deed.
As to rate of rent it has been stated that the petitioner was required to pay the rent at the rate of Rs. 1,485/-.
This figure represents the market rent.
The petitioner as noticed above deposited so rent at the rate of Rs. 525/- only on 25th August, 1994 and, thus, used the public property for 10 long years without paying a single paisa to the State Exchequer.
12.
The various arguments be now noticed :  The first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that in this case the allotment was made by the State Government and this could be cancelled by State Government alone be examined.
The argument is based on wrong assumption of facts and has no legs to stand upon.
Allotment as noticed above was made vide order Annexure P/2.
This was issued by the Deputy Secretary in the Government of MP, in the Department of Home Affairs.
The order of cancellation was made by the Additional Secretary in the Department of Home Affairs.
Copy of this is Annexure R-3.
In this view of the matter, no exception can be taken to the order passed by which allotment was cancelled.
13.
Apart from this, it may be seen that order Annexure P/2 merely stated that allotment be made in accordance with rules.
Thus, the formalities required to be gone into were not gone into.
Agreement in terms of Article 299 of Constitution of India never came into existence.
The order Annexure P/2 only said that the allotment may be made in accordance with rules.
It is the case of the State Government that under the rules it was necessary to enter into an agreement.
Specimen copy is appended as Annexure R/1.
It is the further case of the State Government that the petitioner was required to enter into regular lease but he failed to do so.
There being no formal agreement in terms of Article 299 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner cannot raise any valid argument that the allotment has been cancelled contrary to law.
The petitioner was required to enter into a regular agreement as envisaged by Article 299 of the Constitution of India.
Annexure P-2 as noticed above gave a direction to the Commissioner of Gwalior to take further action in accordance with rules.
So far as rules are concerned, the house in question could not be allotted to the petitioner trust.
This aspect has been dealt with in the later part of this judgment.
However, the requirement to enter into a lease deed as per Annexure R-1 was mandatory.
Failure to do so would make the occupation of the house without authority of law.
It is well established where a contract is not in conformity with Article 299 of the Constitution of India, it is void.
See, Seth Bikhraj Jaipuria v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 113.
It was stated in the above case that under Section 175(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, the contracts had (a) to be expressed to be made by the Governor-General (b) to be executed on behalf of the Governor-General and (c) to be executed by officers duly appointed in that behalf and in such manner as the Governor-General directed or authorised.
The evidence in the case showed that the contracts were not expressed to be made by the Governor-General and were not executed on his behalf.
It was held by the Supreme Court that the provisions of Section 175(3) were mandatory and the contracts were therefore, void and not binding on the Union of India which was not liable for damages of the breach of the contracts.
The same principle was reiterated by the Supreme Court in a latter case State of West Bengal v. BK Mondal and Sons, AIR 1962 SC 779.
The principle is that the provisions of Article 299(1) of the Constitution of India are mandatory in character and the contravention of these provisions nullifies the contracts and makes them void.
There is no question of estoppel or ratification in such a case.
The reason is that the provisions of Article 299(1) of the Constitution have not been enacted for the sake of mere form but they have been enacted for safeguarding the Government against unauthorised contracts.
The provisions are embodied in Article 299(1) of the Constitution on the ground of public policy - on the ground of protection of general public - and these formalities cannot be waived or dispensed with.
It is, however, made clear that notwithstanding the fact that the entry of the petitioner was in pursuance of a void arrangement yet it is liable to pay compensation for use and occupation.
The juristic basis of the obligation in such a case is not founded upon any contract or tort but upon a third category of law, namely, quasi-contract or restitution.
In Bibrosa v. Gairbaim, 1943 AC 32, Lord Wright has stated the legal position as follows :  "......any civilised system of law is bound to provide remedies for cases of what has been called unjust enrichment or unjust benefit, that is, to prevent a man from retaining the money of or some benefit derived from, another which it is against conscience that he should keep.
Such remedies in English Law are generically different from remedies in contract or in tort, and are now recognised to fall within a third category of the common law which has been called quasi-contract or restitution."
In Nelson v. Larholt, (1948)1 KB 339, Lord Denning has observed as follows : "It is no longer appropriate to draw a distinction between law and equity.
Principles have now to be stated in the light of their combined effect.
Nor is it necessary to cancass the niceties of the old forms of action.
Remedies now depend on the substance of the right, not on whether they can be fitted into a particular framework.
The right here is not peculiar to equity or contract or tort, but falls naturally within the important category of cases where the court orders restitution if the justice of the case so requires."
The same conclusion is deducible from a later decision reported as KP Chowdhary v. State of MP, AIR 1967 SC 203.
14.
Thus the argument that original order was passed by State Government and that it could not be cancelled or revoked by an officer who was not exercising powers of State Government is factually incorrect.
Apart from this, when tested on the touch stone of the principles laid down in Article 299, this argument looses all meaning of significance.
The argument that order under the Adhiniyam has not been passed by the competent authority is also without any basis.
The officer who issued the notice and who passed the order was duly designated as the competent authority by the Collector.
Copy of this is Annexure R-5.
Such a course is permissible when Sections 2(a), 3 and 17 are read together.
As such there is no merit in this argument and the same is rejected.
The Adhiniaym was amended by Act No. 18 of 1981.
It was specifically provided that the State Government can appoint any person not below the rank of Assistant Collector or Deputy Collector to be competent authority.
Under Section 17 of the Adhinivam, the powers of the State Government have been conferred upon the Collector.
The Collector in this case had issued notification authorising the Deputy Collector to act as competent person.
It is in pursuance of this delegation of power, the Deputy Collector took cognizance of the matter under the Adhiniyam of 1974.
As such, no exception can be taken to the exercise of powers on the part of the Deputy Collector.
The action initiated issuing notice and the final order so passed cannot be taken exception to.
15.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that no proper opportunity was given before passing the order of eviction.
The circumstances under which eviction order was passed are the creation of the petitioner itself.
On the crucial day there was failure on the part of the petitioner to appear.
As such, none but the petitioner is to be blamed for this.
The petitioner was duly noticed about the date.
Appearance was put in on 27121990.
Thereafter it failed to attend.
The plea taken that Court was not held on that date is denied.
In any case, no litigant is absolved of the duty to verify about the next date.
There is no judicial principle or principle of natural justice which requires the Court to run after the litigant.
As such, the grievance of the petitioner like lack of proper opportunity is without any basis.
In any case, the counsel was asked as to what cause he could have possibly shown to the competent authority.
According to him, lack of jurisdiction and non-issuance of notice were the grounds which could have been taken by the petitioner.
These matters I have gone in detail and find no merit.
What was said by Supreme Court of India in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : 1994 Lab.
IC 792, while dealing with failure to give proper opportunity in a case arising under service jurisprudence would apply to this case also.
The Supreme Court of India has laid down that merely because there is failure to comply with principles of natural justice is itself no ground to quash the proceedings.
The Court can ask the litigant as to what he could have possibly urged.
The cause which could possibly be shown should be examined by the Court and the order is not to be quashed mechanically simply because there is failure of principles of natural justice.
Even on this rationale the petitioner's case is without any merit.
16.
As noticed above, the petitioner is to be blamed for this purpose.
He did put in appearance on 27th December, 1990, but on 10th of January, 1994 it failed to appear.
Therefore, the petitioner is not within its rights to contend that it was not afforded proper opportunity.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The allotment in this case has been made contrary to the rules.
The rules authorise that the allotment to be made in favour of the Government servants only.
The petitioner trust is not a person to whom allotment can be made under the rules.
As such, the allotment made vide Annexure P/2 was not in accordance with rules, therefore, any relief in favour of the petitioner would now lead to re-susication of an illegal order which is not permissible under the law.
For this reference be made to.
17.
The argument raised by the petitioner that no show-cause notice was issued to all the trustees and that notice was required to be given before passing order Annexure R-3 be examined now.
There is no requirement of law that all trustees are required to be given individual notices.
Notice was given to duly authorised person.
As such, there is no merit in the argument raised by the petitioner.
As to requirement of giving show-cause notice before passing order Annexure R/3 is concerned, again no statutory provision has been quoted to support this.
Those who come to acquire a benefit through a process which is itself arbitrary, can hardly make a complaint if that benefit is taken away.
Those who come by back door, can have no grievance if they are made to go by the same door.
Moreover, there was no agreement in terms of Article 299 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner failed to execute the lease deed though it was called upon to do so.
As such, there is no merit in any of the contentions raised by the petitioner.
18.
There however, remains one aspect of the matter still to be gone into.
Is the State competent to confer benefits of the nature which were conferred in this case on private institution ?
The property is meant for allotment to Government employees.
Could it be allotted to a private trust ?
Could an exception be carved out for the benefit of the trust and would this be not hit by equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
One concept of privilege, gratuity, or grace is useful.
Like an individual, the Government may make generous gifts, perform compassionate acts of grace, and legally recognise as privileges such interests as deserve to be something less than legal rights.
A donee ought not to be allowed to compel he Government to make a gift.
Nor should a supplicant for an act of grace be permitted to coerce officers to make a favourable determination in the exercise of discretionary power.
Even so, the Government is not and should not be as free as an individual in selecting the recipients for largess.
Whatever its activity the Government is still the Government and will be subject to restraints, inherent in its position in a democratic society.
19.
When Stuart Kings of England claimed to rule by divine rights, the words of Bracton in his treatise in Latin "quod Rex non debat esse sub homine, sed sub Deo et Lege", i.e., the king should not be under man, but under God and the law, were often quoted.
The above was the reply of Sir Edward Coke also when First Stuart James-I once declared "Then I am to be under the law.
It is treason to affirm it".
In our democratic system based on the concept of 'Rule of law', the law is supreme.
The State and its functionaries are not above it.
Having framed rules with regard to allotment of pool accommodation, they are bound by it.
20.
The status of petitioner trust be examined.
The petitioner is a registered trust.
As to what are its objects and what led to the State Government to make the allotment are not apparent from the record.
As to what public purpose was likely to be served by making this allotment is not clear.
It is settled law that in the matter of dealing with public property, the Government is bound by the rules and regulations.
It is to act in a rational manner.
Each act of the Government is often to judicial review.
When so examined, this allotment made in favour of the trust does not satisfy this test as well.
There are large number of trusts existing in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
As to what prevailed with the Government to allot the present accommodation to the petitioner are not apparent.
21.
In State of MP v. Kanhaiyalal, 1970 MPLJ 973, the decision of the Government to exempt a single organisation from the operation of Rent Laws was declared bad.
See, also M/s. G D Khanna and Sons v. State of Himachal Pradesh and another, AIR 1991 HP 15.
22.
Thus the action of the State Government in passing order Annexure P-2 was in violation of the rules and no reason is available, which led the Government to make the allotment in favour of the institution.
As such, it would be appropriate to remind that the Government is under a constitutional duty to abide by rules even in the matter of distributing largess.
23.
The Government in a welfare State is the single largest entity which regulates, dispenses and provides large number of benefits.
It would be useful to quote what the Supreme Court said in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628.
It was observed thus :  "It must, therefore, be taken to be the law that where the Government is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing quotas or licences or granting other forms of largess, the Government cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will and, like a private individual, deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be in conformity with standard or norm which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
The power or discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of largess including award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences etc., must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the Government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the Government would be liable to be struck down, unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory."
24.
In the present case, the State having framed rules for the purpose of allotting "pool" accommodation cannot go against these rules.
It having demarcated the limits within which it is to operate must remain with the limits carved out by it.
The allotment thus made in favour of the petitioner is beyond the scope of the rules.
25.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
Large number of accommodations meant for Government employees have been allotted to persons and institutions, who are not entitled to these.
As much, State Government must initiate proceedings to seek eviction of all such accommodations which have been allowed to persons and organisations contrary to law and also forbear from doing so in future.
26.
I am, thus, of the view that :-  (i) order Annexure P-2 was cancelled by the same authority; (ii) there was failure to comply with Article 299 of the Constitution and no valid contract of lease came into existence; (iii) proceedings were initiated by a duly constituted authority; (iv) show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner but it absented itself after putting in appearance; (v) there is no requirement to renotify the date of hearing when a litigant has put in appearance; (vi) the house in question formed part of pool accommodation and it could not be allotted to the petitioner; (vii) the State would be at liberty to recover rent and damages for use and occupation as per law; (viii) the State should take steps to see that accommodation which have been allotted to persons and institutions contrary to rules are retrieved back and allotted to the category of employees, who are entitled to these.
27.
This petition is without merit.
This is dismissed with costs.
Costs Rs. 500/-.
Petition dismissed.