GS Singhvi, J - Order of punishment dated 30.6.1988 (Annexure P/1) passed by the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab as well as order dated 1561989 (Annexure P/3) passed by the Government dismissing the appeal of the petitioner filed by him against the order of punishment have been made subject matter of challenge in this petition.
2.
Briefly stated, the case of the petitioner is that while he was working as Junior Analyst, Jagraon Laboratory, Ludhiana, he was placed under suspension vide order dated 17121986.
This was followed by a charge-sheet dated 10/1831987 for an inquiry under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1970.
Inquiry Officer who had inquired into the matter held that charge No. 1 levelled against the petitioner is proved.
He, however, held that charge No. 2 was not proved against the petitioner.
On the basis of the inquiry report, the Director Food and Supplies Punjab issued order dated 30.6.1988 and imposed penalty of dismissal from service on the petitioner.
Against the order of dismissal from service, the petitioner filed an appeal which too has been dismissed by the Government vide order Annexure P/3 dated June 15, 1989.
3.
Although a number of grounds have been raised in the writ petition for challenging the two orders, after having heard learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the opinion that it is not necessary to decide all the contentions raised by learned counsel for the petitioner and that the writ petition deserves to be allowed on a short ground that the disciplinary authority has acted in contravention of the principles of natural justice.
4.
Admittedly the charge-sheet issued against the petitioner on 10/1831987 contained two charges.
It is also art admitted position that the inquiry officer had found the petitioner guilty of first charge but had exonerated him from the second charge.
After receipt of the report of the inquiry officer, the disciplinary authority neither gave a copy of the report of inquiry to the petitioner nor supplied him with the copy of reasons of disagreement which it expressed on the finding of the Inquiry Officer in respect of charge No. 2.
Instead, it straight-away passed the order of punishment against the petitioner.
5.
First argument of Dr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner ought to have been furnished with a copy of inquiry report before final order of punishment could be passed by the disciplinary authority.
His second argument is that even if requirement of supply of copy of inquiry report as a condition precedent to the passing of order of punishment is not held to be mandatory, the order of punishment should be quashed on the ground of failure of the disciplinary authority to furnish a copy of reasons recorded by it for disagreeing with the finding of the Enquiry Officer on charge No. 2 and its further failure to give an opportunity to the petitioner to make his submission qua those reasons.
Mrs. Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General has submitted that it was not necessary for the disciplinary authority to furnish a copy of the inquiry report to the petitioner in view of the fact that rule 9(4) of the Rules, 1970 clearly dispenses with the giving of second show cause notice.
Her further argument is that though the disciplinary authority is required to record reasons for disagreement in terms of rule 9(2) of the Rules, communication of such reasons is not necessary.
6.
In so far as the first argument of learned counsel is concerned, I find sufficient justification for accepting the plea of the respondents that order of punishment cannot be nullified on the ground of non-supply of copy of the inquiry report.
Though in Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471, the Supreme Court declared that even after 42nd Constitution Amendment Act, requirement of supply of the copy of inquiry report is an integral part of the requirement of compliance of principles of natural justice, in a subsequent decision rendered by a Constitution Bench in Managing Director EOIL v. B Karunakaran, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : 1993(5) SLR 532, it has been held that the judgment given in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) shall apply to the cases where punishment is imposed after 29111990, the day on which the order in Ramzan's case was pronounced by the Apex Court.
In the face of a categorical decision of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court, it is not possible for this court to accept the contention of learned counsel that the impugned order of punishment should be quashed on the ground of non-supply of copy of the inquiry report.
7.
However, second argument of Dr. Gupta regarding violation of principles of natural justice on account of failure of the disciplinary authority to supply a copy of reasons which it had recorded for disagreeing with the finding of the Inquiry Officer on charge No. 2 merits acceptance.
Rule 9(1), (2), (3) and (4) of the Rules read as under :-  "(1) The punishing authority, if it is not itself the inquiry authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of rule 8 as far as may be.
(2) The punishing authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for each disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv) of Rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 10, make an order imposing such penalty; Provided that in every case where it is necessary to consult the commission, the record of the inquiry shall be forwarded by the punishing authority to the commission of its advice and such advice shall be taken into consideration before making any order imposing any penalty on the Government employee.
(4) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry, is of opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee, it shall make an order imposing such penalty and it shall not be necessary to give the Government employee any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed; Provided that in every case where it is necessary to consult the Commission, the record of the inquiry shall be forwarded by the punishing authority to the Commission for its advice and such advice shall be taken into consideration before making an order imposing any such penalty on the Government employee."
A combined reading of various clauses of rule 9 of 1970 Rules brings out that the punishing authority shall record its own findings on the charges levelled against the delinquent employee.
If the punishing authority disagrees with the finding of the Inquiry Officer, it must record its reasons for such disagreement.
Recording of reasons is by itself not sufficient of total compliance of rule of natural justice.
What is implicit in the requirement of recording of reasons is that the same must be communicated to the affected person.
Non-communication of the reasons for disagreement puts the delinquent employee to a serious prejudice inasmuch as he will not be in a position to know as to how the mind of the disciplinary authority has worked against him and on what ground it has not accepted the finding of the Enquiry Officer.
Therefore, failure of the disciplinary authority to furnish a copy of reasons for disagreement with the finding of the Enquiry Officer is sufficient for holding that the punishing authority has acted in contravention of the rules of natural justice.
This conclusion of mind is buttressed by the opening words of Rule 5 of the Rules, 1970, which say," the following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter, provided, be imposed on a Government employee, namely......".
This requirement of rule not only contemplates recording of reasons but also provides that such reasons must be good as well as sufficient.
Recording of reasons, which must be good and sufficient, necessarily implies a requirement of communication.
In Bhagat Raja v Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1606 and M/s. Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar v. State of UP and others, AIR 1970 SC 1302, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that even though a statutory provision may not in terms require recording of reasons and communication thereof, it is mandatory for every quasi-judicial authority to record reasons and communicate the same to the affected party.
The same view has been reiterated by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 241 (SC) : 1992(4) SCC 584.
In para 39 of the decision, the Supreme Court has culled out the principle underlying the object of recording of reasons and communication thereof.
The Apex Court has observed :-  "Reasons, when recorded by an administrative authority in an order passed by it while exercising quasi-judicial functions, would no doubt facilitate the exercise of its jurisdiction by the appellate or supervisory authority.
But the other considerations, referred to above, which have also weighed with this court in holding that an administrative authority must record reasons for its decision, are of no less significance.
These considerations show that the recording of reasons by an administrative authority serves a salutary purpose, namely, it excludes chances of arbitrariness and ensures a degree of fairness in the process of decision making.
The said purpose would apply equally to all decisions and its application cannot be confined to decisions which are subject to appeal, revision or judicial review.
In our opinion, therefore, the requirement that reasons be recorded should govern the decisions of an administrative authority exercising quasi-judicial functions irrespective of the fact whether the decision is subject to appeal, revision or judicial review.
It may, however, be added that it is not required that the reasons should be as elaborate as in the decision of a court of law.
The extent and nature of the reasons would depend on particular facts and circumstances.
What is necessary is that the reasons are clear and explicit so as to indicate that the authority has given due consideration to the points in controversy.
The need for recording of reasons is greater in a case where the order is passed at the original stage.
The appellate or revisional authority, if it affirms such an order, need not give separate reasons if the appellate or revisional authority agrees with the reasons contained in the order under challenge."
In Testeels Ltd v. NM Desai, AIR 1970 Guj.
1, a Full Bench of Gujarat High Court presided over by PN Bhagwati, J as he then was observed :-  "The administrative authorities having a duty to act judicially cannot, therefore, decide on considerations of policy or expediency.
They must decide the matter solely on the facts of the particular case, solely on the material before them and apart from any extraneous considerations by applying pre-existing legal norms of factual situations.
Now, the necessity of giving reasons is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the duty to act judicially.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and excludes or at any rate, minimises arbitrariness in the decision making process."
"Another reasons which compels making of such an order is based on the power of judicial review which is possessed by the High Court under Art. 226 and the Supreme Court under Art. 32 of the Constitution.
These courts have the power under the said provisions to quash by certiorari a quasi-judicial order made by an Administrative Officer and this power of review can be effectively exercised only if the order is a speaking order.
In the absence of any reasons in support of the order, the said courts cannot examine the correctness of the order under review."
8.
There is yet another reason for holding that copy of reasons for disagreement should be conveyed to the delinquent employee before a final decision is taken.
There can be no manner of doubt that the finding recorded by the disciplinary authority constitutes the basis of its decision for punishing the delinquent employee.
Therefore, reasons for disagreement can appropriately be termed as material adverse to the delinquent employee.
If the disciplinary authority acts on the basis of its findings which are adverse to the delinquent, without disclosing the same to him, its action is liable to he nullified as violative of the principles of natural justice.
9.
The rule of audi alteram partem has been recognised as early as in 1723 in RV University of Cambridge (1723)1 Str.
557, where the University of Cambridge had deprived Bentley, a scholar of his degrees on account of his misconduct in insulting the Vice-Chancellor's Court.
The action was nullified by the court of King's Bench on the ground that deprivation was unjustifiable and that, in any case, he should have received notice so that he could make his defence.
In the said decision it has been noted that the first hearing in human history was given in the Garden of Eden, in the following words :-  "I remember to have heard it observed by a very learned man upon such an occasion that even God himself did not pass sentence upon Adam, before he was called upon to make his defence.
`Adam, says God, where art thou ?
Hast thou not eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat ?
And the same question was put to Eve also."
In Capel v. Child, (1832)2 C&J 558, the Court of Exchequer gave a lucid exposition to the rule of audi alteram partem.
That was a case in which a bishop had appointed a curate, at the vicar's expense, to perform the duties of the vicar whom the bishop considered to be negligent.
Statute empowered this to be done `whenever it shall appear to the satisfaction of any bishop, either of his own knowledge, or upon proof by affidavit laid before him', that the incumbent was neglecting his duties, Bayley, J said :-  "When the bishop proceeds on his own knowledge I am of the opinion that it cannot possibly 'and within the meaning of this Act, appear to the satisfaction of the bishop, and of his knowledge, unless he gives the party an opportunity of being heard, in answer to that which the bishop states on his own knowledge to be the foundation on which he proceeds."
The same principle was extended beyond the sphere of administrative law to such bodies and societies and clubs.
It was held to be an implied term of each member's contract of membership that he could not be expelled without a fair hearing.
In a case where a member of mutual insurance society was purportedly expelled for suspicious conduct, but without hearing, it was held that the expulsion was absolutely void : Wood v. Wood, (1874) LR 9 Ex. 190.
In Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works, (1863)14 CB (NS) 180, action of the local board of works in demolishing a building raised by a builder was declared to be void for want of hearing, where the builder has raised construction without notice to the local board and the board had in exercise of its power under the Act, demolished the construction.
The board contested the action by claiming it to be a purely administrative action.
Erie, CJ said :-  "I think the board ought to have given notice to the plaintiff and to have allowed him to be heard.
The default in sending notice to the board of the intention to build, is a default which may be explained.
There may be a great many excuses for the apparent default.
The party may have intended to conform to the law.
He may have actually conformed.... though by accident his notice may have miscarried....
I cannot conceive any harm that could happen to the district board from hearing the party before they subjected him to a loss so serious as the demolition of his house; but I can conceive a great many advantages which might arise in the way of public order, in the way of fulfilling the purposes of the statute, by the restriction which we not upon them, that they should hear the party before they inflict upon him such a heavy loss.
I fully agree that the legislature intended to give the district board very large powers indeed; but the qualification I speak of is one which has been recognized to the full extent.
It has been said that the principle.... is limited to a judicial proceeding, and that a district board ordering a house to be pulled down cannot be said be said to be doing a judicial act.....
I do not quite agree with that.....
I think the appeal clause would evidently indicate that many exercises of the power of a district board would be in the nature of judicial proceedings."
Then Willes, J said :-  "I am of the same opinion, I apprehend that a tribunal which is by law invested with power to affect the property of one of Her Majesty's subject, is bound to give such subject an opportunity of being heard before it proceeds; and that the rule is of universal application, and founded on the Plainest principles of justice.
How, is the board in the present case such a tribunal ?
I apprehend it clearly is...." And Byles, J said :-  "It seems to me that the board are wrong whether they acted judicially or ministerially.
I conceive they acted judicially, because they had to determine the offence, and they had to apportion the punishment as well as the remedy.
That being so, a long course of decisions beginning with Dr. Bentley's case, and ending with some very recent cases, establish that, although there are no positive words in a statute, requiring that the party shall be heard, yet the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the legislature."
The same principles were applied in Smith v. R, 1878(3) APP.
Cas.
614, involving cancellation of a crown lease in Queensland; Hall v. Manchester Opn., (1915) 84 LJ Ch.
732 involving condemnation of a house in Manchester as unfit for human habitation.
In Board of Education v. Rice, (1911) AC 179, the question which arose for consideration before the House of Lords was as to whether the Board of Education properly determined a dispute between a body of school managers and the local education authority of Swansea.
The local authority had refused to pay teachers in church schools at the same rate as teachers in the authority's own schools.
The teachers gave notice to leave, and the managers complained that the local authority were failing to keep the schools efficient, as the Education Act required.
A public inquiry was held before a barrister who made a report in favour of the managers, but the Board of Education decided in favour of the local authority.
The Court of appeal upheld the award of certiorari and mandamus to quash the decision of the Board of Education.
House of Lords confirmed the decision of the Court of Appeal.
Lord Loreburn observed that although the action of the Board of Education might be administrative but in such cases the Board of Education will have to ascertain the law and also to ascertain the facts and even though the Board may not be required to act judicially and it was free to obtain information in any manner it liked, what was necessary for it was to give a fair opportunity to those who are parties to the controversy for correcting or contradicting anything prejudicial to their view.
In Errington v. Minister of Health, (1935)1 KB 249, the Jarrow Corporation made a clearance order under the Housing Act, 1930 in respect of an area which included the properties owned by the appellants.
This order was objected to by the owners on the ground that the houses in question were fit for human habitation.
The Minister held a public inquiry.
After the conclusion of the inquiry some more information was sent by the Corporation to the Minister.
The owners were into heard thereafter, and were not invited in the discussion between the Ministry deputation and the Council representatives.
Thereafter, the order was confirmed by the Minister.
Application filed by the appellants was dismissed.
The Court of Appeal reversed the decision.
Greer, L.J observed :-  "I am satisfied that there was nothing wrong in the Minister receiving those communications from the Council.
It was a matter on which the council were entitled to stress the view that was already implied in the clearance order that they had made in the first instance, but I think it would have been a wise precaution on the part of the Minister when he received those further communications from the Council pressing for the confirmation of the order to communicate those letters or verbal persuasions to the other side, the objectors, and ask whether they had anything further to say on the matter.
The Ministry were acting in a quasi judicial capacity they were doing what a semi-judicial body cannot do, namely, hearing evidence from one side in the absence of the other side, and viewing the property and forming their own views about the property without giving the owners of the property the opportunity of that the views which the Ministry were inclined to take were such as could be readily dealt with by means of repairs and alterations to the buildings."
Similar views have been expressed in a later decision by the House of Lords in Fairmount Investments Ltd v. Secretary of State for the Environment, (1976)2 All E.R 865.
In Ridge v. Baldwin and others, (1964) AC 40, the Chief Constable of Brighton had been tried and acquitted on a criminal charge of conspiracy to obstruct the course of justice.
Two other police officers were convicted, and the Judge twice took opportunities to comment adversely on the Chief Constable's leadership of the force.
Thereupon the Brighton Watch Committee, without giving any notice or offering any hearing to the Chief Constable, unanimously dismissed him from office.
He filed an appeal which was dismissed.
His claim against the dismissal was disallowed by the High Court and the Court of Appeal.
The House of Lords, however, allowed the appeal, Lord Reid made the leading speech and observed :-  "The mere fact that the power affects rights or interests is what makes it `judicial' and so subject to the procedures required by natural justice.
In other words, a power which affects rights must be exercised `judicially', i.e. fairly, and the fact that the power is administrative does not make it any the less `judicial' for this purpose."
In AG v. Ryan, (1980) A.C. 718, the Privy Council said :-  "....the Minister was a person having legal authority to determine a question affecting the rights of individuals.
This being so it is a necessary implication that he is required to observe the principles of natural justice when exercising that authority; and "if he fails to do so, his purported decision is nullity."
In R v. Commission for Racial Equality, LBC (1982) AC 779, Lord Diplock observed :-  "Where an Act of Parliament confers upon an administrative body functions which involve its making decisions which affect to their detriment the rights of other persons or curtail their liberty to do as they please, intended that the administrative body should act fairly towards those persons who will be affected by their decisions."
The rule of `audi alteram partem' has been extended further by the Judge made law.
It has been held that a proper hearing must always include a fair opportunity to those who are parties in the controversy for correcting or contradicting anything prejudicial to their view.
In Kanda v. Government of Malaya, (1962) AC 332 Lord Denning observed :-  "If the right to be heard is to be a real right which is worth anything, it must carry with it a right in the accused man to know what evidence has been given and what statements have been made affecting him; and then he must be given a fair opportunity to correct or contradict them."
In Chief Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans, (1982)1 WLR 1155, a police probationer was removed by the Chief Constable on account of allegations about his private life but he was not given any fair opportunity to refute the material collected against him.
House of Lords granted the remedy against the unlawful dismissal.
In R v. Assistant Metropolitan Police Commissioner, (1986) RTR 52, refusal to renew licence of a taxi driver on the ground of an adverse medical report was quashed only because the medical report was not disclosed to him.
In Kanda v. Government of Malaya (supra) the dismissal of the police officer was declared as void because the adjudicating officer was in possession of a report of a board of inquiry which made charges of misconduct but which was not available to the police officer.
In Shareef v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents, (1966) AC 47, a decision of Industrial Injuries Commissioner was set aside because he had relied on some report which was not available to the parties and a about which no opportunity was available to the party of offer its comment on the report, before the decision was taken.
The same view has been expressed in Taylor v. National Union of Seamen, (1967)1 WLR 532, Maradana Mosque Trustees v. Mahmud, (1967)1 AC 13.
The question as to whether even in the absence of statutory provisions requiring compliance of natural justice or where the statutory provisions do not contain a particular procedure, whether the principles of natural justice are applicable has been answered in positive in Wiseman v. Borneman, (1971) AC 297, Lord Reid said :-  "For a long time the courts have, without objection from Parliament, supplemented procedure laid down in legislation where they have found that to be necessary for this purpose.
But before this unusual kind of power is exercised it must be clear that the statutory procedure is insufficient to achieve justice and that to require additional steps would not frustrate the apparent purpose of the legislation."
In Lloyd v. McMohan, (1987)2 WLR 921, Lord Bridge said :-  "In particular, it is well-established that when a statute has conferred on any body the power to make decisions affecting individuals, the courts will not only require the procedure prescribed by the statute to be followed, but will readily imply so much and no more to be introduced by way of additional procedural safeguards as will ensure the attainment of fairness."
In AK Kraipak and others v. Union of India and Others, AIR 1970 SC 150, their Lordships of the Supreme Court declared that the dividing fine between the administrative power and a quasi-judicial power is quite thin and is being gradually obliterated.
Hegde, J who spoke for the court observed :-  "The dividing line between an administrative power and a quasi-judicial power is quite thin and is being gradually obliterated.
For determining whether a power is an administrative power or a quasi-judicial power one has to look to the nature of the power conferred, the person or persons on whom it is conferred, the frame work of law conferring that power, the consequences ensuing from the exercise of that power and the manner in which that power is expected to be exercised.
In a welfare State like ours it is inevitable that the organ of the State under our Constitution is regulated and controlled by the rule of law.
In a welfare state like ours it is inevitable that the jurisdiction of the administrative bodies is increasing at a rapid rate.
The concept of rule of law would lose its validity if the instrumentalities of the State are not charged with the duty of discharging their functions in a fair and just manner.
The requirement of acting judicially in essence is nothing but a requirement to act justly and fairly and not arbitrarily or capriciously.
The procedures which are considered inherent in the exercise of a judicial power are merely those which facilitate if not ensure a just and fair decision.
In recent years the concept of quasi judicial power has been undergoing a radical change.
What was considered as an administrative power some years back is now being considered as a quasi judicial power ...." In State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269 wherein a question which arose for consideration related to the change of date of birth of an employee, the Supreme Court observed :-  "We think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences am already stated, must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State..." 10.
Since it is admitted position that the reasons for disagreement were not made available to the petitioner before the final order of punishment was passed by the disciplinary authority, I have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order of punishment passed by the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab is liable to be quashed.
As a legal corollary, the order of the appellate authority by which the order of disciplinary authority has been confirmed is also liable to be quashed.
11.
In view of the conclusion aforementioned, it is not necessary to deal with other contentions of learned counsel for the parties.
Instead it will be proper to leave the disciplinary authority to consider the matter afresh and take its own decision after giving an opportunity of representation to the petitioner.
12.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders Annexures P/1 and P/3 are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
This order of mine shall not prevent the disciplinary authority to pass a fresh order after giving an opportunity of representation to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.