VK Bali, J - Petitioner-Daya Nand College for Women, through its President, KL Mehta, seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order, Annexure P-2 dated January 28, 1987, as also to declare sections 7(2), (3) (4), 10 and 11 of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979 as ultra vires and violative of Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution of India and inapplicable to it which is being run and maintained by Arya Samaj, a religious minority.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner College is affiliated one run by registered Society know as Maharishi Daya Nand Education Society, Nehru Ground, NIT, Faridabad.
It is stated that the aim of the Society is to propagate the philosophy and teaching of Maharishi Dayanand, founder of Arya Samaj and to set up educational institutions, schools and colleges on modern lines in consonance with the norms and ideals laid down by Swami Ji.
All those persons, who are above the age of 21 years and have faith in the teaching of Maharishi Daya Nand i.e. Arya Samaj can become members of the Society.
Arya Samaj, it is pleaded, is a minority community in the State of Haryana.
It has its own script known as Devnagri and is a reformist movement believing in one God and Vedas as the books of true knowledge.
It is a distinct organisation, the membership of which is open to those who subscribed to its aims and objects.
It has been held to be minority community, so pleads the petitioner.
3.
The staff employed by the petitioner-College includes Principal and Teachers, who are governed by the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as 1979 Act).
The rules framed under 1979 Act are called the Haryana Affiliated College (Security of Service) Rules, 1979.
Respondent-Kiran Aggarwal was serving as Principal of Petitioner-College.
However, she was placed under suspension by its Management for various acts of omission and commission.
She was duly served with a charge-sheet and an Enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct the enquiry into the charges against her.
It is pleaded that the Enquiry Officer, after having as many as 58 hearings, after hearing respondent No. 2 and petitioner- management, found her guilty of various charges vide report dated November 27, 1985.
It is pleaded, respondent No. 2 was represented by a lawyer throughout the enquiry and she had fully participated in the enquiry.
The first charge proved against her was that there was dereliction besides lack of efficiency in discharge of her duties by disregarding Haryana Government directive issued vide letter dated July 21, 1984 ordering that no post should be created in the College without prior approval of the Director, Higher Education.
She was also held guilty of concealing the said instructions from the Management and getting the posts filled by such concealment ultimately resulting into loss of Rs. 183 lacs to the college on account of Government having disallowed the grant with respect to the said posts.
She was also held guilty of wilful defiance of the President of the Institution as also of the Governing body thereof inasmuch as despite the President of the Institution having directed her to abolish the posts got filled illegally and unauthorisedly with a view to off-set future loss to the maintenance of grant of the college, she failed to implement the directive of the President and the governing body and instead instigated the affected employees to file court cases against petitioner- management.
She was also found guilty of indiscipline consisting of use of derogatory language and of unjustified criticism of the actions of President of the Managing Committee in complete defiance of the Service Rules.
Besides that, she was also found guilty of misleading the University and Haryana Govt. about the working and activities of the College, and breach of trust for having unauthorisedly secured loan of Rs. 10,000/- from Students Fund for her personal use in direct contravention of the Rules governing the use of such fund.
Over and above this, she was also found guilty of misusing her position as principle by taking her own daughter not as a student of the College but as member of College contingent on trips in violation and contravention of the rules governing such trips.
Since the charges against the contesting respondent were fully proved.
Management decided to remove her from service subject to the approval of the Director of Higher Education, Haryana.
Accordingly, after accepting the enquiry report, the case was submitted to the Director, High Education, Haryana for grant of approval which was granted vide order dated June 4, 1986.
Being aggrieved, contesting respondent preferred an appeal under Section 11 of 1979 Act before the Secretary, Department of Education, Haryana, who vide orders dated January 28, 1987, held that although charge Nos. 5, 8 and 11 were proved, still punishment of removal from service was not called for and lesser punishment of stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect could meet the ends of justice.
It was also directed that respondent be taken back in service forthwith and her pay and allowances be paid to her from the date of removal from the service on the said post.
It is this order of the Secretary, Department of Education, Haryana, dated January 28, 1987, which is under challenge in the present petition.
4.
The order aforesaid has been challenged on variety of grounds but what is being mainly pleaded and so argued by learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner is that the provisions of 1979 Act are wholly inapplicable insofar as petitioner-Institution is concerned as it is a religious minority community and has right to govern its institutions in the way and manner it likes and any directions in its way in governing the Institutions according to its wisdom would offend Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution.
That apart, it is argued that the learned Secretary reversed the finding on main charges without discussing either the changes or evidence that was led in the matter to prove the same.
It is further argued that even on counts the contesting respondent was found guilty even at the Appellate Forum i.e. by the Secretary punishment of removal from service was the only adequate penalty which should have been imposed.
5.
The matter has been vehemently contested by respondent No. 2 Smt. Kiran Aggarwal.
It is pleaded by way of preliminary objections that the petitioner-College for the first time in the amended petition had claimed that it was being managed by minority community.
This objection having not been taken at any stage and petitioner submitting itself to the jurisdiction of the authorities constituted under the 1979 Act, it was not permissible for the Management to take the plea that the orders were vitiated on account of protection given to it under Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution of India.
After quoting Rules 4 and 5 of 1979 Rules it is further pleaded that disciplinary authority in the case of respondent was the Managing Committee and there was no provision for delegation of such powers to any authority under the Rules.
However, in this case, she was placed under suspension and subsequently charge-sheeted by the President - KL Mehta.
Further, Enquiry Officer was also appointed by KL Mehta and final termination order dated June 21, 1986 was also passed by the President, thus, the entire proceedings were vitiated.
The delegation of powers by misconceived and were not conclusive.
With regard to other charges as well, similar is the reply and there is no necessity whatsoever to minutely notice the same.
6.
This writ was admitted on August 6, 1987, and was ordered to be put up for final hearing in the month of December, 1987.
It was further directed that the Management would be free not to reinstate respondent No. 2 as Principal of the Institution but then it must go on paying the salary last drawn by respondent No. 2 every month.
The salary for the month of August was directed to be paid by September 7, 1987 and thereafter by the 7th of each following month.
Petitioner was directed to pay the entire amount of salary due to respondent No. 2 in accordance with the impugned award along with interest calculated @ 12% per annum within a period of two months in case the writ petition was to fail.
Even though the matter was to be heard in December, 1987, it has now been taken up for arguments and that too while dealing with Misc.
Application No. 2070 of 1993 filed by respondent under Section 151 CPC claiming arrears of salary as per direction of this Court vide order dated August 6, 1987.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties at considerable length and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that there is no merit in either of the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner which have been noticed above.
8.
Dealing first with the question as to whether the petitioner-institution is a religious minority and has the protection as provided under Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India so as to make the provisions of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979 inapplicable the learned Counsel relies upon a Division Bench judgment of this court in Managing Committee of the Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jullundur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) S.L.R.
415.
It is true that this Court held that the State or any other authority cannot under the garb of adopting regulatory measures, interfere in the administrative autonomy of the institution and that Arya Samajists in the State of Punjab are members of a religious denomination and constitute a religious minority and thus entitled to the protection as provided under section 30(1) of the Constitution of India, yet in considered view of the court, this judgment is wholly inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
It shall be seen from the narration of the facts that the Management Committee of the Institution ie Managing Committee of Kanya Maha Vidyalaya had set up the case that it was established and administered by a religious and linguistic minority and this fact was not denied by the respondent-State of Punjab.
It was on that basis alone that Division Bench in the case cited above held that not only that Arya Samajist was a religious minority in the State of Punjab but it also had the protection of section 30(1) of India.
Admittedly, the case in hand emanates from the State of Haryana and no proper date has been given to show that Arya Samajist is a religious minority in the said State i.e. in the State of Haryana as well.
9.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner then relies upon the judgment of a Single Bench of this Court in SMDRSD College Society, Pathankot v. The Director of Public Instructions (Colleges) Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1988(1) S.L.R.
229.
In considered view of this Court, the aforesaid judgment also provides no assistance to the petitioner as once again it was the case of SMDRSD College, an institution administered by religious minority in the State of Punjab.
It is not disputed that a particular religious denomination may be religious minority in one State and yet be not a religious minority in other State.
The Apex Court in DAV College, Bhatinda v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1971 SC 1731 and DAV College, Jullundur v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1971 SC 1737 held that what constitutes as a linguistic or religious minority must be judged in relation to the State inasmuch as the impugned Act is a State Act and not in relation to the whole of India.
A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in Arya Samaj Educational Trust, Delhi and others v. The Director Education, Delhi Administration, Delhi and others, A.I.R. 1976 Delhi 207 held that Arya Samaj is a reformed sect of Hinduism which has revolutionised the Hindu way of thinking and it is a part of Hinduism and not a separate religion for the purposes of Article 30(1) in the Union Territory of India and only those religious minorities which had claimed political rights separate from those of the Hindus prior to the Constitution such as Muslims and Sikhs and though the Christians did not claim separate right they were nevertheless a distinct minority based on a religion which at no stage was regarded as a part of Hinduism and because of the political origin of the sense in which the word 'minority' in Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India cannot apply to a class or section of the Hindus.
While so holding the Division Bench of Delhi High Court relied upon Shivanarayan Kabra v. State of Madras, A.I.R. 1976 SC 986, SK Patro v. State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1970 SC 259 and Ganpat v. Returning Officer, A.I.R. 1975 SC 420.
10.
In view of the discussion made above, it is, thus, held that no proper date has been provided from where it can be concluded that Arya Samajist is a religious minority in the State of Haryana.
The first contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner noticed above is thus repelled.
11.
Coming now to the merits of the case, it shall be seen that the Secretary while dealing with the case came to a definite finding of fact that Enquiry Officer allowed three witnesses to be examined by the Managing Committee which did not figure in the original list of witnesses supplied to the contesting respondent.
Also certain documents were produced by the Managing Committee which did not figure in the original list supplied to the respondent.
The Counsel representing the Managing Committee before the Secretary could not say a word about these additional witnesses and documents as is clearly recited in the impugned order.
Before this Court as well, this finding of the Secretary has not been even remotely challenged.
It is also not disputed that the Enquiry Officer while returning a finding of guilt against the respondent has very much relied upon three witnesses and additional documents copies whereof were never given to the contesting respondent.
The procedure followed by the Enquiry Officer in particular allowing the new set of witnesses and permitting management to produce documents which originally were not supplied to the answering-respondent was, thus, not only irregular but it clearly violated the principles of natural justice.
So far as specific charges against the respondent are concerned, it shall be seen that with regard to the first charge of not bringing the guidelines to the notice of the management, the finding of the Secretary is that such guidelines were brought to the notice of the management.
Ex. D-20 is the letter sent to the respondent Managing Committee.
The plea of the management that it was a forged letter created later with a view to prop up a plausible defence has been negatived by the Secretary on cogent grounds.
With regard to charge No. 3 which was held substantiated against the respondent by the Director, the Secretary found that the findings of the Director were conjectural.
It requires to be mentioned that the Director only held that at sometimes the respondent might have made statements criticizing the management.
That leaves only charges 5, 8 and 11 which were substantiated before the Director.
In so far as charges 5 and 8 were concerned, these were admittedly partially proved whereas charge No. 1 which is with regard to the Principal taking her own daughter as member of the College contingent on trips in an irregular manner is concerned, the same was fully proved.
So far as charge No. 5 is concerned, the same is with regard to the ignoring warning given to the respondent by the general body in its meeting held on 17th April, 1983.
The general body further gave three months time to her to mend her ways but instead of showing any improvement, she assumed a defiant attitude and added to the further worsening of the atmosphere.
The Director after considering the evidence on the aforesaid charge came to the conclusion that Smt. Kiran Aggarwal did not show any improvement and thereafter assumed defiant attitude as already discussed on the above charge.
In so far as charge No. 8 is concerned, the same is with regard to gross negligence in the proper maintenance of college accounts.
In so far as charge No. 11 is concerned, the same as referred to above is with regard to taking her own daughter as member of the College contingent on trips irregularly in contravention of the rules.
It is this charge which was fully proved as per findings recorded by the Secretary.
Considering the nature of charges that were partially or fully proved against the respondent, the Secretary came to the conclusion that it was not a case of giving extreme punishment of removal from service to the respondent but ends of justice should be met if lesser punishment of stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect is given.
The contention of the learned Counsel that no evidence was discussed by the Secretary to reverse the finding of the Director on the charges that were established against the respondent cuts no ice inasmuch as it is only one of the main charges established against the respondent the findings whereon were reversed and the discussion made above clearly reveals that while reversing the findings on the relevant charge in question i.e. charge No. 1, Secretary did rely upon documentary evidence Ex.D.20.
So far as other charges are concerned, the findings of the Director have not been reversed but for charge No. 3.
The findings of the Director on charge No. 3 were based on conjectures and there was, thus, no necessity to discuss the evidence whatsoever.
On the other charges which were proved before the Director and findings on which charges were not reversed by the Secretary, it was found to be a case of lesser punishment and in considered view of this Court rightly so.
The Appellate Tribunal is well within its jurisdiction to reduce the punishment particularly when some of the charges established against a delinquent in the departmental enquiry are found to be not based on any cogent reasons and the finding on said charges is set aside.
There is absolutely no scope for this Court to uphold the punishment given to the respondent by the Management which was reduced by the Secretary in the manner fully indicated above.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner however, relies upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Parma Nand, 1989(2) 132.
The facts of the aforesaid case reveal that a detailed enquiry against the respondent in the said case was conducted and the Enquiry Officer found respondent and two others guilty of the charges framed against each one of them.
The report of enquiry was forwarded to the competent authority who after giving an opportunity of being heard dismissed the respondent from service.
The matter then went to the Central Administrative Tribunal at Chandigarh.
The Tribunal agreed with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and in particular that the respondent was the mastermind behind the scheme to defraud the project.
Even though such was the finding, the punishment was reduced.
It was more in the facts and circumstances of that case that the Apex Court limited or negated the power of Tribunal to interfere with the quantum of punishment.
That apart, it is not a case of a Tribunal or Court interfering with the quantum of punishment.
It is Appellate Tribunal which has interfered with the quantum of punishment and that too after holding that some of the charges that were proved before the Director and on the basis of which charges alone, an extreme punishment of dismissal was given, stood unsubstantiated even though not all but only some.
This Court is only concurring with the quantum of punishment.
Finding no merit in this petition, I dismiss the same leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
In view of the interim orders as have been mentioned above, the respondent-Principal is not in service and that being so, she would now be reinstated with all consequential reliefs forthwith.
To the extent the respondent has been paid her pay and allowances, the management would be well within its right to adjust the same while giving her monetary benefits arising out of the order passed by the Secretary, Annexure P-2 and which order has been confirmed by this Court today.
Petition dismissed.