NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge whereby the appeal filed against the Judgment and decree of the trial Court was accepted, thus decreeing his claim.
2.
Briefly put, Karnail Singh was employed as a JBT teacher in the Government High School when he was prosecuted in a murder case and after the trial he was sentenced to undergo imprisonment of life and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-.
The appeal filed by him too was dismissed by the High Court and further appeal before the Supreme Court met the same fate.
The District Education Officer thus dismissed him on 1061975 w.e.f.
3101973.
Karnail Singh after undergoing the sentence reported for his duty on 11.11.1982 when he was informed that he stands dismissed.
On these promises, he filed the present suit challenging his dismissal order on the ground that he had not been served with any notice before assuming an order of dismissal nor any enquiry was held.
3.
Defendants resisted the claim of the plaintiff primarily on the ground that on account of his conviction in a murder case, the order of dismissal passed by the authorities is according to law and so does not call for interference.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 1061975 is null and void and is not binding on the rights of the plaintiff as alleged ?
OPD  2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction prayed for ?
OPD  3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to arrears of his salary and seniority in service ?
OPD  4.
Whether valid notice u/s 80 C.P.C. has not been served upon the dependent ?
OPD  5.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present suit ?
OPD  6.
Whether the offence committed on the plaintiff involved morale turpitude ?
OPD  7.
Relief.
5.
The trial Court on the basis of evidence decided issues No. 1 to 3, 5, 6 against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 4 was decided against the defendants.
Resultantly the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as law.
It was urged by the respondent plaintiff before the lower appellate Court that the plaintiff's conviction in a murder case could not automatically be construed as misconduct.
Even if the authority wanted it so, it was duty bound to examine the matter in the light of rules applicable and thereafter to decide the penalty to be imposed upon the delinquent official for which an inquiry had to be initiated and that too by giving a prior notice to the person concerned.
Since neither a notice was served nor enquiry initiated, the impugned order of dismissal is non est and is liable to be set aside.
Besides this, the order of dismissal could not be made retrospectively.
The respondent-State, however, tried to justify the passing of the order with the assertion that since the plaintiff was put in detention on his conviction in a murder case holding of an enquiry was merely a formality.
Keeping in view the gravity of the offence committed by the plaintiff, the punishing authority passed the impugned order.
The lower appellate Court for reasons recorded in the impugned judgment agreed with the counsel for the appellant and so allowed the claim set up by the appellant-plaintiff.
It, however, made it clear that the concerned authority is at liberty to pass a fresh order after giving the plaintiff notice in terms of rules applicable with regard to service conditions.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellants has assailed the correctness of the impugned judgment on the ground that the lower appellate Court for no good reason has skipped over the material facts which weighed with the punishing authority, namely, involvement of the plaintiff in a murder case; his conviction by the Sessions Court and upholding of the sentence by the High Court and the apex Court.
Since the plaintiff has been convicted of a heinous crime, the order of dismissal could not be termed as faulty for want of notice and affording of an opportunity of hearing.
In case the facts are closely scrutinized it would become crystal clear that the plaintiff was in confinement since the year 1973 and possibly could not participate in an inquiry nor had any tangible material to urge in support of his show cause notice even if it had been issued.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel for the appellants, I do not find much substance in his submission.
Even if it be taken that there was no point in holding a departmental enquiry against a delinquent person who is convicted by a criminal Court, all the same the competent authority before imposing the penalty is duty bound to afford an opportunity to him to place his view point before his services are terminated.
This aspect of the matter has been simply glossed over by the authorities.
There is no material on record to prove that any such notice was issued to the plaintiff before an order of dismissal was passed.
Much emphasis was laid on a communication sent to the plaintiff by registered post This document is Exhibit P-12 which as per endorsement was sent on 1971983.
Thus at best it can be taken that the order of dismissal passed on 1061975 and to be effective w.e.f.
3101973 for the first time was communicated vide Exhibit P-12 dated 1971983.
This document clearly belies the stand of the State that a notice was issued before passing the order of dismissal.
The impugned order of dismissal is otherwise not sustainable as the same has been made retrospective in its operation.
Thus, I find no merit in any of the submissions made by the counsel for the Appellants.
Consequently, I dismiss the appeal.
The appellants are, however, at liberty to pass any fresh order in terms of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.