B Subhashan Reddy, J - The writ petitioner who was a Driver serving in AP State Road Transport Corporation by his rash and negligent driving caused the death of a motor-cyclist on 2831987 on route from Doramamidi to Jangareddygudem.
He had to negotiate a curve near Marlagudem village and the road was not that wide.
But, in spite of the same he was driving the vehicle at high speed and that too by going to wrong side and did not even slow down which resulted in the accident and consequent death of an young person who was driving Hero Majestic two wheeler who was perfectly driving on his side left side of the road.
He was prosecuted for the criminal offence punishable under Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code in C.C.
No. 192/87 on the file of the Court of II Additional Judicial First Class Magistrate, Kovvur and to his fortune, he was acquitted by judgment dated 30101990.
It is not known as to whether any appeal against acquittal was filed.
As such, it can be concluded that the petitioner was acquitted of the criminal charge under Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code.
2.
But the APSRTC authorities knowing fully well that the acquittal was only for technical reasons as the material witnesses turned hostile, initiated departmental disciplinary proceedings.
A charge-memo was issued containing the following charges, namely,  (1) for having driven the vehicle-AAZ 5338--in a rash and negligent manner and dashed with a motor-cyclist coming from the opposite direction on the left side of the road with the result the motor-cyclist fallen on the road, sustained grave injuries and subsequently expired, which is a serious mis- conduct vide Regulation 28(xxix) and (ix-a) of A.P.S.R.T.C.
Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1963;  (2) for having failed to take adequate precautionary measures to avert the accident with the result motor-cyclist coming from the opposite direction, sustained grave injuries and subsequently expired, which is a serious mis- conduct vide Regulation 28 (ix a & b) of A.P.S.R.T.C.
Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1963; and  (3) for having failed to intimate the fact of the accident caused to the bus to the depot authority on 2831987 and concealed the facts till 313198 which is a serious mis-conduct vide Regulation 28 (xxii) and (xxxii) - of A.P.S.R.T.C.
Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1963.
3.
The Chief Inspector (Enquiries), Eluru was the enquiry officer and after affording opportunity and complying with other formalities and after holding enquiry, he reported to the disciplinary authority and a show-cause notice was issued as to why the petitioner should not be removed from service and after considering the same, the petitioner was found guilty of the mis-conduct and was inflicted with the punishment of dismiss from service.
The appeal was filed with delay.
Nevertheless, it was heard on merits and after comprehensively considering the matter, the appellate authority affirmed the order of the disciplinary authority.
A review petition was filed by the petitioner, but was unsuccessful.
Later, he has raised an industrial dispute and the same was tried as ID No. 181 of 1989 by the Labour Court, Guntur But the Labour Court also concurred with the decision rendered by the disciplinary authority and affirmed by the appellate authority.
4.
Mr. PR Prasad, the learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that the road was narrow and the petitioner was not at all rash and negligent in driving the bus and that the acquittal of the criminal charge is proof positive of the innocence of the petitioner.
His argument is that when a competent criminal court has held the trial and on appreciation of the evidence, has recorded a finding of acquittal, for the same charge of rash and negligent driving, the finding in the departmental enquiry cannot sustain and that always the court judgment takes precedence over the order of the disciplinary authority, that too conducted by persons not legally trained and the officials of the same department under which the petitioner delinquent worked.
It is true that when competent criminal court holds a trial of a charge of rash and negligent driving and records a finding of acquittal after discussion of evidence and appreciation of the same, the departmental enquiry again re-appreciating the said evidence in a manner contrary to that of a court of law is impermissible.
But, where the criminal court records a finding of acquittal not on merits of the appreciation of the evidence of the material witnesses, but only on the ground of the said witnesses turning hostile, such a judgment will not bind the disciplinary authority and the disciplinary authority in such cases is entitled to evaluate the evidence adduced in the enquiry held by him and can arrive at an independent decision.
5.
In the instant case, since the criminal court has recorded acquittal of the petitioner only on the material witnesses turning hostile, the disciplinary authority was not precluded from considering the evidence adduced in the enquiry on its own and I find from the said appreciation that the same is perfectly valid and legal and I do not find any perversity in the appreciation of evidence.
The appellate authority also considered the matter comprehensive and correctly affirmed the order of the disciplinary authority.
Even the third and final fact finding court i.e. the Labour Court, has also gone into the matter in detail and correctly found that the finding of guilt and inflictment punishment wag valid and proper.
I am more than satisfied that there is ample record of evidence for sustaining the charge of mis-conduct against the petitioner.
6.
Then, Mr. PR Prasad, tried to persuade me for inflictment of lesser punishment than that of dismissal.
The labour court has considered the same and so also myself whether I can interfere in the quantum of punishment in exercise of powers under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Here is a case where the petitioner who is a public servant and who was duty bound to be cautious while driving a bus and during broad daylight at 940 am was driving the bus at a very high speed and also on the wrong side and did not even take care of slowing down the vehicle for negotiating the curve and did not even bother to apply brakes on finding the motor-cylist who was perfectly riding his motor-bike on his left side and then dashed against him resulting in his death.
The fact that the petitioner was driving the vehicle at a high speed is abundantly proved by the appearance of skid marks for a distance of 15 feet even after causing the accident.
The bus was not on its left side, but went on to the right side.
After the accident, the petitioner was duty bound to inform the concerned authorities, but he deliberately did not do so.
That apart, he gave utter false statements that the motor-cyclist himself was driving on the wrong side and fell on the bus and died.
The petitioner does not deserve any sympathy.
He has to thank for his acquittal by the criminal court which is the result of his manoeuvring the material prosecution witnesses and of the perfunctory judgment rendered by the criminal court.
It is understandable as to why in a case of this nature, the State did not take care to file an appeal against acquittal as there was other material to be projected even ignoring the evidence of the hostile witnesses.
The petitioner was licensed to drive a heavy vehicle like a bus and was appointed as such by a very important and responsible organisation like A.P.S.R.T.C.
as an effective and economic method of public transport system, and he was duty bound to act with all alertness and diligence But, he was highly callous, irresponsible, rash an negligent in driving the vehicle.
Neither the petitioner nor any person, for that reason, driving a motor vehicle, be it light or heavy, is licensed to injure or kill others who use the road.
In fact, the heavier and speedier the vehicle is, more should be the caution and alertness.
A precious life is lost prematurely due to rash and negligent driving of the petitioner.
But, Mr. PR Prasad still persuades me that the petitioner is of the age of 52 years and at this juncture, he cannot get an employment elsewhere and that himself and his family members would be put to great hardship in the punishment of dismissal is not set aside and that a lighter punishment like reinstatement without back-wages or fresh appointment may be made.
I do not agree even for that, for the reasons mentioned (supra).
Further, such one-sided considerations are not conducive for rendering justice to the cause.
What impact the untimely death of the motor-cyclist has on his family in particular and the society in general also should be taken into consideration.
If a person is guilty for murder and has to be hanged, the courts cannot have consideration with regard to the woes of his family.
It is true that justice always should be tempered with mercy.
But, undue mercy is harmful to the cause of justice.
7.
In the circumstances, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
I would have certainly imposed costs, but for the fact that the petitioner is a dismissed employee.
Petition dismissed.