Harphul Singh Brar, J - The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Agricultural Engineer in Haryana Agricultural Service Class-II on June 3, 1970.
He completed his probationary period of two years in the year 1972.
His services are governed by Punjab Agriculture Service Class-II Rules, 1947.
In Gradation List of Haryana Agriculture Service of Class-II as in 1980, the petitioner figured at Serial Number 26, Sarvshri Bachan Singh, Mukhtiar Masih, KK Riwari, Manmohan Singh Ahlawat, Shyam Sunder and S.P.S.
Nain were shown at Serial Numbers 56, 58, 59, 60, 61 and 62, respectively.
Vide order, dated March 31, 1981, respondent No. 1 promoted Sarvshri Bachan Singh, Mukhtiar Masih, KK Riwari, Manmohan Singh Ahlawat, Shyam Sunder and S P S Nain to the Haryana Agriculture Service Class-I.
The petitioner's representation against the promotions aforesaid failed.
Consequently, he filed a Writ Petition in this Court, seeking directions to the respondent-State to consider his claim for promotion to Class-I Service with effect from the date, persons junior to him were promoted.
His Writ Petition was allowed by this Court vide judgment dated March 13, 1984, in which directions were issued to the State to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the Haryana Agriculture Service Class-I with effect from the date, persons junior to him were promoted.
2.
Consequently, the petitioner had to file Contempt Petition (COCP No. 35 of 1985) in this Court for taking action against the respondents for their failure to comply with the orders of this Court.
3.
The respondents in their reply to the Contempt Petition undertook to comply with the judgment of this Court.
In view of the stand taken by the respondents, the Contempt Petition was disposed of.
4.
During the pendency of this petition, respondent No. 1 vide order, dated September 3, 1990 promoted the petitioner as Agricultural Engineer Haryana Agriculture Service, Class-I with effect from September 3, 1990 in the old pay-scale of Rs. 2,000-3,500 (wrongly mentioned as Rs. 2,000-3,000).
A copy of this order is appended as Annexure P-14 with the Amended writ petition.
5.
Thereafter, vide order dated May 9, 1991 respondent No. 1 in modification of earlier order, Annexure P-14, promoted the petitioner as Agricultural Engineer, Haryana Agriculture Service, Class-I (hereinafter referred to as to HAS-II) with effect from April 1, 1981.
A copy of this order, dated May 9, 1991 is appended as Annexure P-15 with the Amended Writ Petition.
6.
The petitioner had still a grievance against these orders, dated September 3, 1990 and May 9, 1991 Annexures P-14 and P-15, respectively.
According to the petitioner, order dated September 3, 1990, Annexure P-14, is illegal and erroneous to the extent of not granting to the petitioner revised pay scale of the post of Agricultural Engineer in the grade of Rs. 2,200-4,000 (enhanced to Rs. 3,000-4,500 after five years of service), as the order Annexure P-14, only grants the un-revised scale of Rs. 2,000-3,500.
In order to fortify this stand, the petitioner has added that vide Haryana Government Notification dated June 2, 1989, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-16 with the petition, the pay-scale of the Engineers stands revised from Rs. 2,000-3,500 to Rs. 2,000-4,000 (enhanced to Rs. 3,000-4,500 after five years of service).
The petitioner further states that the benefit of the above said revised pay scale has been granted to one Shri Darshan Lal Gaba, Assistant Engineer working in the office of respondent No. 2 and who is decidedly junior to the petitioner, but the same has been denied to him.
7.
The further grievance of the petitioner is that the order dated May 9, 1991 needs modification to the extent that the petitioner should have been promoted from March 31, 1981 the date his juniors were promoted and as a result of promotion he was eligible for all the arrears of pay and all other consequential benefits, but in this order, he has been promoted with effect from April 1, 1981 and it has been specifically stated in that order that no arrear will be paid to the petitioner till the date he joined as Agricultural Engineer, HAS-I.
8.
Written statement has been filed to the Amended Writ Petition on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.
9.
In Para II of the written statement, it has been stated that promotions of Sarvshri Bachan Singh, Mukhtiar Masih, KK Riwari, Manmohan Singh Ahlawat, SS Sharma and S.P.S.
Nain were ordered on March 31, 1981 but the orders of promotion of these officers were issued on April 1, 1981, and they were already reverted to Class-II posts on August 24, 1984 with immediate effect vide order of respondent No. 1, issued on August 24, 1984.
10.
It is discernible from the written statement that the petitioner was rightly appointed on April 1, 1981 the date his juniors were appointed.
11.
It has been stated in Para 14 of the written statement that the petitioner has been denied his arrears of pay etc. from April 1, 1981 as he did not actually work on the post of Agricultural Engineer, HAS-I.
It is further stated in this Para that the petitioner cannot be granted the revised pay-scale in the grade of Rs. 2,200-4,000 (enhanced to Rs. 3,000-4,500 after five years of service) which is admissible only to the Engineer/AIEE/AE/SDO/SDE appointed/working in the Public Works Department (Building and Roads, Irrigation and Public Works Department Branches).
The Department of Agriculture and the Public Works Department Building and Roads, Irrigation and Public Health Branches) are totally different from each other and officers are governed by separate Service Rules.
The pay-scales were revised departmentwise.
The Haryana Government, Finance Department's Notification, dated May 16, 1989 has been enclosed as Annexure R-2 with the reply, wherein it was decided to further revise the pay scales of the posts with effect from May 1, 1989.
12.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that when the petitioner has been promoted with effect from April 1, 1981, he is entitled to arrears of pay and other consequential benefits.
He further contends that the petitioner is also entitled to the pay-scale revised from time to time with interest thereon.
He has, in order to fortify his arguments, cited Shri Charan Dass Chadha v. The State of Punjab and another (Pb.
and Hy.
), 1990(3) S.L.R.
702, KN Chhiber, Ex. E.T.O.
v. State of Haryana and another (Pb.
and Hy.
), 1990(2) S.L.R.
299, Kirpal Jeet v. The State of Punjab and another, 1987(4) S.L.R.
594 and Ch.
Manmohan Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) SCT 149 (P&H) : 1991(1) RSJ 360.
13.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent-State submits that the petitioner has no claim and is not entitled to any arrears of pay etc., as he actually did not work on the post on which he was given the deemed promotion.
The counsel further submits that the pay-scale of Agricultural Engineer was never revised and it was only the pay-scale of Engineers in the Public Works Department which were revised.
Thus, the petitioner is not entitled for revised pay-scale.
The counsel has cited Paluru Ramkrishnaiah and others v. Union of India and another, A.I.R. 1990 SC 166, Smt. Saran Kumar Gaur and others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, 1991(3) SCT 79 (SC) : JT 1991(3) SC 478 and DN Sudhir v. The State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) SCT 250 (P&H) : 1992(1) RSJ 451.
14.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the petitioner is entitled to arrears of pay along with all the consequential benefits since the date of his promotion with effect from April 1, 1981.
I am fortified in my view by the observations in the following judgments which, I am discussing ad seriatim.
In Shri Charan Dass Chadha's case (supra), the relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under :  "...It has been held in KK Jaggia v. The State of Haryana and another 1972 S.L.R.
578, that once an employee is promoted with effect from a retrospective date, he cannot be deprived of the pay and other benefits to which he would have been entitled had he in fact been promoted to the said post on the date on which he has been later promoted.
Any condition imposed to the effect that the said employee would not be entitled to the pay and allowances as a result of the promotion as has been imposed in paragraph 2 of the impugned order in this case would be illegal, the reason being that the Government by not promoting such an employee on the date on which he was entitled to be so promoted, cannot take advantage of its own wrong or illegal order in not promoting him, and then while conceding the claim of the employee for promotion with retrospective effect it cannot withhold that is due to the said employee on account of such promotion in the matter of pay and allowances.
Similar principle was enunciated by a Division Bench of the Mysore High Court in BS Bhima Rao v. The State of Mysore and another, 1970 S.L.R.
190.
In fact the learned counsel for the respondents has not brought to my notice any judgment or provision of law under which the condition imposed in paragraph 2 of the impugned order could be supported or sustained.
In the light of the discussion above, I quash the impugned order so far as it states that the petitioner would not be paid his arrears of pay and allowances as Assistant Secretary for the period from October 1, 1961 to April 25, 1968."
In K.N.
Chhibbar's case (supra) also, the petitioner was given promotion with retrospective date but he was denied arrears of pay and allowances with effect from the date of his promotion.
It was held therein that non-payment of pay and allowances in that case was wholly without any legal justification and the order withholding the payment was set aside.
The relevant, portion of the judgment is reproduced as under, for ready reference :  "The second relief prayed by the petitioner is that though vide order dated 2nd February, 1985 (Annexure P-2), he has been promoted retrospectively consequent upon the acceptance of his representation, as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer, on regular basis with effect from 8th March, 1973, the date on which his junior Shri ML Pahwa was regularised, yet by the impugned order he has been denied the arrears of pay and allowances as Excise and Taxation Officer, for the period from 5th June, 1981 to the date preceding the date on which he actually assumed the charge of his duties as Excise and Taxation Officer.
In nutshell, in the first instance the State Government committed a mistake by not promoting the petitioner even though he was due for promotion.
Later on, when his representation was accepted and he was in fact found fit to be promoted from that date, he was actually promoted and the benefit of seniority, etc. was given to him in the higher rank.
In this situation, the order denying the payment of arrears of pay and allowances to the petitioner with effect from the date his promotion was actually made, is wholly without any legal justification.
Resultantly, the direction issued in the impugned order dated 2nd February, 1985 (Annexure P2) to this extent is struck down."
15.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is further fortified by the observations of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. S Tripathy and others, (1986) 2 SCC 373, Vasant Rao Roman v. The Union of India through the Central Railway Bombay and others, (SC) 1993(2) S.L.R.
289 and Smt. Naseem Bano v. State of UP.
and others, 1993(4) SCT 206 (SC) : JT 1993(4) SC 553.
16.
In S Tripathy and others' case (supra), the Government of Gujarat was directed to give the consequential monetary benefits to the Officer concerned from the date he was promoted.
17.
In Vasant Rao Roman's case (supra), the petitioner was not allowed seniority as Shunter 'B' and Driver 'C' in the Railway, though his juniors were promoted.
In that case, the Tribunal allowed seniority to the petitioner as demanded but declined the arrears of pay by invoking 'no-work no-pay' formula.
The Supreme Court held that there was no justification for not allowing the arrears of emoluments to the petitioner.
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under :  "In our view, the Tribunal was wrong in applying the aforesaid memorandum in the case of the appellant before us.
Admittedly, neither the appellant had been put under suspension nor any disciplinary proceedings were pending against him.
On the contrary, he had been made to suffer on account of administrative reasons for which the appellant was not responsible.
There was shortage of literate Shunters at Gwalior during 1960.
The appellant being literate was deputed for table work and therefore for administrative reasons he could not complete requisite number of firing kilometers.
Thus, with no fault on his part his juniors had been promoted as Shunters and Drivers and his claim was ignored on account of having not completed the requisite number of firing kilometers.
The Tribunal itself has allowed the claim of the appellant regarding seniority over his juniors, considering force in the contention of the appellant.
Thus, in the facts and circumstances of this case, we find no justification whatsoever for not allowing the arrears of emoluments to the appellant of the post of Shunter 'B' from 12.6.1961 and that of the post of Driver 'C' from 17121965."
18.
In Smt. Naseem Bano's case (supra), the consequential benefits accruing to the concerned official were granted.
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under :  "Since we have already held that the appellant possessed the qualifications prescribed for the post of LT grade teacher on the relevant date, it follows that the appellant was wrongly denied promotion to the post of LT grade teacher when one post became available on August 29, 1977 and it was filled in by appointment of respondent No. 6 by direct recruitment.
Respondent No. 6 was appointed on the post of LT grade teacher on October 17, 1979 and she had been holding the post since then.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances, we are of the opinion that the ends of justice could be met if, without upsetting the appointment of Respondent No. 6 on the post of LT Grade teacher, the appellant is treated to have been promoted to the post of LT Grade teacher, with effect from the date when respondent No. 6 was appointed on the said post and the appellant is given the consequential benefits accruing to her as a result of such promotion."
19.
Regarding the admissibility of revised payscale in accordance with the Notification, Annexure P-16, there is no dispute that before the revised pay scale as has been allowed by Annexure P-16, all Engineers including the petitioner were in the same pay-scale.
Qualifications, duties and responsibilities were also similar.
Even the assertion of the petitioner regarding the benefit of the abovesaid revised pay-scale as provided in Annexure P-16 granted to one Shri Darshan Lal Gaba Assistant Engineer working in the office of respondent No. 2 who is junior to the petitioner, has not been denied by the respondents.
It is simply asserted in their written statement that he was wrongly given this scale.
20.
In my considered view when all the Engineers including the petitioner were in the same pay-scale with same Qualifications and similar duties and responsibilities, there is no justification in denying the pay-scale to the petitioner.
In this view, I find support from the observations made in Kirpal Jeet's case (supra).
It was held therein that once the State Government decided to equate the pay-scale of a certain post with that of another post, it is not open to it to discriminate between the incumbents of the two posts for the grant of pay scale at the time of subsequent revision of pay scales.
Such an action would be wholly violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as it would be denying the equality of opportunity in the matter of employment.
It has not been denied by the respondents that pay scales of all these Engineers were the same earlier and their Qualifications, duties and responsibilities were also rather somewhat similar; and they belong to the same Government though in different Departments.
21.
It was held in Ch.
Manmohan Singh's case (supra) that if two posts in different departments carry the same pay scale, their duties and responsibilities have to be treated at par and equal for all intents and purposes.
22.
The facts in Smt. Saran Kumar Gaur and others case (supra) cited by the learned State Counsel are not applicable to the facts of this case.
In the case in hand, the petitioner was denied promotion not due to his fault but due to the fault of the Government.
He has to earn his deemed promotion by the intervention of the High Court by filing a writ petition on the basis of which he was given deemed promotion.
He remained an employee of the Government throughout and was never out of employment of the Government.
23.
In the facts and circumstances of Paluru Ramkrishnaiah and others' case (supra), the Supreme Court was pleased to grant the same limited relief which was grantedly the Madhya Pradesh High Court and it was not ruled therein that when a person has earned a deemed promotion, he is not entitled to arrears of pay and other consequential benefits.
The Supreme Court rulings mentioned earlier are directly on the point holding that the incumbent of the post if given deemed promotion is entitled to all the consequential benefits.
24.
In D N Sudhir's case (supra), the main point in dispute was regarding the fixation of seniority inter se the petitioners and private respondents as Assistants and there was no discussion regarding the principle that "when a person could not be promoted earlier due to the mistake of the Government but later on was given deemed promotion on the basis of the judgment of a Court, in these circumstances be as to whether he was entitled to consequential benefits which obviously included the arrears of pay etc." In the aforesaid case, only a passing reference was made at the end saying "that the petitioners in that case would not be entitled to any arrears of salary in case they were found entitled to promotion from a date earlier than the one were actually given promotion as they did not actually work against the higher posts."
The authorities of the apex Court as well as of this Court mentioned by me above, viz. Shri Charan Dass Chadha's case (supra), K N Chhibar's case (supra), Kirpal Jeet's case supra) and Ch.
Manmohan Singh's case (supra) were, perhaps, not brought to the notice of the learned Judge obviously thinking that this was not the issue raised before the Court for decision.
In these circumstances, this judgment will not help the respondents.
25.
In view of my discussion above, this Writ Petition is allowed and the orders, dated September 3, 1990, Annexure P-14, dated May 9, 1991, Annexure P-15 are modified to the extent that the petitioner though deemed to have been promoted from April 1, 1981 will also be paid the arrears of pay and will be entitled to the pay-scale of the post revised from time to time.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum till all the payments are made to him, particularly in view of the fact that the petitioner had to knock the door of the Court each time when the respondents denied his right to promotion and other requisite dues to him which he had earned by toiling all his life.
Petition allowed.