ML Bhat, J - The petitioner's services have been terminated on 2911975 by the respondents.
He appears to have filed a representation before the Chancellor against his order of termination which also was dismissed on 24101983.
The petitioner challenges these orders in this writ petition and prays for a writ of certiorari for this purpose.
2.
The facts set out in the pleadings are that the petitioner was appointed as an Office Assistant in the pay-scale of Rs. 100-180 plus usual allowances on temporary basis in terms of Annexure 1 to the writ petition dated 11.1.1973. on 22121973 he was appointed in the regular cadre in the aforesaid pay scale.
On 5/6-3-1974 his appointment was approved as an Office Assistant with effect from 181973 on the same conditions on which he was appointed.
On 1481974 an explanation was sought from him as to why he had brought out the bundle of forms from the Almirah of his Superintendent, which had disappeared from the office.
The disappearance of the bundle of forms is attributed to his negligence.
He did not bring this fact to the notice of the Accounts Superintendent and he was asked to explain why he concealed this fact from the Accounts Superintendent.
He is said to have filed an explanation, copy whereof is Annexure 5 to the writ petition.
On 2381974 he was placed under suspension pending enquiry and, thereafter, termination Order was issued on 2911975.
3.
Against the order of termination the petitioner appears to have filed a Civil Suit against the respondent-University.
However, that suit was dismissed by the Civil Court as being not maintainable.
The petitioner thereafter, filed a representation before the respondent No. 2, which was also dismissed.
His supplementary representation was also dismissed by a detailed order by the respondent No. 2.
4.
In the counter-affidavit filed by the respondent-university it is submitted that the record was submitted by the respondents before the Civil Court in Suit No. 33 to 1975, which got burnt in the that broke out in the District Court building.
On merits it is stated that the University had suffered a loss due to the negligence of the petitioner and due to his dereliction of duties.
Along with the petitioner the peon was also found responsible for the loss of the forms whose services were also terminated.
The matter was enquired into by the enquiry committee, which recorded its findings against the petitioner.
On enquiry the petitioner was found guilty, therefore, he was removed from service.
On August 22, 1974 the Vice-Chancellor seems to have desired that in view of the matter it was necessary that a committee consisting of the Registrar, Dean Students Welfare and Proctor be appointed to investigate the matter and submit report fixing responsibility for the loss of admission forms.
In pursuance of these directions the committee of enquiry is said to have enquired into the matter fixing responsibility for the loss of the forms upon the petitioner.
5.
In his rejoinder affidavit the petitioner has stated that the office order dated 5/631974, Annexure IIA to the writ petition is a genuine document.
It may be mentioned here that the respondents have submitted that this document is manufactured and was never produced along with the representation or in the civil suit.
The petitioner has denied his involvement in the loss of forms, It is stated that the Office Superintendent was responsible for the said loss and he had no responsibility for the loss of the forms.
In respect of the enquiry it is stated that it was held behind the back of the petitioner and he was not given the charge-sheet nor afforded any opportunity of being heard.
No witness was examined in his presence.
Any order passed in any sham enquiry will be against the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner denies that any record was produced in the Civil Court by the University, which was burnt.
The assertions made by the University respondent in their counter-affidavit are denied by the petitioner.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the order mainly on the ground that the impugned order was bad because it was the outcome of the so-called enquiry, which was not held in the presence of the petitioner nor was he given charge-sheet.
He was not heard also and anything done at his back to his detriment would be invalid.
It is submitted that it was necessary for the University to hold the enquiry in the presence of the petitioner, frame a charge-sheet against him, associate the petitioner in the enquiry, enable him to cross-examine the witnesses, who had deposed against him and produce witnesses in defence in the enquiry.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the case of S Rengarajan v. Srirangam Janopakara Bank Ltd, Srirangam, reported in AIR 1963 Madras 76.
According to this authority an employee against whom an enquiry is conducted on charge of misconduct does not get a reasonable opportunity to defend himself where no indication is given to him that the statements of witness recorded behind his back are going to be relied on against him.
Reasonable opportunity to defend himself means not only framing of charges and asking for explanation but much more.
The employee must be apprised of the material on which the charges were framed so that he could have a proper opportunity of testing or challenging that material so far as would be possible for him.
He has also referred to a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, reported in 1991(1) SCT 111(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471.
It is a case in which the Supreme Court has held that despite the 42nd amendment which has dispensed with the requirement of second show cause notice the delinquent is to be given a copy of the enquiry report, it is still necessary to apprise the delinquent as to what material was used against him in the enquiry and is being relied upon by the enquiry officer.
This judgment was held to have prospective application and any punishment already imposed was not open to challenge on this ground.
However, the principle laid down in that "disciplinary inquiry is quasi judicial in nature.
There is a charge and a denial followed by an inquiry at which evidence is led and assessment of the material before conclusion is reached.
These facets do make the matter quasi judicial and attract the principles of natural justice.
In a quasi judicial matter, if the delinquent is being deprived of knowledge of the material against him though the same is made available to the punishing authority in the matter of reaching his conclusion, rules of natural justice would be effected."
8.
Even under the Statute of the Allahabad University 2.06(3) before termination of services of an employee, it is necessary to hold an enquiry.
The requirement under the Statute would mean that the enquiry contemplated by it is to be in accordance with the principles of natural justice i.e. giving a reasonable opportunity to a delinquent officer of being heard and conducting an enquiry by associating him with the enquiry.
9.
Mr. SN Upadhya, appearing for the other side, has submitted that the petitioner was negligent in his duties and he had committed dereliction of his duties, therefore, he was not entitled to be given any relief even if it is assumed that the enquiry against him was not valid.
Hc cannot be reinstated on the post from which he was removed.
Reliance is placed on the case of Piaralal v. State of Punjab, reported in 1990 (Supp) SCC 754.
In this judgment the Supreme Court has held that on the facts of that case and in view of long passage of time, the appellant could not be reinstated in service.
Back wages cannot be paid to him.
However, he was notionally deemed to be in service till he attained the age of superannuation solely for the purposes of computing pension and other retirement benefits in respect of the post which he held at the time of commencement of enquiry against him.
This was done because the enquiry held against him was not proper and valid.
10.
Reliance is also placed on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of The Kayastha Pathshala, Allahabad v. Rajendra Prasad, reported in AIR 1990 SC 415.
A teacher in the Pathshala, who was in the teaching job only for one or two years and, thereafter, had diverted to legal profession was kept under suspension by the management and was out of job for over 25 years.
It was held that reinstatement of such a person would be unjustified and uncalled for.
Only salary for three years was given on account of damages.
In Om Prakash Goel v. Himachal Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation Ltd., Shimla, reported in 1991(3) SCC 291 : 1991(2) SCT 534 (SC) termination of service was held to be arbitrary and discriminatory but the relief of reinstatement was not with full wages.
The petitioner in that case was enrolled as an Advocate and he was entitled to back wages at the rate of half of the subsistence allowance per month from the date of his enrollment to the date of his reinstatement.
11.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and considered the authorities cited before us at the Bar.
The petitioner is now a practising Advocate.
It was submitted by Mr. Upadhya that even if enquiry is held to be bad, he cannot be reinstated because of his conduct in the University.
The employee of a University, who is working in the office is required to have highest standard of efficiency and by committing negligence or dereliction of duties the credibility of the University is likely to be eroded.
Therefore, it is not necessary to reinstate him or give him back wages.
Ends of justice would be served if for the purposes of his superannuation the period for which he has been out of service is counted towards his service.
However, it was submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that he was in service only for one or two years, therefore, he will not be under rules entitled to draw any pension unless he had put in requisite number of years in service under rules.
12.
On the material placed before us we are of the opinion that the petitioner was not given reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Charge-sheet was not given to him not were the charges articulated against him.
No material was given to him along with the charge-sheet and after he denied the charge of having lost the bundle of forms from particular numbers it was necessary to hold enquiry in his presence.
If any peon of the University was also allegedly involved, that fact could be ascertained by a regular enquiry.
Any report, which was made against him on the basis of statement of any witness, who appeared against him in the enquiry, was required to be produced for cross-examination in his presence.
In fact he was required to be associated with any enquiry, which is alleged to have been held by the respondents against him.
The holding of enquiry is the requirement of Statute also.
The conduct of enquiry is not an idle formality.
It, in the present case, was required by the Statutes of the University.
Therefore, in all enquiries, which have the effect of visiting a delinquent with penal consequences whether they are statutory or otherwise, a right of hearing is necessarily to be given to a delinquent and he is to be apprised of the charges so as to enable him to make an effective reply and in case any witness is examined against him, such examination is to take place in his presence and he is allowed to cross-examine the said witness.
The hearing, which is to be given, must be before decision is reached.
No decision can be taken unless the person affected is heard and given adequate and reasonable opportunity of being heard.
The hearing in the enquiry must be fair and reasonable.
If a decision is arrived at the back of the delinquent, it will be bad as it would be violative of principles of natural justice.
In the present case the requirement of conduct of enquiry was not followed, therefore, any enquiry, which is said to have been conducted by the respondent, is sham and bad in the eye of law, as it was conducted at the back of the petitioner.
No charge-sheet was framed against the petitioner.
He was only asked to explain about the missing of forms, which he denied.
Thereafter, the enquiry committee is said to have been set up, which is reflected by Annexure CA 1 dated 2281974 to the counter-affidavit.
What happened after the order for conduct of enquiry was made is not known.
13.
The contention of the University that the record, which was produced before that enquiry officer, was produced in the Civil Court and was burnt there, does not appear to be correct, inasmuch as this fact is stated for the first time before this Court in the counter-affidavit.
The statutory authorities of the University have not mentioned it in the orders, which were passed against the petitioner.
14.
It my be stated that the petitioner's representation dated 891976 was dismissed as barred by time on 2151977.
The petitioner is said to have challenged this order through the medium of writ petition No. 1216 of 1971 in the High Court.
The High Court by means of an order dated 1171983 quashed the order of holding the representation as barred by time and directed the opposite party No. 2 to decide the representation afresh.
A supplementary affidavit was also to be made to the opposite party No. 2.
The petitioner had submitted the supplementary representation also to the respondent No. 2.
While deciding the representation as also the supplementary representation the respondent No. 2 has stated that the comments and other relevant records, which were obtained from the University were perused.
It nowhere says that the record was not available or it was burnt in the trial Court.
One of the grievances of the petitioner in the supplementary representation was that he was not afforded any opportunity of being heard during the enquiry.
This could be ascrtained by the record maintained by the University.
The respondent Chancellor has said in the impugned order that the record was before him.
The other functionaries of the University have set up a case that the record got burnt.
Therefore, the contention of the respondent Nos. 1, 3 and 4 with regard to the burning of the record is doubtful.
In their counter-affidavit also the respondents have not stated in so many words that the enquiry was conducted according to the Statutes and the petitioner was afforded opportunity of being heard and he was asked to produce evidence in defence.
Therefore, all these facts cast a cloud on the assertion of the respondents with regard to the non-existence of the original record of enquiry.
15.
From the material as already pointed out, it appears that no enquiry was conducted against the petitioner and if any enquiry committee was constituted, that may have conducted investigation, as held by the respondent No. 2 in his own way.
The respondent No. 2 also does not state in his order that during the investigation the petitioner was associated with it or he was heard.
A portion of the enquiry report is reproduced in the impugned order of the respondent No. 2.
It does not go to show that the petitioner was given any opportunity of being heard or he was associated with any enquiry, which was set up by the Vice Chancellor vide his order dated 2281974.
16.
For not conducting the enquiry in accordance with law and in accordance with the Statute of the University and for not observing the principles of natural justice during the sham enquiry, the punishment imposed on the petitioner stands vitiated.
He was denied right to defend himself.
Therefore, he cannot be visited with penal consequence on the basis of sham enquiry report.
This aspect of the matter has not been considered by the respondent No. 2 in the impugned order.
It was necessary for him also to see that the rules of natural justice were adhered to by the University authorities with regard to the conduct of the enquiry against the petitioner.
This aspect of the matter has escaped notice of the respondent No. 2 but its result is very fatal to the enquiry proceedings as also to the conclusions arrived at such enquiry.
The result is that the enquiry proceedings as also the punishment awarded to the petitioner cannot be sustained.
As a result to this the impugned order passed by the respondent No. 2 also is vitiated.
The petitioner's removal from service is, therefore, bad, unconstitutional and illegal.
17.
That brings us to the second limb of the arguments i.e. whether the petitioner can be reinstated or he is to be paid some amount in lieu of wrongful dismissal.
The petitioner is not out of job.
He has enrolled himself as an Advocate and is a professional lawyer now.
He has been out of services for the last more than 18 years.
So it will not be advisable to grant him back wages for all these years because he has not rendered any work to the University nor can be ordered to be reinstated because he has an alternative job.
The post of the petitioner must also have been filled up.
So by his reinstatement interest of third party is likely to be jeopardised.
18.
In view of the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in AIR 1990 SC 415 : (1991)3 SCC 291 (supra) it is necessary to grant some compensation to the petitioner.
19.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated below.
20.
The impugned orders are quashed as invalid.
The respondents are directed to pay the amount equal to four years' salary to the petitioner beginning from 121975 as also the arrears of salary up to 121975, if any, due to the petitioner after deducting the amount of subsistence allowance, which was paid to him from the date of his suspension till he was removed from services.
21.
In view of the peculiar circumstances of the case the parties are left to bear their own cost.
NB Asthana, J - I agree.
Ordered accordingly.