GS Singhvi, J - CM No. 4720 of 1994 is allowed.
This petition involves a challenge to the order of retirement Annexure P-1 dated 2941993 issued by the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, retiring the petitioner under Rule 3.26(d) of the Civil Service Rules read with Rule 5.32-A(C).
The petitioner has also questioned the legality of Annexure P-3 dated 19th November, 1991, issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana in relation to the premature retirement of employees attaining the age of fifty years or fifty-five years.
The petitioner has prayed that the impugned order as well as the instructions be quashed and he be ordered to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
2.
Case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as J.B.T.
Teacher on 1111955.
He was promoted as Hindi Teacher on 1111967.
Till the date of issue of order of his retirement i.e. 2941993, he was not served with any adverse remark in his confidential reports nor was he punished in any disciplinary enquiry.
The petitioner has stated that he has always been allowed to cross efficiency bar.
The petitioner has made reference to instructions issued by the Government of Haryana (Annexure P-2) for retention in service beyond fifty-five years to only those persons who have 70% good reports in the last ten years.
He has pleaded that these instructions have been struck down by this Court in KK Vaid's case 1990(1) SLR 1 and that decision has been upheld by the Supreme Court.
He has also made reference to circular Annexure R-3 dated 19111991 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana laying down guidelines for exercise of the power under the provisions relating to compulsory retirement.
Petitioner's plea is that on the basis of his unblemish record of service, he has a right to continue in service till the date of superannuation and that there was no material available with the respondents on the basis of which they would possibly form an opinion that the petitioner has out lived his utility or that he has become a dead wood.
His further plea is that on the basis of remarks made in his annual confidential reports, no person with reasonable prudence could have formed an opinion that the petitioner has outlived his utility for public service.
3.
In their reply respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have pleaded that in terms of the instructions contained in the Government letters dated 1681983 and 19111991, case of the petitioner for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years was considered by the competent authority.
Only six annual confidential reports of the petitioner were found to be of good or better category and, therefore, he was not found fit for retention in Government service beyond fifty-five years.
Respondents have made a reproduction of the remarks made in the confidential reports of the petitioner and have asserted that record of the petitioner does not entitle him to be retained in service.
Respondents have placed on record instructions issued by the Government vide letters dated 1781975 and 1081981 regarding evaluation of the confidential reports of the Teachers and have pleaded that in Smt. Sarla Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1986(3) S.L.R.
250, categorisation of annual confidential reports has been upheld by this Court.
Reference has also been made to the decision of the Supreme Court in Baikuntha Nath Dass and others v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripadha and others, 1992(2) S.L.R.
2 : 1992(2) SCT 92 : 1992(*) A.I.R. (SC) 1020 and it has been submitted that premature retirement is neither a punishment nor it casts a stigma on the retired employee.
Respondents have pleaded that record of the petitioner was taken into consideration by the competent authority and it was found that he was not fit to be retained in public service.
While asserting that the petitioner has not established any malice against any individual officer/authority, respondents have further pleaded that a bona fide decision arrived at by the screening committee cannot be made subject matter of judicial scrutiny by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
4.
The only argument advanced by Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that overall evaluation of the petitioner's service record could not have furnished a valid justification for formation of an opinion that the petitioner is not fit to be retained in public service.
Shri Malik argued that every government employee in the State of Haryana has a right to be retained in service upto the age of 58 years unless he falls in the category of persons who deserve to be retired before attaining the age of 58 years.
Shri Malik further argued that the Government Instructions for retention of only those who have earned 70% good reports are wholly arbitrary and they smacks of arbitrariness."
5.
Learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents on the other hand, argued that a bona fide decision arrived at by a competent authority in the matter of compulsory retirement of an employee cannot be upset by the Court.
She argued that this Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot re-evaluate the material which was placed before the screening committee for its consideration and mere possibility of formation of a different opinion by the High Court cannot be a valid justification for interference by the High Court with the order of compulsory retirement.
Learned Assistant Advocate General was fair enough to plead that no adverse remarks was ever made in the annual confidential reports of the petitioner and that was he ever punished during his service career.
6.
There can be no denying that the employer and specially the Government is vested with the power to retire an employee before he attains the age of superannuation.
Exercise of such power is ordinarily regulated by the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Where rules do not exist administrative instructions have been issued by the Governments for dealing with the cases of premature retirement.
Exercise of power of compulsory retirement is no doubt an administrative function of the employer but it is not possible to accept argument of the learned Assistance Advocate General that exercise of this power of retirement is immune for judicial review.
Rather the settled principle of law is that as any other administrative power, exercise of power of compulsory retirement, premature retirement is open to judicial scrutiny.
However, in what circumstances the Court will invoke its power in such matters depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down and no straight jacket formula can be prescribed for exercise of power of judicial review by the Courts in matters relating to compulsory retirement.
In each case of compulsory retirement which is assailed before a Court of Law, the Court is required to examine as to whether the power of compulsory retirement has been exercised by a competent authority and as to whether the competent authority has objectively considered the material placed before it for forming an opinion that the employee concerned has outlived his utility or that his retention in public service is not justified.
If the Court finds that the order has not been passed by a competent authority, there will be ample justification for interference with the order of retirement on the ground of lack of authority.
Likewise where the Court finds that the power of compulsory retirement has been exercised without consideration of relevant material or where it is found that the competent authority has relied on extraneous factors or has not applied its mind or has reached to a conclusion which no reasonable man would have arrived in similar circumstances, the Court will be justified in upsetting the order of premature retirement.
Exercise of power of compulsory retirement for extraneous considerations or by ignoring relevant factors can appropriately be construed as exercise of power which suffers from malice in law inviting interference by the Court.
The Court will no doubt not act as an appellate authority and will not re-evaluate the material placed before the competent authority for the purpose of forming an opinion as to whether the employee should be kept in service or not but it will be the duty of the Court to look into such record with a view to find out as to whether the competent authority has objectively, applied its mind to the relevant considerations.
7.
In the light of the above, the case of the petitioner deserves close scrutiny.
The admitted facts which have come on record show that the petitioner has not been conveyed with any adverse remark in his confidential reports during the last ten years.
In fact none has been conveyed to him during his entire service career.
It is also an admitted position that the petitioner has not been punished for any delinquency during his entire service career.
It is not the case of the respondents that prior to 1982-83 the work of the petitioner has been bad or that he has not taken interest in his work.
In the background of this admitted position if the remarks made in the annual confidential reports of the petitioner during the last ten years which have been made available by the respondents in para 3 of the reply are seen, it becomes clear that the petitioner's record is not such which could furnish basis for forming an opinion that the petitioner has outlived his utility for public service.
For proper consideration that portion of para 3 is extracted below, which contains remarks made in the annual confidential reports of the petitioner;  Sr. No. Year Grading Examination Results 1.
1982-83 Good Two results ( + ) Good.
2.
1983-84 Good Two results ( + ) Good.
3.
1984-85 Good Two results are in minus Average.
4.
1985-86 Outstanding - Outstanding.
5.
1986-87 Very Good School Results are ( + ) Very Good.
6.
1987-88 Good -do- Good.
7.
1988-89 Outstanding One result is plus Outstanding.
8.
1989-90 N.A.C.
One result is in minus Average.
9 1990-91 Average -do- Average.
10 1991-92 Good -do- Average.
8.
A bare look at the aforesaid exact of the annual confidential reports of the petitioner shows that during the last ten years, he has been described as average, good, very good and outstanding employee.
A person who has earned average reports cannot be described as inefficient person.
He can at the best be considered to be an ordinary employee may be that he is not extra ordinary.
However, an ordinary employee cannot be equated with an employee who has become unfit to be retained in public service or whose efficiency has impaired to such a degree which warrants his home sending before reaching the age of superannuation.
In my considered opinion, the competent authority has miserably failed to apply its mind objectively to the record of the petitioner while making recommendation for his premature retirement.
Total non-application of mind by the competent authority is by itself sufficient to vitiate the action of the respondents in retiring him before attaining the age of superannuation.
9 Submission of the learned Assistant Advocate General is that on the basis of examination of results the competent authority was justified in forming the opinion that the petitioner should be shunt out of job, I find myself unable to agree with the submission of the learned Assistant Advocate General in its wide sweep.
True it is that the performance of a Teacher can appropriately be reflected from the results of his pupils but if after evaluation of his performance, the competent authority has classified his work to be of an average category, that classification cannot be over-looked by the screening committee or by other competent authority while considering his case for compulsory retirement.
10 It is thus clear that the petitioner has been retired without there being any valid basis for forming an opinion that the petitioner has outlived his utility or that his efficiency has impaired to such a degree which warrants his non-continuance in service upto the age of superannuation.
11.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition succeeds and it is hereby allowed.
Order Annexure P-1 is declared illegal and it is hereby quashed.
The petitioner has continued in service during the pendency of this writ petition by virtue of interim order of this court.
It is, therefore, not necessary to issue a separate direction for his reinstatement.
Suffice it to say that the petitioner shall get all consequential benefits to which he is entitled as an employee of the Government of Haryana.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.