GR Majithia, J - This regular second appeal is directed against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court dated September 16, 1988, affirming on appeal those of the trial Judge dated June 4, 1987, dismissing the suit of the plaintiff-appellant for declaration that the order dated May 5, 1982, imposing the penalty of withholding of annual increment with cumulative effect was illegal.
2.
The appellant is employed as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways.
General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ferozepore, vide order bearing No. 979/TC, dated May 5, 1982, imposed the penalty of withholding three annual increments with cumulative effect.
The appellant challenged the order in Civil suit bearing No. 54-a instituted on January 31, 1986.
The trial court found that a regular departmental enquiry was conducted and the disciplinary authority accepted the enquiry report and imposed the punishment after following the procedure prescribed.
On the question of limitation, the trial Court found that the suit was filed beyond limitation and, on ultimate analysis, it dismissed the suit.
The judgment and decree of the trial Judge were challenged in the first appeal.
The first appellate Court found that the order inflicting the penalty of stoppage of three increments was not a speaking order and as such was held to be illegal.
On the question of limitation, the first appellate Court affirmed the finding of the trial Judge and held that the suit was filed beyond limitation.
The order imposing the punishment was made on May 5, 1982 and the suit was filed on January 31, 1986.
Thus, obviously it was barred by time having been filed after three years.
3.
When the regular second appeal came up for motion hearing, the learned Single Judge expressed doubt about the Correctness of the judgment reported as State of Punjab v. Malkiat Chand, 1988(4) S.L.R.
243 and admitted the case to Division Bench and it is how this regular second appeal has been placed before us for disposal.
4.
It is no more open to dispute that the suit of the nature as filed by the plaintiff-appellant will be governed by the residuary Articles 113 of Limitation Act, 1963.
It was authoritatively laid down by the apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh, Ashok Kumar, AIR 1991 SC 2219 : 1991(3) SCT 93 (SC), that a suit for declaration that the order of dismissal in ultra vires and will be governed by residuary Articles 113 of the Limitation Act.
The question posed was answered thus :-  "It will be clear from these principles, the party aggrieved by the invalidity of the order has to approach the Court for relief of declaration that the order against him is inoperative and not binding upon him.
He must approach the Court within the prescribed period of limitation.
If the statutory time limit expires, the Court cannot give the declaration sought for."
After so observing, the apex Court approving the view of the Allahabad High Court and the Oudh Chief Court observed thus :-  "The Allahabad High Court in Jagdish Prasad Mathur v. United Provinces Government, AIR 1956 All.
114, has taken the view that a suit for declaration by a dismissed employee on the ground that his dismissal is void is governed by Articles 120 of the Limitation Act.
A similar view has been taken by Oudh Chief Court in Abdul Vakil v. Secretary of State, AIR 1943 Oudh 368.
That in our opinion is the correct view taken.
A suit for declaration that an order of dismissal or termination from service passed against the plaintiff is wrongful, illegal or ultra vires is governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
The decision to the contrary taken by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in these and other cases (State of Punjab v. Ajit Singh, (1988) 1 Serv.
LR 96 (Punj & Har) and (ii) State of Punjab v. Ram Singh, (1986) 3 Se v. LR 379 (Punj & Har) is not correct and stands overruled."
In the light of this authoritative pronouncement of the apex Court, it has to be held that the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant is beyond limitation and has to be dismissed as such.
For the reason stated above, the regular second appeal fail and is dismissed, but there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.