A L Bahri, J - This appeal is by the State of Punjab-defendant against the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, Ferozepur, dated October 21, 1988, whereby the judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside and the suit filed by the Head Constable Sadhu Singh was decreed.
The trial Court had earlier dismissed the suit.
During the pendency of the appeal, Sadhu Singh aforesaid died and his widow was impleaded in his place as respondent.
2.
The facts on the basis of which suit was filed, are brief,  Sadhu Singh-plaintiff joined Police Force as Constable on July 22, 1959.
He was promoted as Head Constable in 1968.
Vide order dated March 4, 1985, he was pre-maturely retired and the present suit was filed for declaration that the order of retirement aforesaid was illegal and against the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service (Pre-Mature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
The suit was filed after issuing a notice under Section 80, Code of Civil Procedure.
Consequential relief was also claimed from the date of his retirement.
The State of Punjab put in appearance, however, failed to defend the suit by filing written statement.
The trial Court eventually struck off the defence on May 15, 1986.
The matter was taken to the High Court in Civil Revision.
The High Court directed the Defendant-State of Punjab to file a written statement in the High Court.
It was not done and one application along with written statement was filed in the trial Court.
The Revision Petition was dismissed on September 3, 1986, with the result the order of the trial Court striking off the defence stood.
In order to support the case of the plaintiff he entered into the witness-box and closed his evidence.
The trial Court dismissed the suit on August 11, 1987.
The lower Appellate Court reversed the decision.
3.
A perusal of the record and the judgment of the lower Appellate Court, it is clear that order of retirement was passed on the basis of one adverse entry alleged to have been communicated to the petitioner of the year 1979-80.
The plaintiff successfully challenged the aforesaid entry in the civil suit (Copy of judgment is Exhibit P2).
The lower Appellate Court observed after examining service record of the plaintiff for a period of five years that there was no other adverse entry against him.
The order of pre-mature retirement was, thus, against the Service Rules as the intention of framing such rules was to weed out dead wood.
The case of the plaintiff did not fall in that category.
4.
Shri R K Joshi, Addl.
A.G. appearing on behalf of the Appellate-State observed that the view of the lower Appellate Court that only five years' record was to be seen at the time of passing pre-mature retirement order now stands modified by the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as of this Court and the judgment and decree of the lower Court should be set aside.
This contention, as such, cannot be accepted.
No doubt, the latest view on the subject is that the entire service record is to be taken into consideration while considering the case of premature retirement.
After referring to several decisions of the Supreme Court on the subject, the matter was considered by the Full Bench of this Court in Punjab State and others v. Kulwantbir Singh, 1993(2) SCT 567 (P&H)(FB) and it was held that the entire service record is to be taken into consideration for taking action for pre-mature retirement and if there is adverse entry doubting integrity, such an entry will have effect for ten years.
Applying the ratio of the decision aforesaid, to the facts of the present case, the order of retirement of the plaintiff cannot be sustained in law.
As already stated above, there was only one adverse entry in the service record of the plaintiff which was quashed by the Civil Court.
Such an entry thus, could not be taken into consideration.
Otherwise it was the case of the plaintiff which went unrebutted that his service record was good.
Thus, it is to be taken that the service record was good and would not justify passing of the order of pre- mature retirement.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.