SK Jain, J - Vide Civil Suit No. 33 of 13.4.1976 plaintiff-Mohinder Singh conductor, employed in Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh, challenged the orders passed by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh bearing Nos. 825/STGR dated 1261973, 1379/STGR dated 27.9.1973 and 14732/LA vide which he was suspended, his four increments were stoppaged with cumulative effect and further ordered that during the suspension period he will not be paid anything over and above the subsistence allowance already paid to him.
He also challenged order No. 14732/LA (Appeal) 206 dated 1871975 vide which defendant No. 2 dismissed his departmental appeal.
He claimed that these orders illegal, ultra vires and violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, against the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules and also against the principles of natural justice, equity and fair play and, therefore, were inoperative, null and void and he was entitled to full pay and allowances during the suspension period and all other benefits of service.
2.
After contest Shri MS Nagra, Senior Sub Judge, Chandigarh, vide his judgment and decree dated 24.5.1977 dismissed the suit.
3.
The plaintiff preferred Civil Appeal No. 23 of 1977 instituted on 27.7.1977 against the abovesaid judgment and decree.
Shri HL Randev, Addl.
District Judge, Chandigarh vide his judgment and decree dated 14121977 accepted the appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and decree of the Court in the first instance and decreed his suit.
4.
It was that judgment and decree of the first appellate Court which was appealed against by the defendants and which required examination of this Court of its sustainability.
5.
The said R.S.A.
No. 1151 of 1978 was decided by this Court vide judgment dated 19.5.1987 thereby accepting the appeal setting aside the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court and that of the trial Court dismissing the suit was restored.
6.
Plaintiff-Mohinder Singh filed Civil Appeal No. 187 of 1988 in the Supreme Court of India by Special Leave and following order was passed on 21101992 by Hon'ble the Supreme Court :  "THAT the judgment and Order dated 19th May, 1987 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Regular Second Appeal No. 1151 of 1978 be and is hereby set aside and the matter be and is hereby remanded to the aforesaid High Court with the direction that the said High Court do restore to its file Regular Second Appeal No. 1151 of 1978 and do dispose of the same afresh as expeditiously as possible in light of this Court's decision dated the 13th September, 1990 in Civil Appeal No. 2960 of 1987 titled Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) reported in Judgments Today 1990(4) SC page 70."
7.
That is how, Regular Second Appeal No. 1151 of 1978 was restored to the file of this Court and was placed before me for hearing.
8.
I have seen the pleadings in the suit, the evidence adduced by the parties in the suit and the judgments of both the Courts below.
9.
The trial Court found that the plaintiff had failed to substantiate his allegations that the impugned orders were illegal and violative of the rules or the Constitution of India.
Having arrived at this conclusion, the trial Court had dismissed the suit.
10.
On appeal, the learned lower appellate Court reversed the findings of the trial Court and decreed the suit of the plaintiff, relying on the judgment of this Court in Punjab State v. Ram Lubhaya, 1983(2) SLR 410, where it was held that the penalty of forfeiture of increments with cumulative effect was a major punishment and before imposing the said penalty, an enquiry was necessary.
11.
Learned counsel for the appellant-State has argued that the above mentioned judgment on which the lower appellate Court had relied, was no more a good law in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab, ILR 1985(2) Pb.
& Hr.
193, wherein it has been held that stopping of increments with cumulative effect was a 'minor penalty' and while imposing minor penalty no enquiry was necessary.
I do not find force in this argument of the learned Assistant Advocate General in view of the latest pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra), which will be discussed in the later part of this judgment.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the Inquiring Officer found that the charges levelled against the delinquent official were not proved but the punishing authority did not agree with the report and imposed the penalty of stopping of four increments with cumulative effect, which was illegal as fresh notice was not given by the punishing authority while differing with the report of the enquiry officer.
He has drawn support from :  (i) RD Rawal v. State of Punjab, 1967 SLR 521;  (ii) Swinder Singh v. Union of India, 1984(2) SLJ 591 (Delhi), and  (iii) Shanker Lal Vishwakama v. Union of India, 1987(1) SLR 747.
13.
Second submission of the learned counsel for the respondent is that the order directing stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect would fall within the meaning of Rule 5(v) of the Rules and, therefore, the provisions of Rules 8 and 9 would come into play requiring conducting of regular enquiry.
14.
In order to appreciate this argument, it is expedient to examine sub-rule (v) of Rule 5 prior to and after the amendment.
The same is reproduced below for ready reference :  Sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 prior to amendment.
"5.
Penalties - The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on a Government employee, namely :-  Minor Penalties  (i) xxxxxxxxxxxxxx  (ii) xxxxxxxxxxxxxx  (iii) xxxxxxxxxxxxxx  (iv) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  Major Penalties.
(v) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of him pay;  Sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 after the amendment.
(v) Withholding of increments of pay with cumulative effect or reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay. "
15.
Analytical examination of Sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 prior to amendment shows that it postulates reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay.
It is an independent head of penalty and it could be imposed as punishment in an appropriate case.
It is one of the major penalties.
The impugned order of stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect whether would fall within the meaning of Rule 5(v) ?
If it so falls Rules 8 and 9 of the Rules require conducting of regular enquiry.
The submission of learned counsel for the State-respondent that the punishment of withholding of four increments with cumulative effect squarely falls within the ambit of Rule 5(v) of the Rules has force.
Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter without any hedge over it certainly comes within the meaning of Rule 5(iv) of the Rules.
But when the penalty was imposed withholding four increments with cumulative effect, it would indisputably mean that the four increments earned by the employee was cut off as a measure of penalty forever in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
In other words the clock is put back to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay and on expiry of two years the clock starts working from that stage afresh.
The insidious effect of the impugned order by necessary implication, is that the delinquent employee is reduced in his time-scale by two places and it is in perpetuity during the rest of the tenure of his service with a direction that four years' increments would not be counted in his time scale of pay as a measure of penalty.
The words are the akin to the language which if peeled off, its true colour or its resultant effect would become apparent.
When I broach the problem from this perspective the effect is as envisaged under Rule 5(v) of the Rules.
16.
In view of the above discussion, I have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule 5(v) of the Rules.
In this regard, reference can be had to the ratio laid down in Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, JT 1990(4) SC 70 : 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) : 1991(1) RSJ 413.
17.
After having held that stoppage of four annual increments with cumulative effect was major penalty under Rule 5(v) of the Rules, the argument of the learned counsel for the State that no fresh notice was necessary to be issued by the punishing authority while deferring with the report of the Inquiring Officer, pales into insignificance.
Rule 9(3) of the rules deals with the cases of minor punishment.
Therefore, the present case would not fall within the ambit of the said rule.
After having disagreed with the findings of the Inquiry Officer the disciplinary authority had to record its reasons for each disagreement and its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record was sufficient for the purpose.
Perusal of the impugned order Ex. D-12 would show that though the Punishing Authority had disagreed with the findings of the inquiring authority on the article of charge, it had not recorded its reasons for such disagreement and had also not recorded its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record was sufficient for the purpose.
That being so, it can he held unhesitatingly that the mandatory provisions of Rule 9(2) of the Rules have not been complied with in the case in hand.
18.
The word "inquire" means to ask about or to question, with the object of seeking truth (Webster's Third New International Directory, Volume I).
Inquiry is the act of seeking truth, Information or knowledge about something.
When used, in the context of departmental inquiry in respect of charges against a Government servant, it means the formal or official investigation by a person having authority to compel testimony.
It is the search for the truth or otherwise of the accusations made against him.
This is done by asking questions, collecting testimony of witnesses and information from documents.
Inquiry is thus the totality of the steps taken in search for truth through the investigating media of issuing notice, recording and fairly considering the evidence, discussion and reasoning.
19.
The Inquiry which commences with the notice to show cause continues into the written statement by a delinquent employee, follows through the evidence of witnesses, production of documents and culminates in reasoning and conclusions.
It is a continuous process which terminates with a final decision into the question under investigation.
The Inquiring does not terminate with the report of the Inquiry Authority, but ends with the decision of the disciplinary authority.
20.
The Inquiring Authority merely aids the disciplinary authority in coming to a conclusion about the truth of the charges.
It is the disciplinary authority who takes a decision in respect of each of the charges, after considering the evidence.
The role of the Inquiring Authority, as the delegate of the disciplinary authority, ends with the making of the report.
His findings on the charges and the report are merely an aid in the inquiry which the disciplinary authority is called upon to hold because it is the disciplinary authority who takes a decision on each of the charges, notwithstanding the conclusions made by the Inquiring Authority.
The disciplinary authority may accept, modify or reject the conclusions made by the Inquiring Authority.
He does this on consideration of the evidence on record which means that his mind is engaged in the search for the truth in respect of the articles of charges.
In this endeavour, his mind considers the record, the inference from facts and evaluates the evidence.
Where it disagrees with the Inquiring Authority, reasons have to be recorded.
The disciplinary authority is required to "determine" what penalty should be imposed on the Government servant.
In my opinion, the scheme of the Rules contemplates one inquiry.
The proceedings before the Inquiring Authority, a delegate of the disciplinary authority, are in aid of the inquiry which continues beyond the proceedings before the Inquiring Authority.
The decision making process of the disciplinary authority is a part of the Inquiry envisaged by Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and the Rules.
21.
Perusal of impugned order Ex-D12 would further show that punishment of stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect was inflicted on the delinquent official without issuing a show-cause notice to him.
Obviously, the disciplinary authority had passed the impugned order imposing penalty of stoppage of four annual increments with cumulative effect considering it to be a minor penalty.
If it is considered to be a minor penalty then the procedure followed certainly meets the test of principal of natural justice and it would be a sufficient compliance with the procedure.
But as held earlier the imposition of a penalty of stoppage of four annual increments with cumulative effect was a major penalty within Rule 5(v) of the rules.
Certainly a regular enquiry under Rules 8 and 9 has got to be conducted which had not been done in this case and, therefore, the impugned order is clearly illegal, The learned lower Appellate Court had rightly accepted the appeal and decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
22.
This Regular Second Appeal is accordingly dismissed but in the circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.