SK Jain, J - The facts :  The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the office of District Red Cross Society, Hissar in the year 1959.
Under orders of the President, he was promoted to the post of Accountant and again to the post of Assistant Secretary.
After the formation of new District Sirsa (carved out of old district Hissar), District Red Cross Society, Sirsa came into being.
The petitioner was transferred as Assistant Secretary to that society in the month of September, 1979.
With effect from 1641986 he was promoted to the post of Secretary.
He remained on probation till 1541987.
2.
On the grounds that he was initially appointed as a clerk in the office of District Red Cross Society, Hissar; that he was promoted from time to time in that office; that he was transferred by order of the President, Red Cross Society, Hissar and that he retained his lien on the said post there, the petitioner instituted Civil Suit No. 792-C of 1981 on 6.1.1981 Radha Kishan Rajpal Vs. (i) District Red Cross Society, Sirsa (ii) District Red Cross Society, Hissar, and (iii) Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana State Branch, Chandigarh, for a decree of declaration to the effect that he was entitled to service in the District Red Cross Society, Hissar, where he had retained his lien as Accountant and the order dated 4.2.1986 passed by the President, District Red Cross Society, Hissar, was erroneous, illegal and was liable to be set aside.
3.
That suit was decreed for declaration to the effect that the plaintiff was entitled to serve with the defendant No. 2 District Red Cross Society, Hissar, as Accountant till he was confirmed as Assistant Secretary with District Red Cross Society, Sirsa, by Sub-Judge, 2nd Class, Sirsa, vide his judgment and decree dated 11.3.1983.
4.
That judgment and decree was challenged by one Kanwaljit Singh, Accountant, District Red Cross Society, Hissar on the ground that the said judgment and decree would adversely affect him.
Neither District Red Cross Society, Hissar, nor District Red Cross Society, Sirsa had challenged the said judgment and decree.
5.
Civil Appeal No. 51 instituted on 1841983 was dismissed by Shri CR Goel, Additional District Judge, Sirsa vide his judgment and decree dated 3101985.
Kanwaljit Singh, Accountant, District Red Cross Society, Hissar, brought RSA No. 3092 of 1985 against the said judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court.
It was dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 2381993 of this Court.
6.
The case of the petitioner is that on account of differences between him and Shri B B Kaushil, City Magistrate, he was falsely implicated in a case for misappropriation etc.
Charge sheet dated 18121987 was served on the petitioner which was replied to by him whereafter no further steps were taken in the matter nor the said charge-sheet was withdrawn.
However, a fresh charge sheet containing some of the previous charges and new charges was served on the petitioner on 1021988.
He was not allowed to inspect relevant documents for submitting effective reply to the charges.
He, however, denied the charges vide his reply dated 231988.
An enquiry Officer who was a friend of Mr. BB Kaushik was appointed to hold a departmental enquiry.
Two applications of the petitioner for transferring the enquiry to some other Officer were declined.
Enquiry was completed and report submitted to the disciplinary authority thereby holding the petitioner guilty for some of the charges which were in the nature of the irregularities.
The President, District Red Cross Society, Sirsa forwarded the said enquiry report along with the show cause notice to the petitioner asking him as to why his services should not be terminated.
The petitioner submitted reply which did not find favour with the Enquiry Officer.
For a period of 10 months' no action was taken but suddenly on 17.10.1979 the petitioner was dismissed from service of the society.
His representation to the Govenoror-cum-President, Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana State Branch, Chandigarh was still pending.
Vide this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged order dated 17.10.1989 Annexure P-6 vide which he was dismissed from service by respondent No. 2 'inter-alia' on the following grounds that :-  (i) since the petitioner had a lien on the post of Assistant in the office of District Red Cross Society, Hissar as held by Civil Court, respondent No. 2 was neither his appointing nor punishing authority and, therefore, the impugned order was without jurisdiction;  (ii) no action on the first charge-sheet was taken nor the same was withdrawn, therefore, the issuance of the second-charge sheet was illegal;  (iii) the petitioner having not been allowed to inspect all the relevant documents, he would not submit effective reply to the charge sheet and, therefore, had been gravely prejudiced.
The enquiry, therefore, stood vitiated;  (iv) that since no Presenting Officer had been appointed, the Enquiry Officer himself was acting as such which prejudiced the case of the petitioner;  (v) the evidence led by the petitioner in defence had not been taken into consideration by respondent No. 2 while passing the impugned order;  (vi) that the impugned order was a non-speaking order inasmuch as the evidence produced in defence had not been discussed nor the reasons as to why the same was discarded have been assigned; and  (vii) that the impugned order was passed in flagrant disregard of the provisions of clause 20(ii) of the Model Draft Constitution because the petitioner who was the Secretary of the District branch could not be dismissed from service by the President without obtained concurrence of the State branch.
7.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
The case is that the matter regarding lien had not been finally decided so far.
Charge- sheet dated 1021988 was issued by the then President, Red Cross Society and Mr. Kaushik, the City Magistrate had nothing to do with the charge-sheet.
The request of the petitioner was never turned down.
It was the petitioner who failed to turn up to inspect the relevant record.
The Enquiry Officer was an impartial person.
The petitioner had been afforded full opportunity at all stages to defend himself.
The Enquiry Report was perfectly valid and legal and the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on the basis of said report.
Reply of the petitioner to the show cause notice was considered and then it was proposed to impose the punishment of removal from service upon him.
Vide resolution No. 5 passed by the Executive Committee in its meeting held on 16111988, the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules were made fully applicable to the employees of the District Red Cross Society, Sirsa.
The President was competent to appoint an employee.
He was also competent to terminate his services, but it has to be in accordance with Model Draft Constitution of the Society.
All the allegations levelled by the petitioner were denied.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that while transferring the petitioner from District Red Cross Society, Hissar to District Red Cross, Society, Sirsa, his consent was not taken.
The petitioner, therefore, had lien on his substantive post at Hissar.
A decree to that effect had been passed by the Civil Court and was affirmed by the lower appellant Court.
Red Cross Society did not file any regular second appeal.
The RSA filed by Kamaljit Singh bearing No. 3092 of 1985 was dismissed as withdrawn on 2391993.
Therefore, it stands finally decided that the petitioner had a lien on his substantive post with District Red Cross Society, Hissar.
Besides this, the District Red Cross Society, Sirsa vide its letters dated 2791977, 311978, 1471980 and 1691980 had admitted that the petitioner had no lien at Sirsa.
9.
Relying on the various judgments, he was submitted that an employee had a lien on such a post upon which he is confirmed even after his allocation to other District/State and that such a lien cannot be suspended or terminated without passing a specific orders to that effect and that too if he is confirmed on the post of his new assignment.
He has further argued that lien on the post cannot be terminated even with the consent of the employee concerned if the result of such termination is to leave him without a lien or a suspended lien upon a permanent post and the lien is not automatically suspended on appointment in substantive capacity to a permanent post out side the cadre and the competent authority was bound to pass order for suspending his lien.
The aggrieved employee could not be made to suffer because of the inaction or ommission of the competent authority.
In the absence of written request by an employee, lien on the post permanently held by him cannot be terminated.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued supporting the impugned order.
10.
I have carefully considered the above arguments.
In Civil Suit No. 792-C of 1981, "Radha Kishan Rajpal v. District Red Cross Society, Sirsa and two others" it was held under issue No. 1 as under :-  "The lien of the plaintiff having not been proved to be terminated at any stage, much less on 6101975, I am of the view that the plaintiff is entitled to serve with the defendant No. 2 - Society as Accountant and he retains his lien with that society till he is confirmed by the defendant No1 - Society.
This finding of the Subordinate Court was affirmed by the lower appellate Court in the following terms :-  "Furthermore, as discussed above, the defendants themselves have admitted that the plaintiff-respondent had a lien on the said permanent post of accountant, at Hissar, but on his transfer to Sirsa, the same was terminated, whereas it is not so.
For that reason also, now it does not lie in their mouth to defeat the claim of the plaintiff-respondent on the assertion that he has no lien on the said permanent post of accountant at Hissar.
Consequently, findings recorded by the learned trial Court, on issue No. 1, are hereby affirmed, as there is no ground to reverse the same."
The above facts have been taken from the file of Regular Second Appeal No. 3092 of 1985 which was being heard along with this writ petition.
11.
Regular Second Appeal against the judgment and decree dated 3101985 of the lower appellate Court having been dismissed as withdrawn, the above findings became final between the parties and, therefore, there is no escape from the conclusion that the petitioner herein, had his lien with the District Red Cross Society, Hissar against the permanent post of Accountant.
In Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(3) S.L.R.
648 : 1993(1) SCT 361 (P&H), a Single Bench of this court has held that when an employee of District Level Service is transferred in public interest, his seniority will be kept in parent District and he will be considered for next higher promotion in his parent District.
12.
In Ramnarayan Chand v. State of Rajasthan and Collector Jaisalmer, 1981(1) SLR 85, it has been held by a Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court that lien on a post cannot be terminated even with the consent of the official concerned if the result of such termination is to leave him without a lien or a suspended lien upon a permanent post.
13.
In view of the above discussion, I find that the petitioner retained his lien against the permanent post of Assistant in the District Red Cross Society, Hissar.
14.
Now the next question to be answered is as to whether the President, District Red Cross Society, Sirsa had an authority to suspend, charge-sheet, hold an enquiry into charges and terminate the services of the petitioner.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the subordinate judge in his judgment dated 11.3.1983 had held as under :-  "......
It is proved on the file that no rules have been adopted by the defendant/society so as to govern the services of its employees under Civil Services Rules but the rules of natural justice are to be followed by every organisation.
In view of the statement of the plaintiff, it is proved on the file that he is still unconfirmed Assistant Secretary and in case his services are terminated, then he would be rolling on the road.....".
In para No. 10 of his judgment, the lower appellate Court has discussed this point as under :-  "In this regard it is further note-worthy that defendant No. 1 has admitted that the services of the plaintiff-respondent were governed the service rules of local bodies, as Red Cross Society is a corporate (Statutory) body, established under the Act.
In such circumstances, even if the concerned civil service rules are not applicable to its employees, at least the basic principles of the same are very much applicable to them as even held right by the learned court below."
Then the learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention towards the provisions of Clause 20 of the Model Draft Constitution under which the appointment of the Secretary at the District Branch of the Red Cross Society is made by the President with the approval of the State Branch.
Such an appointment could not be annulled except with the previous concurrence of the State Branch.
16.
In para No. 14 of the writ petition a specific ground to this effect has been taken.
Corresponding para of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent No.2 reads as under :-  "14.
In reply to para 14, it is submitted that the petitioner was placed under suspension vide orders No. 20 dated 211988.
A copy of the order of suspension was also sent to the Secretary Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana State Branch, Chandigarh presently respondent No. 1.
The same duly translated in English is appended as Annexure R-2/1.
A true copy in Hindi is also enclosed.
Thereafter the respondent No. 2 received the letter dated 1511988 from the office of the respondent No. 1 requesting therein to send a copy of the charge sheet served on the petitioner for their information.
A true copy of the same is reproduced/appended as Annexure R-2/2.
In response to this, the respondent No. 2 vide letter dated 1021988 forwarded the charge sheet to respondent No. 1.
A true copy of this letter is appended as Annexure R-2/3 duly translated in English.
A copy of letter is also enclosed."
17.
Before proceeding further, it is also necessary to note that in para Nos. 11 and 12 of the written statement, the answering respondent has taken following stands :-  "It is further submitted that the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules are fully applicable to the employees of the District Red Cross Society, Sirsa.
This decision was taken vide resolution No. 5 passed by the Executive Committee in its meeting held on 16111988.
The contents of the same are produced below :-  "it is decided that to all employees of all the branches of Red Cross, the Haryana Government's Service & Conduct Rules, 1966 will be applicable."
However, the President is competent to appoint and terminate the terms of employment of the employees working in the District Red Cross Society.
But this has to be in accordance with the Model Draft Constitution of the Society.
The contents of rest of para are denied.
The departmental inquiry was conducted in accordance with the rules.
The petitioner was given full opportunity to defend himself."
18.
From the above, it is evident that the case of the respondents is two- fold.
Firstly, their stand is that the President District Red Cross Society was competent to appoint and terminate the services of an employee of the society strictly in accordance with the Model Draft Constitution of the Society and Secondly, that vide resolution No. 5 dated 16111988 the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1966 were made applicable to the employee of the society.
19.
In order to find out as to whether the services of the petitioner had been terminated in accordance with clause 20(ii) of the Model Draft Constitution which is produced in para No. 14 of their written statement, it is evident that no concurrence of the State Branch had been taken.
Therefore, inescapable conclusion is that the impugned order vide which the services of the petitioner had been terminated by the President, District Red Cross Society, Sirsa, without obtaining previous concurrence of the State Branch was without jurisdiction.
20.
Learned counsel for the appellant has then argued that the departmental enquiry is quasi-judicial in nature and where the principles of natural justice have not been observed, it stands vitiated.
Further eloborating his argument, he has submitted that no Presenting Officer was appointed by the Department.
The Enquiry Officer has acted as a prosecutor as well as a Judge which could not be allowed to be done.
21.
I find force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In para No. 16(iv) of the writ petition this ground has been taken.
In the corresponding para of the written statement it is stated as under :-  "(iii), (iv) & (v); In reply to these paras it is submitted that full opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend his case."
22.
It is thus clear that no Presenting Officer was appointed and the Enquiry Officer had acted both as Prosecutor as well as the Judge.
It cannot be allowed to be done.
The principles of natural justice have been violated.
23.
The next submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that since the petitioner was not allowed to inspect the relevant documents, he could not submit effective reply to the charge sheet and, therefore, the inquiry proceedings stood vitiated.
This ground had been taken in para No. 16(iii) of the writ petition.
In the corresponding para of the written statement it is submitted that full opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend his case.
Thus it is evident that the plea of the petitioner that he was not allowed to inspect the documents has not been denied.
24.
In Kashinath Dikshita v. Union of India and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 2118, it has been held by the Apex Court that where the Government refused to its employee who was dismissed, the copies of the statements of the witnesses examined at the stage of preliminary inquiry proceeding the commencement of the inquiry and copies of the documents said to have been relied upon by the disciplinary authority in order to establish the charge against the employees and even in this connection the reasonable request of the employee to have the relevant portions of the documents extracted with the help of his stenographer was refused and he was told to himself make such notes as he could, and the Government failed to show that no prejudice was occasioned to the employee on account of non-supply of copies of documents, the order of dismissal rendered by the disciplinary authority against the employee was violative of Article 311(2) inasmuch as the employee has been denied reasonable opportunity of defending himself.
In para No. 16(3) of the writ petition, the petitioner has taken a specific plea in this regard but in the correspondent para of the written statement, it has not been denied on behalf of the respondents.
As mentioned earlier, it has been contended on their part that full opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend his case.
Otherwise also, the respondents have not shown that no prejudice was occasioned to the petitioner on account of denial of inspection of the relevant record.
Therefore, the case in hand is fully covered by the ratio laid down in above mentioned Supreme Court case.
25.
It is next submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the enquiry report was submitted by the Enquiry Officer more than five months after the submission of the written arguments.
This inordinate delay was not explained by the Enquiry Officer.
Further the impugned order was passed about 10 months after the reply to show cause notice was submitted.
This delay also remained unexplained and, therefore, the whole of the proceedings including the impugned order stood vitiated.
26.
This argument also has force.
In Smt. Manjit Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(6) SLR 762, a Single Bench of this Court has held that where inordinate delay in finalising the proceedings has not been explained satisfactorily, disciplinary proceedings were liable to be quashed.
27.
Now on to the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents.
28.
First submission of the learned counsel for the respondent is that the writ petition was not maintainable against the respondent-society.
In reply, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contended that the petitioner is not seeking to enforce his Fundamental Rights.
He, on the other hand, complains that there has been infraction of the Punjab Civil Service Rules applicable to the petitioner and his services have been terminated in violation of the Rules of natural justice.
He contends that for redress of this grievance of the petitioner, his writ petition is maintainable and the society is amendable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
In support of this contention he has relied upon the following judgments :-  (i) Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Majib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487 wherein it has been held as under :-  "It is immaterial for determining whether the corporation is an authority, whether the Corporation is created by a statute or under a statute.
The test is whether it is an instrumentality or agency of the Government and not as to how it is created.
The inquiry has to be not as to how the juristic person is born bue why it has been brought into existence.
The Corporation may be a statutory corporation created by a statute or it may be a Government company or a company formed under the Companies Act or it may be a society registered under the Societies Registration Act or any other similar statute.
Whatever be its general originality would be an 'authority' within the meaning of Article 12 if it is an instrumentality or agency of the Government and that would have to be decided on a proper assessment of the facts in the light of the relevant factors."
(ii) Sarmukh Singh v. Indian Red Cross Society, 1985 Lab.
& Indl.
Cases 1972, wherein it has been observed that the society was incorporated for humanitarian purpose only.
The aim was to continue in peace time on a wider basis the work which was being done by the Indian Branch of the British Red Cross Society and the Joint War Committee of the order of St John of Jerusalem.
The predominant object is to give relief to the disabled, sick or wounded soldiers during the war time and also to provide relief from sickness, suffering or distress in India, whether due to the operation of war or otherwise.
29 (iii) Indian Red Cross Society v. RN Kaul, D B Special Appeal No. 65 of 1978 (Raj.
High Court) followed in 1987 (1) PLR 69.
In this judgment it has been held as under :-  "Keeping in view of the raio decidendi laid down in Ramana v. IA Authority of India (Supra), we have no hesitation in holding that the Rajasthan Branch of the Indian Red Cross Society is not an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The Society has been created by a statute.
If the statute is not there, the society cannot exist.
The statute given an exclusive domain and monopoly to the Society to act in a particular sphere.
The assets which fell to the share of Pakistan were transferred under Section 13 of the said Act.
The share which fell to the share of Burma was allocated by the Red Cross Society (Allocation of Property) Act, 1936.
As stated earlier, the Constitution provides that the Governor shall be the patron-in-Chief, Chief Minister would be the President, Health Minister would be the Chairman and Director of Medical and Health Services would be Vice-Chairman, Clause 44 of Annexure R-2/2 clearly states that the services of all the employees shall be governed by the rules which are in force for the employees of the State of Rajasthan.
All these factors lead to the irresistible inference that though the Indian Red Cross Society is not an authority as envisaged under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, yet it is amenable to the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 226 of the Constitution."
(iii) Manmohan Singh Jaitla v. Commissioner Union Territory, Chandigarh, AIR 1985 SC 364; and  (iv) Pant Raj Sachdev v. The Indian Red Cross Society, through the Secretary General and others, 1987(1) PLR 69, wherein it has been held that the writ petition on the ground of infraction of the Service Rules and the rules of natural justice can be maintained against the society.
30.
Next submission of the learned counsel for the respondent is that on new district of Sirsa having been carved out of Old District of Hissar, District Red Cross Society, Sirsa came into being and the services of the petitioner were allocated to the new society.
Therefore, his lien stood automatically terminated.
Since the petitioner did not challenge the initial order of his allocation dated 6101975, it became final and, therefore, he could not now turn round and say that he still had lien against a permanent post of Assistant in the District Red Cross society, Hissar.
This argument is without any force.
As mentioned in the earlier part of this judgment, the lien of the petitioner having not been terminated at any stage, he was entitled to serve with the Red Cross Society, Hissar as he retained his lien with that society against the permanent post of the Accountant.
The respondents have failed to produce any order terminating his lien or even suspension of such lien.
Rather, they have themselves admitted vide letters dated 2291977, 311978, 1471980 and 1691980 that the petitioner had a lien against the permanent post of Accountant at Hissar.
31.
Last submission of the learned counsel for the respondents is that till the order dated 421980 passed by the President, District Red Cross Society, Sirsa, to the effect that he could not be sent back to the post where he retains his line is finally set aside in the Regular Second Appeal the petitioner continued to be an employee of the District Red Cross Society, Sirsa and, therefore, the President of the said society could suspend, charge sheet and after holding a departmental enquiry against him, could punish him and, therefore, the impugned order of termination of his service was valid.
This argument is without any force.
As mentioned herein before, the petitioner had filed Civil Suit No. 792-C of 1981 "Radha Kishan Rajpal v. District Red Cross Society, Sirsa and two others".
After contest that suit was decreed and the order dated 421980 was declared illegal.
That judgment of the Subordinate Court was confirmed by Additional District Judge, Sirsa vide his judgment and decree dated 3101985 in Civil Appeal No. 51 instituted on 1841983.
Regular Second Appeal No. 3092 of 1985 against the above said judgment and decree of the first appellate Court was dismissed as withdrawn vide judgment of this Court dated 23.8.1983.
Therefore, the order dated 421980 stood declared illegal and invalid finally.
32.
In view of the above discussion, it is held :-  (i) that the order dated 421980 having been declared illegal and invalid finally, the petitioner Radha Kishan had a lien upon a permanent post of Assistant in District Red Cross Society, Hissar;  (ii) that the inquiry proceedings and the report of the Inquiry officer and the impugned order of dismissal stood vitiated on the grounds mentioned in the earlier part of this judgment i.e. on account of the authorities having committed infraction of the Punjab Civil Service Rules which were adopted vide resolution No. 5 dated 16121988 by the respondents and  (iii) that no prior concurrence of the State Branch having been taken, the impugned order of termination of services of the respondent was illegal.
33.
In the result, this writ petition is allowed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.