HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The Government of Punjab, vide notification dated May 9, 1992, invited applications for admission to the M.B.B.S/B.D.S and BAMS courses for the session 1992-93 in the three State Medical Colleges, the Dental College, Amritsar, the Dental Wing Medical College, Patiala, and Ayurvedic College, Patiala.
It was notified that the Pre-Medical Test (PMT), would be held by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, on behalf of the Government of Punjab.
The petitioner being eligible to appear in the test, submitted her Application Form and appeared in the examination held on July 4, 1992, and on the declaration of the result, was placed at Serial No. 1876.
It was provided in paragraphs No. 41 and 42 of the prospectus that 15% of the total number of seats available for MBBS and BDS would be filled on an All India Basis through a test to be conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, whereas the others would be filed from amongst those who had taken the PMT.
Provision was also made to reserve a certain percentage of seats for the handicapped, such as children/widows of defence personnel, more particularly described in Paras III(c)(iv), III(c)(viii) and III(c)(ix) of the prospectus (fully detailed later on).
It was further notified that the seats left vacant in any reserved category owing to non-availability of eligible candidates were to be filled from the eligible candidates belonging to the General Category.
It appears that as no seat from the category of Central Board of School Education had been filled in, the State Government took a decision Annexure P-2 dated October 8, 1992 that half of the seats for MBBS and BDS courses would be filled by nominations to be made by the State of Punjab and the other half by the candidates selected in the test held by the Central Board of School Education.
Admittedly, the nominations were made and these instructions were impugned by way of a writ petition in the Supreme Court in the case of Saurabh Mathur v. Director General of Health Services and another, Writ Petition (C) No. 48 of 1993 and other connected petitions and the Supreme Court found that the nominations could not have been made but as there had been a fait accompli nomination of the candidates was not disturbed, but the petitioners too were granted admissions by the Court.
In the meantime, the present petition was filed once again impugning Annexure P2.
Notice of motion was issued on February 23, 1993, but as the State failed of file a reply despite a number of opportunities having been given the petitioner was granted provisional admission by this Court vide order dated March 12, 1993.
This order was challenged in the Supreme Court and was set aside but the High Court was directed to dispose of the main petition itself as expeditiously as possible.
The case of the petitioner now is that in view of the prospectus and notification issued on May 9, 1992 all the seats which remained unfilled up to the 2nd week of February, 1993 from the Central Board of Secondary Education candidates or any other category on account of non-availability of eligible candidate, were to be given to the general category candidates and in that eventuality Annexure P-2 dated October 8, 1992 providing for nomination against half of the seats reserved for the candidates nominated by the Central Board of School Education and Annexure R-2 dated September 3, 1992 authorising nomination against the three unfilled seats from the categories detailed below :-  Paragraph III (c) (vi)  (1) Children/Widows of defence personnel who are killed or disabled to the extent of 50% or more in war;  (2) Wards of gallantry awarders i.e. Paramvir Chakra/Mahavir Chakra/Vir Chakra, Ashoka Chakra/Kirti Chakra and Shaurya Chakra.
2%  III (c) (viii)  (1) Children/Widows of Para-Military personnel killed or disabled in action to the extent of 50% or more  (2) Children of Serving/Ex-para-Military personnel.
1%  III (c) (ix)  Children/Widows of Punjab Police, Personnel killed or disabled to the extent of 50% in action.
(3) The other terms and conditions will remain the same as already notified on 20th May, 1992.
", 1%  which were filled by nominations as well, could not be sustained in view of the Full Bench judgment of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab etc., 1993(3) PLR 213 : 1993(4) SCT 328, and a Division Bench judgment in Ravdeep Kaur v. The State of Punjab, ILR (1985) 1 P&H 343, that the admissions have to be made on the basis of the prospectus issued as it has the force of law and any amendment made in its provisions cannot have retrospective effect.
It has also been urged that the nominations had been made from the candidates lower in merit in the PMT than the petitioner and as a matter of fact, some of the nominees had not even appeared and as such could not be admitted.
2.
A reply has been filed by respondent No. 4 Dr. Sudesh Khanna, Officiating Principal, Government Medical College, Amritsar, in which the broad facts have not been controverted.
It has been admitted that the nominations were made against half of the seats reserved for the CBSE candidates and also of three students from amongst the three categories mentioned above as there was no candidate available for admission from amongst these categories.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record and find that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is to be noted that in the prospectus issued and duly notified on May 9, 1992, there was a clear stipulation that any seat that remained unfilled from the reserved categories, meaning thereby any or all such categories was to be filled in from general category on the basis of the PMT Examination.
Admittedly, vide Annexure P-2, dated October 8, 1992, right to nominate 50% of the total number of seats which were to be filled from CBSE candidates was arrogated to itself by the State Government and vide Annexure R-2, dated September 3, 1992, the State Government again allowed itself the right to make nominations against the three categories mentioned in Paragraph III (c) above.
As already observed, this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota's and Ravdeep Kaur's case, (supra), has held that once the prospectus is issued, no amendment can be made therein retrospectively.
It is, therefore, apparent that any seat from amongst the reserved categories that remained vacant were liable to be filled in from the general category according to the merit in the PMT.
In the present case, however, as far as the nominations against the CBSE seats are concerned, no challenge can now be made by the petitioner in the light of the arrangement made before the Supreme Court in Saurabh Mathur's case (supra), but the petitioner is entitled to stake a claim against the three seats dereserved on account of Annexure R-2, as this matter was not the subject matter of challenge before the Supreme Court.
4.
The question now arises is as to what relief is to be made available to the petitioner.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Miss Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 169, duly followed by a Division Bench of this Court in Prem Sagar Batra v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and others, AIR 1993 Punjab & Haryana 17 : 1992(2) SCT 437 (P&H) (DB), that although the petitioner was not high enough in merit, yet, on account of the fact that nominations against the three seats had been wrongly made and the petitioner being the only one who came to this Court in February, 1993, she alone was entitled to admission.
In this connection, the following observations of the Supreme Court in Miss Neelima Shangla's case, (supra), having been highlighted :  "But having regard to the fact that most of the others have not chosen to question the selection and the circumstances that two years have elapsed we do not propose to make any such general order as that would completely upset the subsequent selection and create confusion and multiplicity of problems.
The cases of any other candidate who may have already filed a writ petition in this Court or the High Court will be disposed of in the light of this judgment.
Those who have not so far chosen to question the selection will not be allowed to do so in the future because of their laches."
5.
Following the decision in the aforesaid case, a Division Bench of this Court in Prem Sagar's case, (supra) observed that it would be incumbent upon a person seeking admission to an educational institute to come to the Court immediately duration of the course being limited, failing which, the Court would not interfere.
Applying the ratio of the aforesaid cases to the facts of the present one, I find that as no other candidate had come to this Court impugning the action of the Government in the manner indicated by the petitioner, she alone is entitled to seek admission.
In the light of the above, the present petition is allowed and the petitioner is directed to be admitted to one of the Medical Colleges in MBBS classes.
The petitioner will be granted admission forthwith and her attendance will be counted from the date when she is inducted in the course.
No costs.
Dasti Order.
Petition allowed.