Rajendra Saxena, J - The petitioner by filing this petition has prayed that his termination order dated 2941989 (Annexure 15), letter dated 2241989 (Annexure 14) of the Chief Executive Officer, Zila Parishad, Jodhpur (respondent No. 3) along with the resolution No. 7(2) dated 1241989 of the District Establishment Committee, Jodhpur and the Circular letter dated 2431989 (Annexure 13) issued by the Special Secretary to the Government, Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, Jaipur (respondent No. 2) be quashed and the respondents be directed to make payment of salary to him in the regular pay scale for the post of Lower Division Clerk w.e.f.
the date of his initial appointment on the principle of "equal pay for equal work" and to regularise his services on the post of LDC with all consequential benefits along with interest on his arrears at the rate of Rs. 18% per annum.
2.
Briefly the case of the petitioner as stated in his writ petition is that he has studied upto Hr.
Secondary and has the requisite qualifications to be appointed on the post of LDC Initially, he was appointed on the post of Primary School Teacher by the Vikas Adhikari, Panchayat Samiti, Bap (respondent No. 1) on contractual basis on a consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month for the period from 1541985 to 1551985 vide order dated 1541985 (Annexure 1).
Thereafter again vide order dated 1871985 (Annexure 2) he was appointed on the post of Primary School Teacher on contractual basis on a consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month w.e.f.
2571985 to 15.5.1986 or till a trained selected teacher was made available.
This appointment continued upto 15.5.1986.
It is alleged by the petitioner that though in pursuance of appointment order Annexure-2, he was appointed to the post of Primary School Teacher, but in fact he was allowed to continue on the post of LDC, which was lying vacant.
Thus, he was directed to discharge his duties on the post of LDC It appears that from 1651986 to 13th April, 1987 the petitioner was not employed in the service of the Panchayat Samiti, Bap.
Thereafter, the respondent No. 1 by his order dated 1441987 (Annexure 4) temporarily appointed the petitioner as LDC on daily wages at the rates of Rs. 15/- per day as the sanctioned post of LDC was lying vacant.
It was also mentioned in the said order that payment of salary to the petitioner shall be made from the own income of the Panchayat Samiti.
The Panchayat Samiti, Bap in its general meeting dated 24.4.1987 by its resolution No. 7940 also approved the petitioner's appointed as daily rated LDC It appears that the respondent No. 1 by his letter dated 9.7.1987 (Annex.
5) made a recommendation to the Project Director, District Rural development Agency, Jodhpur for according approval of the appointment of the petitioner as a daily rated LDC against the vacant post under the National Rural Employment Programme (NREP).
This recommendation was accepted by the Project Director, DRDA, Jodhpur on 1371987 and petitioner's appointment as daily rated LDC under the NREP was approved.
It is the case of the petitioner that before converting his appointment under the NREP Scheme neither any notices was given to him nor his consent was taken.
Thereafter, the daily wage of the petitioner was raised from Rs. 15/- to Rs. 1850 per day vide order dated 1071987 (Annexure 6) issued by respondent No. 1.
Since the petitioner was directed to work on Sundays on account of huge quantum of work under famine relief works and other relief works, by office order dated 17101987 (Annexure 7), he was also allowed salaries on Sundays.
The respondent No. 1 by his letter dated 17121987 (Annexure 8) also intimated the Director and the Special Secretary Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department (respondent No. 2) that in pursuance of the resolution No. 7(4) passed in the general meeting of the Panchayat Samiti dated 24.4.1987 and after seeking the approval of the Project Director, DRDA, Jodhpur, the petitioner was appointed as a daily rated LDC in the Accounts Section of NREP, that his work had been satisfactory and recommended that he should be appointed substantively on the post of LDC The general body of the Panchayat Samiti, Bap in its resolution dated 23121987 (Annexure 9) also resolved that the District Collector and the concerning higher authorities be requested for regularising the appointment of the petitioner on the post of LDC, because Shri OP Sharma, LDC was under suspension for last 7-8 years.
Accordingly, the respondent No. 1 vide his letter dated 641988 (Annexure 10) requested the Collector, Jodhpur for according sanction for giving regular appointment to the petitioner on the post of LDC in regular pay scale w.e.f.
14,4,1987.
The Pradhan of Panchayat Samiti, Bap by his DO letter dated 191289 (annexure 12) also requested the Director, Rural Development and Panchayati Raj Department, Rajasthan (Respondent No. 2 for regularisation of the petitioner on the post of LDC It was also mentioned therein that the petitioner was working as a daily rated LDC since 1441987 in the NREP, RLEGP, DDP and Famine Relief Schemes satisfactorily and that he has also crossed the maximum age limit for the appointment in the Government service and has become over age.
However, the respondent No. 2 by his impugned letter dated 2431989 (Annexure 13) addressed to all Chief Executive Officers of Zila Parishads and Vikas Adhikaris of all Panchayat Samitis in the State intimated that it has been observed that generally when any post falls vacant on account of the retirement, transfers, death, promotion or training of an employee in the Panchayat Samiti, information thereof it not sent to the Development Department by the concerning Panchayat Samiti that on the other hand temporary or daily wage appointments are made against such posts and thereafter recommendations are made for regularisation of such employees to the Development Department that some times the services of such employees are terminated without complying with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act with the result that such employees procure stay orders either from the Labour Court or the High Court and that ultimately such illegal terminations are quashed and those employees are reinstated in service with back wages resulting in unnecessary financial burden on the exchequer.
The respondent No. 2, therefore, directed in future no appointment either temporary or on daily wages basis be made against any vacant post and that if any appointments on daily wages or on temporary basis have been made by the Panchayat Samitis then the services of such employees should be terminated after complying with the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Thereafter, the respondent No. 3 communicated the resolution No. 7(2) dated 1241989 passed by the District Establishment Committee, Jodhpur to the respondent No. 1 intimating that the appointment of petitioner Om Parkash Sharma as daily rated LDC was not made under first and second proviso to Rule 23 of the Rajasthan Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads Service Rules, 1959, and that petitioner's appointment was made despite the total ban on appointments imposed by the Government and, therefore, his services be terminated and compliance thereof be reported.
Thereupon in pursuance of letter dated 241989 (Annexure 14), the respondent No. 1 issued the impugned termination order dated 2941989 giving him one month's notice pay and retrenchment compensation under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act on the ground that there was no excessive work in the NREP.
It is the case of the petitioner that the cheque dated 151989 for an amount of Rs. 926/- given to him along with the termination order could not have been encashed on the same day though his services were dispensed with w.e.f.
the forenoon of 151989, the requirement of mandatory provision of Section 25-F (a) and (b) of the Act were not complied with, and, therefore, his retrenchment is void an initio and illegal.
He has also contended that his services have been terminated in the arbitrary exercise of power, which amounts to unfair labour practice.
He has asserted that the impugned order Annexure 13 could not be applied in his case because the same did not operate retrospectively.
On the other hand, respondent No. 1 had made repeated recommendations for his regularisation on the post of LDC against the vacant post, but his services have been terminated arbitrarily and illegally.
He has further contended that on the basis of well crystallized principle of 'equal pay for equal work', he is entitled to get salary in the prescribed pay scale of the LDC and also regularisation on the said post.
3.
Notices were issued to respondents to show cause as to why this writ petition be not admitted. ?
4.
The respondent No. 1 in its reply has averred that the petitioner was not duly selected for the post of LDC but was appointed on temporarily on daily wages under the National Relief Employment Programme, that no temporary or sanctioned post of LDC was lying vacant in Panchayat Samiti, Bap and that due to poor financial condition of the state, there was a total ban on the appointment of temporary/daily wages employees imposed by the Government.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were retrenched complying with the provisions of Section 25F of the Act.
It has been emphatically denied that the petitioner was working on any sanctioned/substantive vacant post of LDC.
5.
No counter has been filed by other respondents.
6.
The petitioner in his rejoinder has specifically admitted that he was initially appointed as a daily rated LDC temporarily against the NREP Scheme, but payment of his salary were made from the own income of the Panchayat Samiti.
He has averred that even if it is presumed that his appointment was made against NREP Scheme, the said scheme has been converted into Jawahar Rojgar Yojana Scheme wherein sanctioned post of one LDC was in existence vide orders dated 16121988 and 2681989 Annexure 16 and 17 respectively, issued by Dy.
Secretary, Special Schemes and Integrated Rural Development and whereby 237 posts of LDCs for 237 Panchayat Samitis were sanctioned under the DRDA for the fiscal year 1988-89 and thereafter for the Jawahar Rojgar Yojana for the temporary posts of 237 LDCs were sanctioned at the rate of one post for each Panchayat Samiti upto 28.2.1990 or till further orders, whichever was earlier.
He has reiterated that since he has discharged the duties of the LDC, he was entitled to get salary in the prescribed pay scale of the LDC on the basis of 'equal pay for equal work' and also for his regularisation on the said post.
He has clearly admitted that though he was not a selected candidate by the District Establishment Committee, but till the selected candidate is not available, he has a right to continue as LDC and hence on this count also his termination is illegal.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and the learned Dy.
Government Advocate at length and carefully perused the relevant record.
On the joint request of the parties, this writ petition is being finally disposed of at the admission stage.
8.
The main contention of Shri PP Choudhary is that since the petitioner has worked on the post of LDC though on a temporary and/or a daily wages basis since 1441987 till his retrenchment on 151989 and has discharged similar duties and responsibilities of LDC, and his work was quite satisfactory and that even respondent No. 1 by his letters dated 17121987, 641988 and 19.12.1988 Annexures 8, 10 and 12 respectively recommended for his regularisation in the regular pay scale of LDC, therefore, on the basis of the principle of 'equal work for equal pay' he is entitled to get the salary and allowances in the regular pay scale of the LDC w.e.f.
his initial date of appointment.
For this he has relied on Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, 1986(1) SCC 637, General Secretary, Bihar State Road Transport Corporation v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Patna, JT 1988(1) SC 29 and Pancha Ram v. State of Raj and Ors, 1990(2) RLR 18.
9.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for respondents have vehemently contended that since the petitioner was appointed as LDC temporarily on daily wages under the NREP Scheme, which was later on converted into the Jawahar Rojgar Yojana, he has no right for employment nor can claim salary in the prescribed pay scale, because the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' does not apply to such schemes as has been held by the Apex Court in Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union v. Delhi Administration, 1992(4) SCC 99 : 1992(1) SCT 425 (SC).
10.
Admittedly, the petition was neither selected as LDC by the District Establishment Committee nor his appointment vide Annexure-4 was under the proviso (1) and (2) of Rule 23 of the Rajasthan Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads Service Rules, 1959.
On the other hand, from the letter dated 9.7.1987 (Annexure 5) sent by the Vikas Adhikari to the Project Director, DRDA, Jodhpur, it stands firmly established that petitioner was appointed as a daily rated LDC temporarily to assist the UDC, who was also looking after the additional work of Junior Accountant in the NREP Scheme.
This fact further gets strengthened by the office order dated 27101987 (Annexure 7), wherein it has been clearly mentioned that the petitioner's appointment was made under the NREP Scheme.
Again in the letter dated 17121987 (Annexure 8) sent by respondent No. 1 to the respondent No. 6, this fact has been further re-affirmed.
Even in Para No. 2 of his rejoinder, the petitioner has in most unequivocal, unambiguous and explicit terms admitted that he was initially appointed against the NREP Scheme, which was subsequently converted into Jawahar Rojgar Yojana Scheme, wherein one post of LDC was sanctioned for Panchayat Samiti, Bap vide Annexures 17 and 18.
Therefore, the petitioner was not appointed against any regular post of the Panchayat Samiti.
11.
In Delhi Development Horticultural Employees' Union v. Delhi Admn.
(cited supra), it has been held that workers employed under the scheme by the District Rural Development Agency under the temporary Government schemes like NREP and Jawahar Rojgar Yojana have no right to claim regularisation of their service, because of completion of 240 or more days of work, that indiscriminate regularisation jeopardises the public interest and the object of such schemes, that right to work and livelihood under Article 41 of the Constitution has not yet been recognised as a fundamentla right though it has been broadly interpreted in the context of Article 21 and that its deprivation must be in accordance with the procedure established by law.
It has further been held that the right to work and livelihood under Article 41 is qualified by the expression "within the limits of its economic capacity and development".
12.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under :-  " The object of the scheme was not to provide the right to work as such even to the rural poor much less to the unemployed in general.
No fault can be found with the limited object of the scheme given the limited resources at the disposal of the State.
Those employed under the scheme, therefore, could not ask for more than what the scheme intended to give them.
To get an employment under such scheme and to claim on the basis of the said employment, a right to regularisation, is to frustrate the scheme itself.
No court can be a party to such exercise.
It is wrong to approach the problems of those employed under such schemes with a view to providing them with full employment and guaranteeing equal pay of equal work.
These concepts, in the context of such schemes are both unwarranted and misplaced.
They will do more harm than good by depriving the many of the little income that they may get to keep them from starvation.
They would benefit a few at the cost of the many starving poor for whom the schemes are meant.
That would also force the State to wind up the existing schemes and forbid them from introducing the new ones, for want of resources.
This is not to say that the problems of the unemployed deserve no consideration or sympathy.
This is only to emphasis that even among the unemployed a distinction exists between those who live below and above the poverty line, those in need of partial and those in need of full employment, the educated and uneducated, the rural and urban unemployed etc.
Though broadly interpreted as a necessary logical corollary, right to life would include the right to livelihood and, therefore, right to work, but this is in context of Article 21 which seeks to protect persons against the deprivation of their life except according to procedure established by law.
This country has so far not found it feasible to incorporate the right to livelihood as a fundamental right in the Constitution.
This is because the country has so far attained the capacity to guarantee it, and not because it considers it any the less fundamental to life.
Advisedly, therefore, it has been placed in t he Chapter on Directive Principles Article 41 of which enjoins upon the State to make effective provision for securing the same "within the limits of its economic capacity and development".
Thus even while giving the direction to the State to ensure the right to work, the Constitution makers though it prudent not to do so without qualifying it.
Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corp, (1985) 3 SCC 545 : AIR 1986 SC 180 : 1986 R.R.R.
290, referred to  Although there is Employment Exchange Act which requires recruitment on the basis of registration in the Employment Exchange, it has become a common practice to ignore the Employment Exchange and the persons registered in the Employment Exchanges, and to employ and get employed directly those who are either not registered with the Employment Exchange or who though registered are lower in the long waiting list in the Employment Register.
The courts can take judicial notice of the fact that such employment is sought and given directly for various illegal considerations including money.
The employment is given first for temporary periods with technical breaks to circumvent the relevant rules, and is continued for 240 or more days with a view to give the benefit of regularisation knowing the judicial trend that those who have completed 240 or more days are directed to be automatically regularised.
A good deal of illegal employment market has developed resulting in a new source of corruption and frustration of those who are waiting at the Employment Exchanges for years.
Not all those who gain such backdoor entry in the employment are in need of the particular jobs.
Though already employed elsewhere, they join the jobs for better and secured prospects.
That is why most of the cases which come to the courts are of employment in government departments, public undertakings or agencies.
Ultimately it is the people who bear the heavy burdent of the surplus labour.
The other equally injurious effect of indiscriminate regularisation has been that many of the agencies have stopped undertaking casual or temporary works though they are urgent and essential for fear that if those who are employed on such works are required to be continues for 240 or more days they have to be absorbed as regular employees although the works are time-bound and there is no need of the workmen beyond the completion of the works undertaken.
The public interests are thus jeopardised on both count."
13.
This view has been further re-affirmed by the Three Judges Bench of the Supreme court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh and Ors, 1992(4) SCC 118 : 1992(3) SCT.
201.
It has been reiterated that so far as temporary or time bound schemes like NREP/Jawahar Rojgar Yojana are concerned, the matter has been exhaustively dealt with and pronounced upon in Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union case and that there is no need to add anything to it.
Therefore, the concept of 'equal work for equal pay' in the context of NREP Schemes' Jawahar Rojgar Yojana is both unwarranted and misplaced and this doctrine cannot be pressed into service or made applicable in the instant case.
14.
In Dhirendra Chamoli's case (cited supra), casual workers on daily wages basis were engaged by the Government in different Nehru Yuvak Kendras in the country.
Nehru Yuvak Kendras were in existence for more than 12 years.
The ground taken by the Government was that the Nehru Yuvak Kendras were temporary and that in absence of sanctioned post, the casual workers on daily wages basis, who were working for more than 12 years cannot be regulrised.
The Apex Court negativing the contention raised on behalf of the Government held that in absence of sanction post, such casual workers on daily wages basis performing the same duties as performed by regular Class IV Employees against sanctions posts were entitled to salary and conditions of service on par with the regular persons.
Apparentaly the facts of Dhirendra Chamoli's case are not comparable, but are clearly distinguishable with the facts of case in hand.
15.
In General Secretary Bihar State Road Transport Coroporation's case (cited supra) relying on the law laid down in Daily Rated Casual Labour Employed under P & T Department through Bhartiya Dak Tar Mazdoor Mancha v. U.O.I.
and ors., JT 1987(4) SC 164 and UP Income Tax Department Contingent Paid Staff Welfare Association vs. U.O.I.
and ors., JT.
1987(4) SC 585, the Hon'ble apex Court directed respondent Corporation to prepare a reasonablee scheme for regularisation of the causal labourers and to pay salary and allowances to them equal to the minimum pay of the pay scale of the regularly employed persons in the corresponding cadres of the Corporation.
Apparently the casual labours were appointed in the Bihar State Road Transport Corporation, which was a permanent department while the NREP and Jawahar Rojgar Yojana schemes are temporary schemes having a different object for giving employment to the unemployed rural force.
Therefore, this case also does not come to the rescue of the petition petitioner.
16.
In Pancha Ram's case (cited supra), the petitioners were appointed as ward boys on daily wages basis in SMS Hospital, Jaipur and they were continuing as such for many years.
It was held that it cannot be said that their appointment was made keeping in view the temporary need or staff pressure of work in the Hospital and that it amounted to unfair labour practice.
It was held that they were entitled to get same pay which the other ward boys working on permanent basis were getting.
A direction was also issued by the Rajasthan High Court, Jaipur Bench to the State Government to frame the rules and standing order in respect of such workmen.
But keeping in view the latest trend of the Apex Court as reflected in Delhi Development Horticulture Employees Union's case and Piara Singh's case the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' cannot be made applicable for the daily wages employees under the NREP or Jawahar Rojgar Yojana schemes.
Therefore, the petitioner is neither entitled to get pay in the prescribed pay scale of LDC nor for his regularisation on the post of LDC  17.
The next contention of Shri PP Choudhary is that the circular letter dated 2431989 (Annexure 13) issued by the respondent No. 2 reflects arbitrary exercise of power and that Annexure 13 can only have the prospective effect, it could not operate retrospectively to the prejudice of petitioner's rights.
Therefore, letter Annexure-13 should be quashed.
18.
To any mind this argument is devoid of any substance and against the contents of circular letter Annexure-13 and the provisions of the Act, 1947.
As mentioned earlier, in circular letter Annexure-13, the respondent No. 2 has deprecated the practice of the panchayat samitis in filling the post irregularly and by giving appointments temporarily and on daily wages without informing the Government, and thereafter, making recommendations for regularising such irregular appointments.
It has also been emphasized therein that the services of such temporary/daily wages employees are terminated without giving any notice or complying with the provisions of section 25F of the Act, 1947 with the result that such illegal termination orders are set aside by the Labour Court or the High Court causing unnecessary financial burden on the State.
The respondent No. 2, therefore, stressed that if any employee has been appointed irregularly on temporary/daily wages basis then his services should be terminated after complying with the provisions of section 25F of the Act, 1947 and that in future no appointment either temporary or on daily wages basis should be made against any vacant post by the panchayat samiti.
The observations made and directions given by respondent No. 2 in circular letter Annexure-13, therefore, neither project any arbitrary exercise of power nor those amount to unfair labour practice.
Hence, it cannot be said that letter Annexure 13 was issued by respondent No. 2 for some ulterior consideration or by way of victimisation.
Therefore, circular letter Annexure-13 is not illegal, malafide or against the provisions of law.
19.
In pursuance of the directions given in letter Annexure-13, the District Establishment Committee, Jodhpur examined the case of petitioner and found that despite the total ban on the appointment of daily rated employees, he was appointed by respondent No. 1.
It also found that the petitioner was not duly selected under the proviso (1) and (2) of Rules 23 of the Rules, 1959, that the respondent No. 1 had irregularly appointed the petitioner temporarily and that his services could not be extended.
The Chief Executive Officer, Zila Parishad, Jodhpur (respondent No. 3), therefore, by his letter dated 2241989 (Annexure 14) sent the resolution passed by the District Establishment Committee to the respondent No. 1 for compliance.
In pursuance thereof, the respondent No. 1 passed order dated 2941989 (Annexure 15) tendering one month's notice pay and the retrenchment compensation to the petitioner and terminated his services w.e.f.
151989.
It was also specifically mentioned therein that there was no excess work in the NREP scheme and as such petitioner's services were no more required.
Thee petitioner has neither submitted the cheque dated 151989 for an amount of Rs. 926/-, nor has submitted any document to show that the said amount was no tendered or paid to him at the time of his termination on 151989, he has also not filed any document to prove that the said amount of Rs. 926/- also included his salary for the month of April, 1989.
Therefore, he has miserably failed to prove that the mandatory provisions of section 25F (1) and (2) of the Act, 1947 were not complied with.
On the other hand it stands amply proved that the mandatory provisions of section 25F of the Act, 1947 were duly complied with.
Therefore, the retrenchment of the petitioner is not void ab initio, illegal or non est, and the question of his reinstatement along with back wages does not arise.
The cases relied on by the petitioner namely Gammon India Ltd v. Nirajnan Dass, 1984(1) SCC 509, (2) Narotam Chopra v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1988(4) SLR 388 and (3) Prabhu Dayal Sharma v. State of Raj, RLR 1989(1)-27, wherein it has been held that if the retrenchment of a workman has been made without complying with the mandatory provisions of section 25F of the Act 1947 then such a termination is void and non est and that the workman is entitled for reinstatement with full back wages, do not come to the rescue of the petitioner.
20.
No other point was pressed before me.
21.
Hence, for the reasons mentioned above, this writ petition fails.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.