NC Jain, J. (Oral) - The facts giving rise to the filing of this Second Appeal are that the plaintiff filed a suit challenging the termination of the services, vide order dated 1791983 confirmed by the High Court on administrative side.
The plaintiff while challenging the order of termination has averred that he was initially appointed as Record Lifter in the office of the District and Sessions Judge, Chandigarh, which is a class IV post and thereafter he was promoted to the post of Clerk which is Class III post vide order dated 18.8.1973, Exhibit P.15.
It is the case of the plaintiff that when he was posted as Reader, he applied for casual leave for 9th and 10th December, 1978 and later on applied for extension from 11th to 16th December, 1978 as he fell ill.
It is further alleged that due to his illness he could not join and his services were terminated by the District and Sessions Judge, vide order dated 18121978.
The order of the District and Sessions Judge was set aside by the High Court.
Inquiry was initiated against him which was ultimately dropped but his services were terminated by an order which though simpliciter in nature but was by way of punishment in view of the allegations made against him giving rise to the initiation of inquiry proceedings.
The order of termination was challenged inter alia on the grounds that it was illegal ultra vires and has been passed without affording any opportunity of being heard.
The order was also challenged on the ground that once the plaintiff was promoted from the post of Record Lifter to the post of Ahlmad, his services could not be dispensed with in accordance with the terms and conditions of his original appointment as a Record Lifter.
It was further averred in the plaint that persons junior to him were retained and that there was no adverse entry in his confidential reports.
2.
The defendants contested the suit primarily on the ground that the order of dismissal was simpliciter in nature and was not by way of punishment.
It was further the case of the defendants that the suit was barred by time and that the same was not competent.
On the basis of rival pleas of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :  1.
Whether the order dated 17983 and 6.8.84 are illegal, wrong, ultra vires etc. as alleged in para No. 11 of the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is not competent as alleged in preliminary objection No. 1 of the written statement ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit is barred by time ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is not valued properly for the purpose of court fee ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff served a legal and valid notice under section 80 CPC before filing the present suit ?
OPD.
6.
Relief.
Finding of the trial Court under Issue No. 1 went against the plaintiff whereas the other issues were decided in his favour.
The appeal of the plaintiff having been dismissed, he has now come up in second appeal before this court.
3.
During the course of hearing, some of the facts have remained undisputed before me.
It was not disputed that the post of Ahlmad was Class III and that of Record Lifter is Class IV.
It is further not disputed that persons junior to the plaintiff were retained whereas the services of the plaintiff were terminated.
This fact has been admitted even by the defendants.
With the help of the counsel for the parties, this court has perused exhibit P5 to P14.
There is no adverse entry in any of the confidential reports.
The plaintiff was adjudged as `Average' or `good' employee.
In some of the reports his work was described as satisfactory.
It has also remained undisputed fact that inquiry was dropped.
The counsel for the appellant, Mr. Ravinder Chopra, has pointedly drawn the attention of this Court to Exhibit P.1 an order passed by the District and Sessions Judge on 2681980, according to which it was specifically observed that the confirmation case of the plaintiff Rup Lal would be taken up later on as some inquiry was pending against him.
In this very order, it was specifically observed that he will be deemed to be confirmed w.e.f.
1451975 provided he is exonerated of the charges levelled against him.
It is at this stage that the factum of dropping of inquiry against the plaintiff becomes relevant.
4.
On the basis of the afore-mentioned facts which, as has been observed above, were not disputed before this Court during the course of hearing, the question that arises for consideration is whether the order of termination deserves to be upheld or not.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that once the plaintiff was promoted from Class IV to Class III post, the authorities could not bank upon the original letter of appointment.
No condition was attached in the promotion order that the plaintiff's services could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
There was no adverse entry in any of the confidential reports.
Rather, a perusal of Exhibit P16 makes it clear that the case of the plaintiff for confirmation was not decided in view of the pendency of inquiry and it was observed in the aforementioned order of the District Judge that the plaintiff would be deemed to be confirmed if he is exonerated in the inquiry proceedings.
Once the inquiry proceedings were dropped, the plaintiff was entitled to be considered for confirmation even if another order was needed to be passed for confirming him.
In any case, his services could not be terminated by referring to the original letter of appointment which, as has been observed above, pertained to a period when the plaintiff was employed as class IV employee.
The plaintiff was entitled to be heard before the termination of his services.
Since persons junior to him were retained in service, the order of termination, in my considered view, is by way of punishment because once inquiry was initiated against him the authorities could prove during the inquiry that the plaintiff was guilty of the charges levelled against him which the authorities apparently thought that they would not be able to prove.
After the inquiry was deposed, the plaintiff's services could not be dispensed with by way of passing order dated 1791983 being no longer required.
The order, in my view, cannot be described simpliciter in nature.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal is allowed, the judgment and decree of both the courts below are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is decreed with costs.
The plaintiff would be entitled to all the benefits of service including arrears of salary etc.  Appeal allowed.