VK Bali, J - Municipality, Malout seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order Annexure P-2 dated 27.8.1990 vide which application of the respondent-workman, Karamjit Singh, under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred as `Act') was allowed.
Brief facts need to be first noticed.
2.
A claim of Rs. 52,800/- was made by workman as arrears of wages on the ground that by serving as Octroi Clerk he was placed under suspension by the Executive Officer, Malout on 5.2.1985 and was only paid Rs. 775/- per month as suspension allowance.
It was also stated that the Executive Officer was not competent to pass any order of suspension with regard to a workman and the said order was void and without jurisdiction.
By treating the said order to be void the claim of the workman was that he should not be treated to be under suspension and paid the entire arrears of his wages, from the very date of his suspension till the date of his filing the aforesaid application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The claim of the workman was contested by the petitioner- Management.
An objection was raised that the matter in question related to determination of right and should not be entertained under Section 33-C(2) as also that such a claim could be made only through a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, framed the following two issues :-  1) Whether the application is not maintainable as alleged in the legal objection of the written reply ?
2) To what amount, if any, is the workman entitled ?
While dealing with both the issues together the Labour Court on the basis of two decisions rendered by this Court in Hari Chand v. SD Bawa and another, 1982 ALJ Vol. IV 203 (P&H) as also in Janta Co-op.
Sugar Mill, Bhogpur v. Labour Court, Jalandhar, 1987 Lab IC 1094 (P&H), came to a conclusion that the order of suspension passed by the Executive Officer was a nullity and thus necessarily required to be ignored.
That being so the obvious conclusion was to grant to the workman all the wages that he was entitled to from the date of his suspension which has already been indicated above to be Rs. 52,800/-.
It is this award of the Labour Court, as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment, that has been challenged by the Municipality, Malout in this petition.
3.
Mr. Iqbal Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal had no jurisdiction whatsoever to entertain and determine a claim which was not based on an established right of the workman.
In the same strain it was argued by the learned counsel that determination of rights is only by seeking a reference from the Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
For the aforesaid stand, the learned counsel relies upon Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd v. Workmen and another, AIR 1974 SC 1604 as also a judgment rendered by SS Sodhi, J of this Court in State of Punjab v. Paramjit Kaur (C.W.P.
No. 241 of 1988, decided on 18.9.90).
Mr. Goel, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, however, contests the aforesaid claim of the learned counsel and contends that there was no question of determination of a right of the workman in the present case.
He was admittedly entitled to the wages being an employee of the Municipality which were being denied to him.
It is only this claim that he asked from the Labour Court and inasmuch as the order of suspension was a nullity, the same had to be simply ignored.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that there is no force in the contention raised by Mr. lqbal Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner and, therefore this petition deserves to be dismissed.
In a recent judgment recorded by RS Mongia J in Nasib Chand v. State of Punjab, 1990(2) RSJ 783, it has been held that there is no power with the Executive Officer to pass an order of suspension of an employee who was getting remuneration exceeding Rs. 45/- per mensum.
By holding so, reliance was placed upon an earlier judgment of this Court in Hari Chand v. D.R.
Bawa & another, 1977 PLJ 365.
A plain reading of Section 39(i) of the Punjab Municipal Act shows that overall control vests in the Municipal Committee which may suspend, remove, dismiss, or otherwise punish any officer or servant of the Committee and under Section 4(b)(i) of the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, the power of the Committee can be exercised by the Executive Officer subject to the limitation that in case of appointment the monthly remuneration of the post does not exceed Rs. 25/- and in case of removal or dismissal of any officer or servant his monthly remuneration does not exceed Rs. 45/- provided that the Executive Officer shall dismiss an employee if required by the Committee to do so.
The plain meaning of the statute really conveys that Executive Officer is not at all authorised to pass an order of suspension of any employee who might be getting remuneration exceeding Rs. 25/.
The petitioner, an Octroi Clerk, was admittedly getting far more remuneration.
The order passed by the Executive Officer is thus wholly illegal.
That being so, there was no question of determination of any right.
The work-man was simply asking for his wages by pleading that the order of suspension was void and should be ignored.
In so far as reliance upon Central Inland Water Corporation v. The Workman and another, (supra) is concerned suffice it to say that the facts of the said case were entirely different.
The Government of West Bengal had made two orders of reference purporting to be under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
By the first order of reference it asked the Labour Court to compute the benefits covered by the settlement dated August 25, 1965 between the Union and the Company and by the second order of reference, it asked for the computation of retrenchment benefits under Section 25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The corporation challenged those orders in a Writ Petition in the Calcutta High Court, principally on the ground that the reference had made several unjustified assumptions, which by the nature of the frame of the references had become non-justiciable.
It requires to be mentioned here that after the settlement of 1965, the Company owing to its indebtedness to various creditors including the Union of India and others had filed a winding up petition in the Calcutta High Court.
A scheme was sought to be sanctioned and before the Company Judge the Labour Union appeared with a view to safeguard the interest of the workmen.
Aggrieved by the order which sanctioned the scheme the Union went in appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court.
Division Bench by judgment dated 1471967 upheld the order of Single Judge sanctioning the scheme.
It is in the aforesaid circumstances and in particular the litigation before the Company Judge that the right of the workmen was not an admitted one and thus required determination.
The facts of the case aforesaid thus cannot be applied to the one in hand.
In State of Punjab v. Paramjit Kaur and others (supra) the claim of the workmen was for the same wages as were being paid to the regular clerks of the Directorate.
The right of the workmen was in question and, therefore, required determination.
The facts of the case aforesaid also cannot apply to the one in hand.
The Labour Court after considering the whole matter and also relying upon two judgments given by this Court with regard to validity of the suspension order passed by the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, came to a correct conclusion and the said decision needs no interference by this Court.
This petition is thus dismissed.
There still, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.