DP Wadhwa, J - The petitioner, a medical graduate, qualified for being admitted to post graduate course for the session commencing from 1990 under 25% all India quota for post graduate candidates.
In the merit list she was placed at serial No. 1250.
In the second list which was issued in January 199 she was allotted a seat in Delhi for diploma in!
Gynaecology and obstetrics.
She is presently undergoing her post graduate study in the diploma course at Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi.
2.
The petitioner filed this writ petition on 21 may 1991 praying that she be alloted a vacant seat in MD (Gynae and Obst) in Delhi and a direction to issue to the Delhi University for that purpose.
In the petition she impleaded Director General Health Services, Government of India, and Registrar, Delhi University, as respondents.
3.
On filing of the writ petition, notice was issued to the respondents to show cause as to why rule nisi be not issued.
They have since filed their answers to the show cause notices and all the parties filed further affidavits as well.
4.
The admitted position is that Delhi University has in all 16 seats for MD (Gynae & Obst) and out of these four seats representing 25% are earmarked to be filled on all India basis.
The remaining 12 seats are filled up by the Delhi University from among the medical graduates of Delhi University itself appearing in the separate entrance examination for that purpose held by the University.
As far as MD Course in Gynae in Delhi University is concerned, there is no seat vacant in 75% quota of Delhi University.
As regards 25% all India quota relating to MD (Gynae) course is concerned Director General Health Services, first respondent, notified first Est in September 1990 and two candidates joined that course.
The second list was notified by the first respondent in December 1990 and out of the two candidates so nominated none joined.
It is the case of the Delhi University that thereafter no third or fourth admission lists were received by it but a list of reallocation dated 1 February 1991 was received and from that list one Dr. Sarita Narula having rank No. 245 joined the MD Course in Gynae.
As of today, therefore, one seat in MD Course in Gynae still remains vacant.
I he question is : Has the petitioner any right to this seat ?
5.
Delhi University has contended that it held preliminary entrance examination for its 75% quota and completed all the formalities in 1990 it self and issued last admission list to fill up all vacant seats on 14 February 1991.
Earlier this action had been withheld because of pendency of a certain writ petition in this Court and there being status quo order in that matter.
It is not necessary for us to go into the facts of various writ petitions mentioned by Delhi University in its return on the question of admission to post graduate courses.
The course for both 75% and 25% all India quota candidates is the same and they have to undergo same studies.
The Board of Research Studies of Delhi University in its meeting held on 13 January 1991 resolved that 16 February 1991 be fixed as the last date for offering admissions pertaining to the session 1990.
This decision was again considered and reiterated by the Board of Research Studies in its meeting held on 16 April 1991.
Mr. Mariarputham, learned counsel for the University, submitted that in view of this decision of the Delhi University no candidate was admitted to MD Course which was sponsored by the Directorate General of Health Services after 5 February 1991.
He said in one or two stray cases admission was granted only on account of orders of this Court but not otherwise.
Mr. Mariarputham also said that as of today even session for post graduate studies for the year 1991 was also commenced and at this fag end of 1990 session no admission can be allowed irrespective of the fact that a seat is lying vacant.
Delhi University also submitted that by letter dated 16 arch 1991 the Director General of Health Services surrendered vacant seats in 25% all India quota to Delhi University.
It was, therefore, that nationally though one seat from all India quota may be lying vacant but that now belongs to medical graduates of Delhi University.
Delhi University has further contended that in fact course in the present case commenced on 1 August 19% and all degree students irrespective of their respective dates of joining would be required to submit their thesis by July/August 1992 and all these students of 1990 session would be taking their degree examination in June/July 993.
University contended that students of 25% all India quota and the students of 75% Delhi University quota were not differently treated in at regard and there was no separate commencement of the course for all India quota student.
University also said that first year of the degree course and the first year of the diploma course were not identical.
This was in answer to the plea of the petitioner that first year both the students whether of the degree or diploma course do house job and no one would suffer if the petitioner was allotted degree course at this stage.
The University has said that lecture programme for degree and diploma courses are different and that whereas degree students are required to submit their thesis at the end of the second year, there is no such requirement by the diploma course students.
In the alternative, University has submitted that if at all the one vacant seat in MD (Gynae & Obst) is to be filled up by order of this Court, the same has to be filled up among Delhi University medical graduates who had appeared in the entrance examination conducted by the Delhi University as all India quota has since been surrendered to it.
University says that there are more than 25 candidates eligible for admission to this course and even among the students now doing diploma course in Gynae there are as many as four students who had opted for degree course in Gynae but could not be admitted in degree course due to want of seats.
It is said that all of them will be ready and willing to shift to the vacant seat in degree course if so permitted.
University has further said that even if the seat is filled up from 25% all India quota it has to be done on basis of merit.
Reference has been made to an affidavit of the first respondent wherein it is mentioned that as many as 42 candidates are above the petitioner in order of merit.
Mr. Mariarputham submitted that any departure from the principles of merit in the matter of admission would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and he ridiculed the submission of the petitioner that as no other candidate has come forward to claim the vacant seat it should invariably be allotted to her.
6.
Mr. Goburdhun for the petitioner submitted that the fixing of cut off date as 15 February 1991 was arbitrary and seat should go vacant and, thus, go waste.
In support of his this submission he referred to a decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Miss Sumedha Kali and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1990(4) S.L.R.
122.
This case pertain to the admission in MBBS Course where there is all India quota.
The learned Single Judge in the case held (1) Once the Director General of Health Services had informed the authorities that no further seat was being sponsored, the same could be thrown open for admission to the candidates in general quota on the waiting list, on the first principle that no seat should go waste; (2) since time for admission for the academic session was over long time back and none of the other candidates on the waiting list other than the petitioner had come forward to press their claim, only the petitioners could be granted admission irrespective of their position in the merit list even though there were more meritorious candidates; and (3) the petitioner who would be admitted to the medical course would be allowed condonation of shortage of lectures by the University or the College as the case may be, or the petitioners might approach the Medical Council of India or any other higher authority for making any provision for condoning the lectures.
With due respect to the learned Single Judge, we are unable to agree with points (2) and (3) in the judgment.
We are concerned here with post graduate course in medicine where after qualification the candidates have to provide medical care to people.
Before they are entitled to do so they have to undergo practicals and at tend proper lectures.
It is not something like passing a BA degree course.
We cannot make mockery of the post graduate medical education.
Moreover, there is substance in the stand of the University in fixing a cut off date for admission to the post graduate course.
Admission cannot go on indefinitely even during the middle or the end of the academic session.
The best authority for fixing a cut off date is the Board of Research Studies of the University of Delhi and certainly not the court.
Then, the University has right to fix a cut off date, has been upheld by a Bench 'decision of this court.
For the earlier year, we are told, also the cut off date fixed was 16 February 290.
In another judgment, a Bench of this Court was also upheld the stand of the Delhi University at courses for diploma and degree for post graduate studies are different.
It is said that in the new three years revised degree course of Delhi University which has got approval of the Supreme Court in Mridula Avasthi and others v. University of Delhi and others, (1988) 2 SCC.
572, the first year of course is not identical to the one year housemanship and that three years degree course is integrated one unit and during the first two years the students undertake research, attend lectures apart from actual clinical work in the hospital with a view to submitting thesis in the selected subjects at the end of the second year.
This is not the requirement of students : of a diploma course.
In Mridula Avasthi's case the court noted that it had directed with a view to bringing about uniformity on the basis of the principle accepted in the earlier decision that for ad mission beginning from 1993, there would be only one pattern namely a three-year integrated course without any separate housemanship.
The Court observed that the University of Delhi decided to adopt the three-year course for the post graduate degree and two-year for the diploma commencing from the academic session of 1988 itself.
Then the court issued certain directions in the circumstances of the case before it which otherwise are not relevant in the present controversy before us.
7.
In Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh v. Sanjay Gulati and others, 1983) 3 Supreme Court Cases 517, the Supreme Court was concerned with the admission to engineering students.
One of the questions before the court was if the petitioners should be admitted to the available seats or whether admission to those seats should be made strictly in accordance with merit.
The court did not accept the submission of the petitioners that they should be preferred for ad mission irrespective of merit.
It observed that the circumstances that the petitioners filed writ petitions in the High Court but other similarly ag grieved did not, would not justify the granting of admission to them by ignoring those others who were higher up in the merit list.
After discussing certain decisions of the court it directed admission would be made as per merit.
8.
In State of Orissa and another v. Dr. Asim Kumar Mohanty and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1801, the Supreme Court said that the time for admission into the particular academic session was long over due and none of the waitlisted candidates came forward to press his or her claim and though ordinarily the more meritorious candidates, if there were any, would be entitled to preference, in the circumstances stated the petitioners should be granted admission.
One has to see the facts and circumstances of the case in which such observation was made and it must also be noticed that the contention of the counsel of the State of Orissa that more meritorious persons should be given admission, was not acceded to on the ground that such a contention had not been raised before the High Court and had been raised for the first time in the Supreme Court and that too at the time of arguments.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner cannot get any right over the candidates who are higher in merit to her.
There are in fact number of such candidates both in the 75% and 25% quotas.
We do not think that the argument that one seat in post graduate degree course is going waste is of any avail to the petitioner.
For this Delhi University cannot certainly be blamed.
It is the Director General of Health Services which has to set his house in order and sponsor the names of the candidates well in time so that the candidates are imparted proper education.
It is also a matter of common knowledge that even post graduate medical students after getting MD degree go for civil services.
They also then waste the seats and at a much more cost to the nation.
9.
Recently in the case of Dr. Pramod Kumar Joshi v. Medical Council of India, 1991(2) SCT 270 (SC) : JT 1991(5) SC 186, where the question was admission to diploma course in paediatrics, the following observations of the Supreme Court appear to be quite apt :-  "There is some force in his submission but we find it difficult at this point of time to entertain the application as the 1990-91 session is almost complete and it would not be proper to allow him admission belatedly and disturb others who have already been admitted and have been undergoing the course.
We accordingly dismiss the writ petition.
Petitioner may look for admission in a future year.
There will be no order for costs."
10.
In conclusion, we may refer to an order dated 10 July 1991 of the Supreme Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar v. Motilal Nehru Medical College (Writ Petition No. 348-5/85) where the Supreme Court gave the following directions -  "We make it clear that the outer limit for both allotment and transfer shall be 7th February of the year following the commencement of the session."
11.
This in fact concludes the matter against the petitioner.
We, therefore, cannot allow admission to the petitioner to degree course in Gynaecology and Obstetrics at this fag end of the 1990 session in November this year.
12.
We, therefore, find no merit in the writ petition.
It is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.