Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By this judgment, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9112, 11468, 15167 of 1990 and 3931 of 1991, are being disposed of.
The facts of the case have been taken from CWP No. 9112 of 1990.
2.
The petitioners are stated to be the forest guards working in the offices of various Divisional Forest Officers in the State of Haryana.
They were appointed as forest guards on the basis of their admitted qualifications during the years 1971 to 1976, and it is stated that petitioner Nos. 1 to 4 have since been confirmed as forest guards, whereas the case of the petitioner No. 5 for confirmation is under consideration of the Government.
It has been stated that the petitioners are governed by the Punjab Civil Subordinate Services (Executive Section) Rules, 1944, (hereinafter called the `Rules').
Rule 13 thereof provides that the seniority of members of the service shall be determined by the dates of their substantive appointment to a permanent vacancy in their class of service.
It has been averred in the petition that petitioners Nos. 1 and 2 are senior to respondent Nos. 6 to 35, whereas petitioners Nos. 3, 4 and 5 are senior to most of the said respondents.
It has been submitted that the seniority of the petitioners, as stated above, is reflected in the gradation list of forest guards circulated on 111990, which is Annexure P-4 to the petition.
The channel for promotion of forest guards to the post of forestors as given in rule 9, which is relevant for that purpose, is reproduced below :  "Rule 9.
Appointments to posts of Foresters shall be made as follows, that is to say -  (1) To the First Grade or the Second Grade from among Forestors in the next lower grade.
(2) to the Third Grade from among -  (a) persons who -  (i) have passed the Matriculation Examination of a recognized University; and (ii) have agreed to undertake after the expiry of one year's work in the Forest Department the course of training at the School in accordance with the regulations in Appendix `D'.
(b) Forest Guards, who have obtained a certificate of training from the school in accordance with the regulations in appendix `D' : Provided that the Chief Conservator, the Conservator or the Director, as the case may be, may appoint as Forestor any Forest Guard or Daroga who has not obtained the certificate of training from the school; provided further that thirty percentum of the total number of posts of Foresters shall be filled by the appointment of person under sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the remaining seventy per centum by promotion from among Forest Guards of Darogas."
It will be seen from a reading of the above rule that the forest guards in order to be promoted as foresters are required to have a certificate of training, although the Chief Conservator has been given the authority by virtue of the first proviso to appoint a person who has not obtained the certificate.
It will also be seen that the second proviso stipulates that 70 per cent of the posts of foresters are to be filled by way of promotion from the forest guards or Darogas.
The case of the petitioners is that they being senior, to all or some of the respondent Nos. 6 to 35 and being otherwise eligible for promotion, should have been promoted as foresters.
They have impugned the order Annexure P-6 dated 31.5.1990 which is the order of promotion, whereby the private-respondents have been promoted as foresters, some of them (though senior) without passing the foresters' course and others admittedly junior, who have passed the course in question, and obtained the requisite certificate.
3.
A written statement has been filed in reply to the petition by Shri RS Hooda, Conservator of Forests, Haryana, wherein the facts of the case have been broadly admitted, but it has been stated that the petitioners were not promoted as forests as they did not fulfill the requisite qualification of having obtained a certificate from the School (Foresters Course) as per rule 9(b) ibid.
It has also been stated that the petitioners were not sent for the Foresters Class training as their record was not found up to the mark during scrutiny.
It has been stated that Annexure R-1 dated 23.4.1963 formed the basis of selection of forest guards to be deputed to the training school for Foresters, and after the matter was examined under that circular, the petitioners were not found suitable, whereas respondents Nos. 6 and 35 were sent for the training to Pinjore.
It has been admitted that the officials mentioned at Sr. Nos. 1 to 15 in the first portion of Annexure P-6, were promoted Foresters w.e.f.
1121983 without having passed the Forestors Training Course, whereas the persons mentioned in the second chart were promoted w.e.f.
the same date but after having passed the said course.
4.
The first point argued before me by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that for sending the Forest Guards for training to the Foresters Training Course, the only criteria that is to be followed by the Government is that of seniority, and the petitioners, being senior to some or all of those who had been sent for training, have been arbitrarily singled out for harsh treatment.
While elaborating this argument, it has been asserted that the petitioners fulfilled the requirements of Annexure R-1 and their record of service was as meritorious as that of those who had been sent for the training.
It has been stated that the policy of pick and choose that has seen followed by the respondent for deputing the forest guards to the foresters training course is arbitrary and the proviso (i) of rule 9(b) which gives the Chief Conservator of Forests and other functionaries the authority to promote forest guards as foresters without having passed the training course, is without any guideline and is liable to be struck down on that basis.
5.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been urged that the basis for sending/deputing the forest guards to the foresters training course is seniority-cum-merit as provided in Annexure R-1 and, as much, nobody can be heard to say that he is entitled to be sent to the course on the basis of the seniority alone.
If has also been urged that proviso (i) to rule 9(b) is perfectly valid as similar clauses for relaxation exist in other rules as well.
It has also been urged that no policy of pick and choose has been evolved by the official respondents and the forest guards, who have been deputed to the foresters training course, were sent there on account of their merit, vis-a-vis the petitioners.
6.
I have considered the argument of the counsel for the parties and am of the view that the stand of the petitioners seems to be correct.
It may be seen that rule 9 which has been quoted above in extenso, lays down the eligibility for promotion to the post of foresters from that of forest guards and the only requirement for promotion against the 70 per cent posts reserved for forest guards, is that the forest guards must have a certificate of training from the school.
Annexure R-1 which has been appended with the reply does not talk about promotion at all as it deals only with deputing forest guards to the training school.
It will be seen that para 1(d) of Annexure R-1 provided that the students will be nominated normally in order of seniority-cum-merit from amongst those who possess the required educational qualifications, and para 1(e) provides that the total length of service irrespective of the fact whether it is temporary or permanent will count while determining seniority of the forest guards for selection.
From a reading of Annexure R-1 along with rule 9, I am of the view that what is envisaged by it is that for the purpose of being sent to the training school, the seniority would be the determining factor and the merit would take a back seat as the sending of a candidate to the training school does not constitute a step in the process of promotion.
This has been so held by a Full Bench of this Court in Sardul Singh v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab and others, 1970 S.L.R.
505.
The court while construing a somewhat similar police rule held that acquiring of a qualification for promotion does not constitute a part of the process of promotion, as it only makes a person eligible to be considered for promotion.
It was further held therein that since the number of seats for the Intermediate School Course were limited, the Head Constables were to be sent for training on the basis of their seniority alone.
The argument of the counsel for the respondents is that the case of the petitioners was considered on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and as much warranted no interference, would be of no avail.
Where the basis for promotion is seniority-cum-merit, seniority would be the primary factor, but the merit could also not be ignored.
A somewhat similar matter came before the Supreme Court in Government of India and another v. C.A.
Balakrishnan and others, 1974 SLWR 791.
In this case, the distinction between a selection post and the one to be filled up on the basis of seniority-cum-merit was brought out.
In that case, respondent No. 2 was promoted to the post treating it to be one to be filled on the basis of selection.
It was argued before the High Court that this promotion was wrong, as, at the relevant time the rules provided that the post be filled up on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The High Court allowed the writ petition and the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal filled against the order of the High Court on the ground that the promotion of respondent No. 2 could not be sustained as the same had not been filled up on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The matter was also considered by the Supreme Court in State of Mysore and another v. Syed Mahmood and another, 1968 SLR 333, wherein it was held that when rules provided for promotion, on seniority-cum-merit no person had a right to claim promotion, but a senior could be overlooked if he was found unfit to perform his duties on a higher post.
It is significant that the Supreme Court has used the word `unfit' as a person may be lacking in merit but he may still be fit for a particular job.
The distinction appears to be that in a case of seniority-cum-merit, the senior can be overlooked only if he is unfit for the job.
It will be seen that in Syed Mehmood's case (supra), the Supreme Court itself construed the concept of promotion on seniority-cum-merit basis as seniority-cum-fitness for the higher post.
I am, therefore, of the view that accepting Annexure R-1 as it is, what has to be seen by the authorities was seniority-cum-merit which was to be reflected in the fitness of the person concerned to hold the higher post.
7.
The next argument raised by the counsel for the petitioner is that the first proviso to rule 9(2) ibid which gives the Chief Conservator, Conservator or the Director, the authority to appoint as Forester any forest guard or Daroga who has not obtained the certificate of training from the training school, is arbitrary as it does not indicate any guidelines for the exercise of their power.
This matter is, however, not open to the petitioners as the factual basis for impugning the above-noted provision has not been laid in the petition.
8.
Keeping in view of the aforesaid discussion, I am of the opinion that these petitions are liable to succeed.
Accordingly, the petitions are allowed; the order Annexure P-6 is quashed qua the respondents who are parties to the writ petitions, and a direction is issued to the respondent-authorities to depute the forest guards to the foresters training course strictly in accordance with their seniority and to consider the case for promotion only after they have secured the necessary training.
The costs of the petitioners are assessed at Rs. 500/- in each case.
Petition allowed.