Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner has been under suspension since 28.4.1977 and has claimed the relief of reinstatement in the service during enquiry.
2.
Briefly stated the facts are as under :-  Petitioner was appointed as Clerk-cum-Cashier with Punjab National Bank (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) and joined as such in the year 1968.
In 1975 he was promoted to the post of Teller.
On 28.4.1977, in pursuance of F.I.R. No. 248 registered on 27.4.1977 at Police Station City Hissar, petitioner was suspended in accordance with the provisions of Para 193 of the Bipartite Settlement.
Petitioner was accused of misappropriation of money by wrongful withdrawal from the account of customers in connivance with one Phul Chand and Bhajan Ram.
Later on two FIRs.
No. 349 and 410 dated 1061977 and 771977 respectively were also registered against the petitioner.
F.I.R. No. 410 dated 771977 was dropped later on.
In all six challans were put up against the petitioner in FIR Nos. 248 and 349 and the petitioner was tried and acquitted in all the six challans by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Hissar vide his separate judgments dated 29.2.1988, copies of which are Annexed as Annexures P/5 to P/10 with the writ petition.
These judgments have become final as no appeal was preferred against the same.
3.
On 7111979, petitioner was served with three different charge-sheets copies of which have been attached as Annexures P/2 to P/4 with the writ petition.
Petitioner filed his reply to the charge-sheets, referred to above, on 10111979.
On 911980, Enquiry Officer was appointed.
On 1811980, petitioner filed an application asking the Bank not to hold enquiry as criminal cases pending against the petitioner were still going on.
Bank authorities did not proceed with the enquiry thereafter.
After acquittal of the petitioner on 29.2.1988 by Chief Judicial Magistrate, Hissar, the petitioner filed an application on 1131988, requesting the bank to revoke the order of suspension and reinstate him as he had been acquitted by this Court of competent jurisdiction.
This request of the petitioner was not acceded to and a fresh charge-sheet containing the same allegations which were contained in the earlier charge-sheets was issued with the direction that he should file his reply to the same within three days from the receipt of the latter failing which it would be presumed that he had nothing to say in his defence.
Petitioner's request of reinstatement pending enquiry on the ground that he had been acquitted by a Court of competent jurisdiction was not acceded to and the petitioner being aggrieved has come to this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution seeking a mandamus directing the respondents to take him back in service during the pendency of enquiry.
4.
First submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner is innocent and had been falsely implicated in certain cases as he used to take interest in the activities of employees Union; that his claim of innocence is reinforced by the judgments of acquittal passed in his favour by a Court of competent jurisdiction which have become final; that he should be reinstated pending enquiry and the continued operation of order of suspension cannot be regarded as reasonable, fair and just and as such he should be reinstated pending enquiry against him.
5.
As against this, submission of Mr. Nijjar, Senior Advocate, appearing for the Bank, is that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief sought for in this writ petition as he has not come to this Court with clean hands; his submission is that the petitioner has tried to create impression in the mind of the Court that the enquiry was not proceeding because of some fault on the part of Bank whereas actually the enquiry proceedings were stayed at the request of the petitioner himself; petitioner, subsequent to the filing of the writ petition, filed a suit in the Court of Sub Judge 1st Class, Hisar, wherein he had claimed a similar relief; acquittal of the petitioner was not an honourable acquittal and the same was a technical acquittal as the Bank failed to produce its evidence and as such acquittal cannot be termed as an honourable acquittal.
6.
I do not find any force in either of these submissions.
Petitioner filed the civil suit in the Court of Sub Judge 1st Class, Hissar, subsequent to the filing of the present writ petition wherein he claimed that the respondent-Bank be restrained from holding the enquiry proceedings against the petitioner.
His claim in this suit was not for reinstatment during the pendency of enquiry.
Petitioner had moved an application under Order 39 rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure, during the pendency of suit and in that order itself, it has been noted by the trial Court that the claim of the petitioner in the writ petition was different from the one claimed by him in the suit.
Trial Court had granted him injunction but in appeal the Appellate Court held that the suit was not maintainable and the petitioner should approach the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act for redressal of his grievance.
Plaint was ordered to be returned to the petitioner.
There was no final adjudication of this suit.
In my view, since the suit was never adjudicated upon finally and the relief claimed in the suit was different from the one which has been claimed in the present writ petition, the petitioner cannot be held to be disentitled to the relief claimed for in the present writ petition.
I have gone through the judgment of Chief Judicial Magistrate, wherein judgment of acquittal has been recorded by him in favour of the petitioner.
These are detailed judgments and the petitioner has not been given the benefit of doubt; has been acquitted as the prosecution had failed to establish the case against the petitioner.
Simply because the petitioner filed an application with the Bank that enquiry proceedings be suspended till the matter is finally decided by the criminal Court would not disentitle the petitioner to the relief claimed for in this writ petition as in my view, this Court was in no way misled in giving a relief which the petitioner did not deserve on its own merits.
7.
Next submission of learned counsel for the respondents is that the writ petition is not maintainable and the petitioner should seek his redressal under the Industrial Disputes Act.
I do not find force in this submission either.
There is no provision under the Industrial Disputes Act wherein a person under suspension during enquiry can seek his reinstatement from the Labour Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioner was unable to substantiate his plea that petitioner had an alternate remedy to claim reinstatement pending domestic enquiry under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Even if it is taken for the sake of argument that the petitioner could approach the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act even then the same cannot be termed as an absolute bar for the grant of relief claimed by the petitioner from this Court.
Alternate remedy is not a complete bar for the grant of relief in deserving cases.
In exercise of its writ jurisdiction the High Court shall try to reach wherever injustice is being perpetrated.
Normally speaking a total service period of an individual who joins the service at the age of 28 or so is 30 to 35 years.
Petitioner has been kept under suspension for a period of about 14 years and that too after his acquittal from the criminal Court, without any justifiable reason.
Petitioner cannot be kept under suspension for an indefinite period and it would be unjust to keep him under suspension after he has been acquitted by a Court of competent jurisdiction simply because a domestic enquiry is pending against him for the last 14 years.
I am reinforced in my view by a Division Bench judgment of Himachal Pradesh High Court in Surinder Kumar v. State of Himachal Pradesh and another, reported as 1985(3) SLR 254 wherein it has been observed as under :-  "The orders of acquittal are undoubtedly under challenge in the High Court.
The preferment of acquittal appeals cannot, however be regarded as the continuance of the trial.
The trials have concluded with the judgment of acquittal (See State v. BC Dwivedi, 1983(2) XXIV GLR 1315).
The initial presumption of innocence must, therefore, be regarded as having been doubly reinforced by orders of acquittal passed in faovur of the petitioner.
Under such circumstances, the continued operation of the order of suspension as from the date of a acquittal cannot be regarded as reasonable, fair just, Merely because the petitioner was, at one point of time, detained in custody for a period exceeding forty-eight hours, he cannot be kept under suspension perpetually, especially when the allegations on the basis of which he was detained and which ultimately became the subject-matter of two trials before the criminal court, are found by a Court of competent jurisdiction to have been established beyond reasonable doubt."
This judgment has been followed with approval by single Judge of this Court in Rattan Lal Arora v. The Central Bank of India and another, 1989(2) S.L.R.
797.
Learned Single Judge under somewhat similar circumstances ordered reinstatement of an employee of this very bank who was kept under suspension for a period of 11 years.
It has further been observed in this case that in an appropriate case, relief cannot be refused to a petitioner only on the ground that he has got an alternate remedy.
The point of alternate remedy which has been raised in this case was also raised in Rattan Lal Arora's case (supra).
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed with costs.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner forthwith.
Petitioner will be entitled to all the consequential reliefs which he is entitled to under the rules.
Costs are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.