MR Agnihotri, J - The Managing Committee of Dayanand Mathura Dass College (DM College), Moga, in the State of Punjab has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for the quashing of the communications dated 8th February, 1988 Annexure P.3.
and 18th February, 1988, Annexure P5, issued by the Director of Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab summoning the petitioner-College to represent its case before the Director regarding removal from service of lecturer MC Sood and for issuing a writ of prohibition.
restraining the respondents from interfering in the management and control of the affairs of the College.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioner-College known as DM College, Moga, is an educational institution established, managed and run by the Arya Pratinidhi Sabha, Punjab.
This institution was founded in the year 1926 by a renowned Arya Samaji Philanthropist, late Rai Bahadur Mathura Dass Pahwa, a well-known Eye Surgeon of Moga, in the name and memory of Maharishi Dayanand, the Guru.
of Rai Bahadur Mathura Dass, as recorded in his Will.
3.
The Arya Smajis in the State of Punjab constitute a minority in terms of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India and it has been so held by the apex Court of the country in DAV College etc. v. State of Punjab and others, 1971(2) S.C.C.
269.
4.
The petitioner-College has on its establishment a lecturer by the name, MC Sood, respondent No. 3, in this petition.
The management of the College received a number of complaints against this lecturer and his explanation was also called, which was, however, found to be unsatisfactory.
A charge-sheet was framed against him.
Shri PK Sabharwal, an Advocate of Jalandhar, was appointed as an Inquiry Officer to look into the following charges levelled against Mr. Sood :-  "(a) That on 6.9.1986, Prof. MC Sood entered the Principal's office in DM College of Education at Moga when interviews for the selection of Lecturers were held and Dr. Rajinder Vijan, the nominee of the President, Managing Committee, was in the chair.
At that time you were in state of intoxication and you indulged in gibberish talk.
You were not quite articulate in your speech and were under the influence of wine.
Your conduct was most reprehensible and you put awkward questions to the members of Selection Board.
(b) That on 5287 at about 100 P M while at the premises of DM College, Moga you were in drunken state and you abused Prof. SK Sood in the presence of Prof. VK Sood and Prof. VN Vijan.
(c) That you did not attend the practicals on 5287 at 1.40 P.M. and absented yourself from college without permission."
As a result of the inquiry, Shri Sabharwal found the respondent guilty of all the three charges.
A copy of the report was supplied to Mr. Sood, respondent No. 3, and a Sub Committee was constituted to hear and afford an opportunity to Mr. Sood to rebut the charges and findings of the Inquiry Officer, before any action was taken against him on the basis of the inquiry report.
However, in response to this, neither Mr. Sood appeared before the Sub Committee personally or through any representative, nor did he submit any representation.
Consequently, the Sub Committee submitted its report to the Managing Committee of the College, which in its meeting held on 8th September, 1987, accepted the findings of the Inquiry Officer, Mr. Sabharwal, Advocate, as also the report of the Sub-Committee.
The matter was once again considered by the Managing Committee at length and ultimately the Sub Committee passed the resolution to remove respondent No. 3 from service of the College.
However, the Managing Committee by a majority vote referred the question to the President of the Managing Committee, Mr. Virenedra, as to whether being an educational institution established by a linguistic minority, the Managing Committee was itself competent to pass the order of removal from service or the case had to be sent to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, for confirmation.
The President thereupon recorded the following decision on 21st September, 1987.
"15.
I have considered the matter in detail.
It has been held by a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Managing Committee of the Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jullundur v. The State of Punjab and others, reported in 1986(2) Services Law-Reporter 415, that Director of Public Instruction, Punjab, is an outside authority and he cannot interfere in a matter of the present nature.
According to this authority, what is required to be done is that an inquiry against the delinquent must be held and he should be given fair chance to present his case.
This chance has been given in excess than what was required to Prof MC Sood.
Furthermore, an identical matter came up for consideration of the Supreme Court in the All Saints High School etc. etc. v. The Government of Andhra Pradesh and others etc. etc. reported in AIR 1980 Supreme Court 1042.
The question which arose in that case was whether certain provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Recognised Private Educational Institutions Control Act II of 1975, offended against the fundamental right conferred on minorities by Article 31(1) of the Constitution of India Section 31(1) and 31(2) of the above said Andhra Pradesh Act laid down that subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, no teacher employed in any private educational institution shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank nor shall his appointment be otherwise terminated except with the prior approval of the competent authority and if any educational institution contravened the aforesaid provision, the teacher affected by the contravention shall be deemed to be in service.
These provisions further provided that where the proposal to dismiss, remove or reduce in rank or otherwise terminate the appointment of any teacher employed in any private educational institution is communicated to the competent authority, that authority shall approve the proposal if it is satisfied that there are adequate and reasonable grounds for the proposal.
The Supreme Court struck down these provisions as violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution, and held that these provisions were not applicable to minority institutions.
Similarly, the provision that the proposal for imposing the penalty has to be sent to the Director of Public Instruction (Colleges)" Punjab, in the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974, is not applicable to minority institutions.
In my considered opinion, therefore, the case of Prof MC Sood is not required, in law, to be referred to the Director of Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab.
17.
In accordance with decision of the Managing Committee, therefore, Prof. NC Sood of DM College, Moga, is hereby removed from service with immediate effect.
Sd/  (VIRENDRA) Dated : 21.9.87  President,  DM College Managing Committee (Pb) Moga.
To  Prof. MC Sood (under suspension),  DM College, Moga, through the Principal, DM College, Moga.
Soon thereafter, copies of the aforesaid orders alongwith other papers were sent to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, under intimation to respondent No. 3, and it was thereupon that the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, issued the communications, Annexure P-3 and P-5, requiring the Secretary of the Managing Committee/Principal, DM College, Moga, to appear before him, before finally approving their decision.
The Managing Committee of the College, on the other hand, instead of submitting to the jurisdiction of the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, approached this Court by filing the present writ petition.
5.
Though separate written statements have been filed by the Secretary to Government, Punjab Education Department, and the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, on the one hand, and respondent No. 3 Mr. MC Sood, lecturer, on the other, yet in both the written statements the factual position has almost been admitted.
So far as legal position is concerned, in order to overcome the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jalandhar v. The State of Punjab and others 1986(2) SLR 416, it has been pleaded that the aforesaid judgment has since been challenged in the Supreme Court of India.
It has further been pleaded that "the petitioner institution, by voluntarily accepting conditions of 95% grant-in aid, has subjected itself to the jurisdiction of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974.
Having got lakhs of rupees as grant, the institution is estopped to challenge the conditions accepted earlier voluntarily, at this stage, on the pretext of protection under Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India."
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, I am of the considered view that the writ petition deserves to be allowed in view of the law laid down by Hon'ble the Supreme Court as well as this Court, and the petitioner College being a minority institution within the meaning of Article 30(1) of the Constitution, is not amenable to the jurisdiction of the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab a functionary under the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974.
The mere fact that the institution has been drawing grant-in-aid from the State Government or that a copy of the decision was endorsed to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, will not operate as an estoppel in the way of the petitioner-College in seeking protection of fundamental rights envisaged by Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
When it is axiomatic that there cannot be an estoppel against a statute and a person cannot be deprived of the protection of law simply by estoppel by his conduct, the protection of the Constitution is certainly on a much higher footing and no amount of conduct, waiver or acquiescence can stand in the way of enforcement of fundamental right.
7.
Consequently, following the law laid by the Division Bench of this Court in Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Jalandhar v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLR 416, I hold that DM College, Moga, is a minority institution within the meaning of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India, even if it was founded by an individual, as its foundation and establishment was in the memory and name of Maharishi Dayanand, the founder of Arya Samaj.
Resultantly, the petitioner College is not amenable to the jurisdiction of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974, and communications dated 8th February, 1988, Annexure P.3, and 18th February, 1988, Annexure P5, issued by the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, are without jurisdiction, and null and void in the case of the petitioner.
This writ petition thus stands allowed, with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.