Radhakrishna Rao, J - This is a pitiable case of a helpless lady who becomes victim of the fate which took away the life of her husband, the only bread-winner in the family, while he was working as a Junior Assistant in the 1st respondent organisation on 28121987, leaving behind the petitioner, 3 daughters and a son, who are still at the school age.
His untimely death brought irrepairable shock, agony and unbearable financial trouble to his dependents as he has left no moveable or immoveable properties for them to sustain in life.
As the petitioner is unable to make both ends meet, she made fervent appeals to all the authorities concerned including the 1st respondent to provide suitable employment on compassionate grounds in order to protect her and the children from starvation.
After several representations dated 2641988, 1771989 and 28.8.1989 the 1st respondent at last moved in matter only to inform her their helplessness to provide her any employment due to critical financial position.
On 23.9.1989, the petitioner made another representation to the 1st respondent stating that "had her husband been alive, the organisation would have been incurring expenditure on his wage bill whatever be the financial position of the enterprise".
But there was no response from the 1st respondent.
She, therefore, petitioned to the Chief Justice of India seeking his Lordship's indulgence in the matter.
The Assistant Registrar of the Supreme Court forwarded the petition submitted by the petitioner to the 1st respondent organisation requesting them to take action in the matter.
By letter dated 17.1.1990 the Legal Aid Committee of the Supreme Court directed the petitioner to approach the 1st respondent with a copy of the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court reported in Smt. Sushma Gosain v. Union of India, AIR 1989 SC 1976 wherein it was directed to create a supernumerary post in order to accommodate the petitioner therein.
The Legal Aid Committee further directed the petitioner to approach the High Court for redressal of her grievance if the respondents fail to initiate any action on this aspect.
In pursuance of the said directions of the Legal Aid Committee of the Supreme Court, the petitioner approached the 1st respondent with a representation dated 29.1.1990 requesting the authorities to provide employment on compassionate grounds.
As she has not received any communication from the 1st respondent, she filed this writ petition to issue a writ of mandamus declaring the action of the respondents in not considering and appointing her on compassionate grounds in any suitable post as illegal and void and consequently direct the respondents to consider and appoint her in any suitable post.
2.
The respondents filed a counter stating that the company is incurring loss and so they could not provide any employment to any person.
It is stated by the respondents that the petitioner's husband joined the 1st respondent organisation on 8.1.1971 and he was working as a Junior Assistant at the time of his death on 28121987.
There are many dependents of the deceased employees like the petitioner and so far the company provided jobs to nearly 60 dependents of deceased employees.
As there is idle manpower in certain categories due to lower plant capacity utilization, a complete ban was imposed on outside recruitment.
The Corporate office of the Respondent Company by a letter dated 1291986 informed the Hyderabad Unit that due to the critical financial position through which the company was passing through and the need to enforce utmost economy, it had been decided not to resort to any type of recruitment in any cadre on any ground.
According to the respondents, there are about 95 applications of dependents of deceased employees pending for appointment on compassionate grounds.
The company maintains a separate of list male and female dependents of the deceased employees.
The petitioner is at Sl.
No. 41 in the list of female dependents.
There are about 30 male dependents who are senior to her.
As such the respondent have to appoint 70 dependents before the petitioner's case can be considered.
The respondents further submit that a scheme known as Family Pension Scheme was introduced in the Hyderabad Unit of the Company in the year 1971 and as the husband of the petitioner has opted for the said scheme and on his death the petitioner has received a sum of Rs. 750/- from 29121987 to 30.4.1988 initially and she is now drawing a monthly FPF at the rate of Rs. 439/- per month as family pension.
The petitioner was also paid a sum of Rs. 17,935/- as Gratuity and Rs. 10,000/- as Group Insurance and Rs. 8,021/- towards Contributory Provident Fund.
The petitioner was informed by a letter dated 291989 that due to the critical financial position through which the company was passing, it had been decided not to resort to any type of recruitment on any ground.
She was further informed by another letter dated 13111989 that since there was ban on outside recruitment which includes induction of dependents of deceased employees, there was no question of resorting to any recruitment.
She was also informed that her case would be given due consideration as and when circumstances permit.
The respondents further submit that in the Memorandum of Settlement between the Management and the Workmen entered on 21.10.1990 it was agreed that under clause 24 of the said settlement the matter of employment to dependents of deceased employees would be discussed separately.
3.
The respondent sought to distinguish the decision of the Supreme Court in Sushma Gosain's case (supra) by stating that in that case the ban on recruitment came in 1985 subsequent to her submitting an application for the post of L.D.C.
in November, 1982 and passing the required trade test and interview for that post.
As the ban on recruitment in that case was imposed much later to the application of Sushma Gosain, in those circumstances, the Supreme Court directed creation of a supernumerary post to accommodate her.
In the instant case, according to the respondents, the ban on all recruitments was imposed on 1291986 more than a year prior to 28121987 i.e., the date of expiry of the husband of the petitioner.
Moreover, there are 70 dependents of deceased employees who are senior to the petitioner.
Without considering their case, the respondents submits, the petitioner's case cannot be considered.
4.
The respondents also filed an additional counter-affidavit stating that subsequent to the ban on recruitment i.e., 1291986, 9 workers i.e. 5 in the category of Peons and 4 in the category of Record Keepers left the organisation by way of retirement or death.
The respondents further submit that the Sanyal Committee submitted its recommendation for rehabilitation of the respondent-company to the Ministry of Industry, Department of Chemicals and Petro Chemicals, Government of India, in September, 1986.
The Committee in its report stated that the number of employees particularly in the service areas and clerical staff, semi-skilled, and unskilled workmen was too high and needs to be reduced.
5.
It is true that the husband of the petitioner died on 28121987 while working as Junior Assistant in the 1st respondent-organisation.
The petitioner is a Matriculate and she requested the authorities to provide employment to her in any suitable post on compassionate grounds in order to mitigate her hardship.
If can be stated unequivocally that the respondent-organisation has to maintain all the employees that were available as on date of imposition of ban.
The petitioner's husband died after the ban was imposed.
After the ban was imposed, the respondent-organisation probably may not be in a position to appoint any person in any post on account of the critical financial position of the company.
But the question of appointment on compassionate grounds of the dependents of the deceased employees is entirely different.
Simply because the company has not filled up the vacancies after the ban was imposed, it cannot be said that the petitioner is entitled to a post in a vacancy caused due to the death of her husband.
The petitioner's husband was working as Junior Assistant at the time to death.
But the petitioner is seeking a job inferior and low to the post of Junior Assistant in view of the fact that she is only a Matriculate and naturally the lower posts i.e., Record Keeper and Peons carry lower scale of pay than that of the post of Junior Assistant.
The petitioner's contention that had her husband been alive, the respondent-organisation would have been incurring expenditure on his wage bill whatever be the financial position of the company, seems to be well founded.
It is not the case of the respondents that after the ban was imposed any retrenchment took place.
Moreover, after the ban was imposed, 9 workers either retired or died.
These 9 posts ought to have been given to the dependents of the deceased employees who are available as on the date of imposition of ban.
With regard to persons that have to be absorbed prior to the ban is a matter that has to be settled between the workmen and the Management.
But in the case of the petitioner, the company would not be spending more amount than the emoluments incurred had the petitioner's husband been alive.
6.
In Smt. Sushma Gosain's case (supra) the Supreme Court observed :  "We consider that it must be stated unequivocally that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread-earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such cases pending for years.
If there is no suitable post for appointment supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant."
7.
So saying, the Supreme Court reversed order of the Delhi Court on the ground that High Court has made the order in a mechanical way and the order lacks the sense of justice.
8.
The contention of the respondents that the above decision is not relevant to the facts of this case as the ban on recruitment came subsequent to her submitting an application to provide her employment, is not correct and it is unfounded.
In theis case, the petitioner's husband died while the ban is in force.
The company would have incurred expenditure towards the emoluments had he been alive and continued to work as Junior Assistant.
The petitioner is seeking employment to a lower post as she is only a Matriculate.
Therefore, the company need not incur as much expenditure as it would have been incurring had the petitioner's husband been alive till date.
After the ban was imposed, some vacancies arose on account of retirement or death of employees.
It may be true that there are critical financial conditions prevailing in the company.
But creating supernumerrary posts at least to the equal number of posts that are available at the time of imposition of ban will not come in the way of financial burden than the one that was available as on date of imposition of ban.
9.
Following the broad principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the above case and also the fact that some vacancies arose on account of death or retirement of employees in the categories of Record Keepers or Peons after the ban was imposed and also taking into consideration the mitigating circumstances submitted by the petitioner as she has to maintain 3 daughters and one son, the respondents are directed to provide one post to the petitioner in any suitable post either in the category of Record Keepers or Peons within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
10.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed as indicated above.
No costs.
Petition allowed.