RP Sethi, J - A Division Bench of this court while disposing of Writ Petition No. 88 of 1985 on April 23, 1987, held the petitioner entitled to draw the subsistence allowance under rules which governed the conditions of service during the period of his suspension.
Similarly, the Writ Petition No. 28 of 1985, another Division Bench directed the payment of subsistence allowance as permissible under rules to be paid to the petitioner.
As the respondents failed to comply the court directions, this petition was filed against the respondents for appropriate directions and initiation of contempt proceedings against them.
Objections were filed by the respondent and on April 30, 1980 Mr. AN Kotwar, the learned counsel for the respondents, sought time to comply the court directions within two months.
It was, however, submitted that the petitioner was getting the subsistence allowance regularly according to the assessment made by the respondent which was disputed by the petitioner.
This court, vide its order dated July 16, 1990, prima facie found the respondents being guilty of violating the court directions and issued a formal show cause notice for initiating contempt proceedings in response to which they appeared in the court and filed their objections.
2.
In the objections filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it is submitted that he remained posted as Chief Engineer, Civil Construction Wing, Power Development Department, Jammu, from September, 1986 to July 9, 1990, as Head of the Department.
It was not his function to pay the salary or subsistence allowance to the employees of the department despite the fact that he exercised over all supervision on the technical and administrative work of the department.
He has denied his responsibility for non-payment of subsistence allowance to the petitioner.
He, however, submitted that respondent No. 2 under the genuine and bona fide belief that as per Article 108-A(iii) Government Instruction No. 1 of the J & K Services Regulations, found that the petitioner was entitled to the subsistence allowance only for that period for which he remained attached in the office to which he was attached and that under rule 7(1)(b) of SRO-370 regarding J & K services (Revised Pay) Rules of 1987, the suspended employee is not entitled to the revised pay as he had to exercise his option within 3 months from the date he returns to the duty.
It is submitted that it was decided in July, 1987 that the rate of subsistence allowance which the petitioner was already drawing be decreased by 10 per cent with effect from April 1, 1987, on account of the fact that he was not co-operating so far as the settlement of store accounts were concerned.
It is submitted by respondent No. 1 that he has got the greatest regard for the institution of judiciary and for the orders of this court.
3.
In their reply respondents 2 and 3 have stated that the petitioner has been paid subsistence allowance from the date of his suspension i.e. January 9, 1985, upto date on the basis of pay and rate of DA and ADA permissible under rules No increment is payable to the suspended employee during the period of suspension under rule 78 of the CSR (Vol. 1).
It is submitted that the petitioner has been paid subsistence allowance at the rate of his basic pay he was receiving at the time of his suspension and the benefit of revision of pay was not given to him under SRO-370 of 1987.
It is submitted that delay in the payment of the subsistence allowance has not been intentional but has proceeded from normal and sincere interpretation of rules relating to the attendance of the suspended employee at the place of his attachment after suspension.
The petit0ioner started marking his attendance in the office to which he was attached with effect from August 3, 1990.
It is submitted that the order of this court has faithfully been complied with by the respondents with the result that payment in full and upto date has been made to the petitioner as per statement annexed as Annexure B/1.
It is stated that respondent No. 2 took over as Executive Engineer, CI & D Division, Jammu on July 25, 1987, and on transfer handed over the charge on May 3, 1990.
His predecessor did not make the payment of the subsistence allowance on account of the petitioner's not marking his attendance in the office to which he was attached.
The petitioner received payment for May 1, 1986 to November 13, 1986 and for the months of December, 1986 and January, 1987, and was not paid for the period he did not mark attendance in the officer register.
No sooner did the petitioner mark his attendance in the office register under the directions of this court, payment of subsistence allowance was made to him promptly and regularly.
It is submitted that the respondents have got the greatest regard for the court and have never failed to implement the direction issued.
However, it is submitted by them that if the court feels that there has been an inadvertent irreverence towards the court, they tender their unqualified apology with a prayer for dropping the proceedings against them.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was suspended on January 9, 1985, pending enquiry of alleged misappropriation of huge State funds by him.
It is also not denied that this court gave directions for the payment of the subsistence allowance to the petitioner during the period of suspension in accordance with the rules applicable.
It is also admitted that for various reasons subsistence allowance could not be paid to the petitioner till specific directions were issued by the court in this behalf.
It is also admitted that despite the expiry of more than 5 years, the petitioner continues to be suspended and has neither been convicted by any criminal court nor awarded any punishment in any departmental enquiry.
The practice of keeping the suspension order in operation for years together is deplorable and should not ordinarily be resorted to.
Such a prolonged suspension may amount to punishment to the delinquent public officer on the one hand and the loss to the state exchequer and administrative functioning, on the other.
The respondents are, therefore, under an obligation to either prosecute the petitioner in a court of competent jurisdiction or take disciplinary action against him or both, if permissible under law, without any further delay and avoid prolonging agony of suspension order hanging over the head of the petitioner.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents have referred to SRO-370 of 1987 dated July 17, 1987, to urge that the petitioner was not entitled to the payment of the subsistence allowance on the basis of revised pay-scale and during his suspension was to be paid according to the basic pay he was drawing at the time to the order of his suspension.
The respondents have referred to para 7(1)(b) of the said SRO in support of their contention.
Para 7 deals with the exercise of option of the concerned employees in the prescribed form and proviso (b) provides :  "Where a Government servant is under suspension on the date of issue of these rules, the option may be exercised within 3 months from the date of his return to duty".
Interpreting this proviso, the learned counsel for the respondents has urged that unless and until the petitioner is reinstated, there is no question of his exercising the option and being entitled to the payment of the salary according to the revised pay scales."
6.
It is acknowledged proposition of law that suspension is not punishment unless it is tainted by mala fides or resorted to without the authority of law or for extraneous considerations.
Suspension only deprives and debars the government servant from the discharge of his duties as such government official in the interest of administration and to prevent the abuse of his position but does not, in any way, amount to his having been removed from the service.
Removal from service has to be distinguished from suspension from service.
The suspended employee continues to remain bound by the Service Rules and under an obligation to follow them till he is removed from service.
A corresponding obligation is, therefore, cast upon the administration to treat the suspended employee in the service of the government and confer upon him such benefits to which he would have been entitled, had the order of suspension not been passed against him.
Revision of grades is a benefit conferred upon the state employees which cannot be denied to a particular employee only on the ground of his suspension.
Depriving the suspended employee of the salary benefits to which the other employees similarly situate dare entitled, may amount to punishment not permissible under the service rules applicable without holding a proper enquiry and may independently amount to punishment under those rules.
This court in BL Mengi v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, 1986(1) S.L.R.
315 held :  "To withhold the subsistence allowance of an employee by way of punishment without finalising the enquiry is synonymous to the withholding of pay by way of punishment, is ultra vires the rules relating to service of an employee.
To ask a man to work and then not to pay him any salary or wages savors of begar which is prohibited in Article 23 of the Constitution of India.
Thus in fact and circumstances of the present case in so as the arrears of the salary are concerned upto January 4, 1981, it is for the department to see and if after investigation it is found that the petitioner failed to work during that period the matter can be decided by the competent authority for which I do not find any ground to pass any order in this writ petition, but in so far as the payment of suspension allowance is concerned, I am convinced that the respondents have prejudged the issue and the mere pretext of impediments in the enquiry or failure of the petitioner, to report for duty is a simple camouflage for non-payment of suspension allowance to the petitioner, to which he is entitled as right.
For the said proposition reliance can be placed on the analogy of withholding the pay on a reported decision of Madhya Pradesh High Court reported in AIR 1960 M.P. 303...." 7.
The Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra v. Chander Bhan and others 1983(2) S.L.R.
493 held;  "If the civil servant under suspension, pending a departmental enquiry or criminal trial started against him is entitled to subsistence allowance at the normal rate which is a bare minimum required for the maintenance of the civil servant and his family, he should undoubtedly get it pending his appeal filed against conviction by trial court.
Whether he is enlarged in prison or released on bail on his conviction pending consideration of his appeal, his family requires the pay minimum by way of subsistence allowance."
A Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Gajraj Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(3) S.L.R.
292 held :  "A suspended employee was entitled to the payment of enhanced subsistence allowance under rules if the period of suspension exceeds 6 months."
8.
Karnataka High Court in Swarnamba BR v. Karnataka State Agriculture Marketing Board and another, 1988(2) S.L.R.
541, dealt with the argument as now raised by Mr. Sharma in this case for not paying the enhanced salary after dealing with the definition of pay, leave salary and the relevant rule held that allowing the leave salary to be calculated with reference to the pay drawn on the date of suspension runs counter to the scheme of the service rules applicable.
Right conferred under a rule framed in exercise of powers conferred under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, could not be annulled or taken away by means of a clarification issued by the State Government.
9.
The service rules under which the subsistence allowance is paid to a suspended employee are the rules framed under the powers conferred by the Constitution entitling the suspended employee to the payment of 50 per event of his salary during the period of suspension for the first 6 months and its enhancement as per those rules if the suspension exceeds the limits of 6 months.
SRO-370 does not, in any way, take away the right conferred upon a suspended employee to get allowance as per Article 108 of the Jammu and Kashmir CSR (Vol. 1).
There is, therefore, no justification for the respondents to deprive the petitioner of the benefit of revised the pay scale while making the payment of subsistence allowance as per directions of the court issued from time to time in this behalf.
10.
However, I see force in the arguments of Mr. Sharma that the petitioner was not entitled to the benefit of increment which according to the petitioner, notionally became due to him.
Payment of increment cannot be claimed by the petitioner as matter of right.
Increment is paid on account of the record of service of an employee and is the discretion of the authority in accordance with the rules applicable on appreciation of his work and conduct in the discharge of his official duties.
When an employee is suspended to perform the work, there is no possibility of appreciating his conduct entitling him to the grant of increment.
The petitioner was, therefore, rightly not paid any amount on the basis of his claim of increment during the period of suspension.
Right of the petitioner to claim the benefit of increment can be decided and disposed of if he is ultimately reinstated and the authorities in their discretion and under the rules hold him entitled to such payment.
11.
The conduct of the respondents in not making the payment of the subsistence allowance inclusion of the benefit of revised pay-scale is regrettable and condemnable.
Prime facie it amounts to violating the directions of the court issued from time to time.
The delay in making the payment of the subsistence allowance by itself is sufficient to hold the respondents a guilty for the contempt of the court and pass appropriate orders against them.
However, in view of the explanation submitted and the technicalities of interpretation of the rules involved, I have proposed to take a lenient view against the respondents by only warning them to be careful in future in compliance of the court directions.
It is impressed upon all the concerned higher officials, who are called upon to comply the court directions, that in case they feel any difficulty in the implementation of the court directions, they should immediately approach the concerned court for the clarification of the orders and obtain appropriate direction in the behalf and not to sit over the judgment with liberty to take the burden of deciding the controversial issue themselves which ultimately affect the intent and purpose of the court direction.
It appears that the respondents have bona fide withheld the amount payable to the petitioner on the basis of the revision of grades and delayed payment on account of his not marking the presence in the office to which he was attached, they are held entitled to be given a further chance for compliance of directions without formally holding them guilty of the contempt of the court order and awarding them sentence.
I have been persuaded to take this lenient view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lt. Col. KD Gupta v. Union of India, AIR 1989 SC 2071.
In that case the respondents were directed to make the payment of Rs. 4,00,000/- to the petitioner within two months but the respondents instead paid only Rs. 2,80,000/- within the time specified.
An amount of Rs. 1,20,000/- was withheld on the plea that under Chapter XVII of the Income-Tax Act and the respondents claiming their obligation to deduct income tax at source, the Supreme Court held :  "The intention of the payer in the facts of the case for withholding the amount cannot be held to be either male fide or is there any scope to impute that the respondents intended to violate the direction of this court."
The Supreme Court, however, in that case directed the payment of the withheld amount to the petitioner and dropped the proceedings against the respondents.
12.
This petition is, therefore, disposed of by giving directions to the respondents and to the all other concerned to make the payment of the arrears of subsistence allowance payable to the petitioner by giving him the benefit of revision of grades during the period of suspension but not only of increments, within a further extended period of one month positively.
The present proceedings initiated against the respondents are, however, dropped with a warning and caution as detailed hereinabove.
13.
Rules issued against the respondents shall stand discharged.
The petitioner is held entitled to the payment of costs assessed at Rs. 300/-.
Petition disposed of.