AS Nehra, J - The plaintiff-appellant has filed this appeal against the judgment and decree dated 2291987 passed by Additional District Judge, Sirsa.
2.
The Plaintiff-appellant filed a suit praying for a decree for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to work as a Physical Training Instructor under the defendants-respondents and the impugned order dated 791983 passed by defendant-respondent No. 2, terminating the services of the plaintiff-appellant, is illegal and liable to be set aside.
By way of consequential relief, a prayer has also been made by the plaintiff-appellant for restraining the defendents-respondents from implementing the impugned order.
3.
It is alleged in the plaint that the plaintiff-appellant joined the post of Physical Training Instructor under the defendants-respondents on 771983 through the Employment Exchange, Sirsa, and his work and conduct during this period was outstanding and unblemished.
Defendent-respondent No. 2 terminated the services of the plaintiff-appellant with effect from 791983.
The validity of the impugned order of termination has been assailed on the following grounds :-  a) That defendant-respondent No. 2 was the Incharge Headmaster and, as such, he had no authority to terminate the services of the plaintiff-appellant.
He was not even Drawing and Disbursing Officer and, as such, he could not terminate the services of the plaintiff-appellant.
He was not the Appointing Authority of the plaintiff-appellant and, therefore, the impugned order is illegal, being violative of Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India.
b) That the plaintiff-appellant took up his assignment on 771983 and, in this manner, he acquired the right over the post.
He, therefore, could not be ousted except in due process of law.
However, no opportunity of being heard was afforded to the plaintiff-appellant.
The impugned order is, thus, in violation of the principles of natural justice and also in contravention of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
c) That the impugned order is not a speaking one and is, therefore, liable to be struck down.
d) That the impugned order has been passed upon the direction of the District Employment Officer, Sirsa, and, in this manner, defendant-respondent No. 2 did not independently apply his own mind at the time of passing the same.
Accordingly, it is stated by the plaintiff-appellant that the impugned order of termination dated 791983 is null and void and is liable to be set aside.
On these premises, this suit was brought with a prayer for granting exemption from serving notice under section 80, Code of Civil Procedure, keeping in view the urgency of the relief claimed.
4.
The defendant-respondents have stated in their written statement that the plaintiff-appellant had no locus standi to file this suit; that the plaintiff-appellant has.
no cause of action against the defendants; that the suit is not maintainable in its present form; that the suit is bad for want of notice under section 80, Code of Civil Procedure; and that the suit is bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of parties.
5.
On merits, it is admitted by the defendant-respondents that the plaintiff-appellant was appointed as a Physical Training Instructor on six months' basis and that he joined his service on 771983.
However, it was submitted by the defndants-respondents that, subsequently, upon a complaint, it was found during an enquiry that the plaintiff-appellant had not appeared on 571983 and had rather appeared on the next day of the interview and was appointed by the Headmaster with a mala fide intention; that, moreover, the plaintiff-appellant took training in Physical Education from the Directorate of Sports and Youth Services, Government of Maharashtra, which is not recognized in the State of Haryana as per Article No. 154 of the Haryana Education Code and this is also evident from Memo No. 15/55-83-Establishment- 5(7) dated 11101983 of the Director of School Education, Haryana; that in this manner the plaintiff-appellant was not eligible for appointment as P.T.I.
in the State of Haryana and, accordingly, the services of the plaintiff-appellant were terminated by the Incharge Headmaster on 791983; that the plaintiff-appellant, however, did not note the impugned order dated 791983; and that his relieving order was issued on 791983 and, as per order book of the School, the plaintiff-appellant refused to note it and he left the school with the copy of the relieving report.
It, therefore, submitted by the defendants-respondents that the impugned order of termination dated 791983 is perfectly legal and in accordance with law.
However, it is admitted that defendant-respondent No. 2 was the Incharge Headmaster of the School; that he was neither the Drawing nor the Disbursing Officer; and that he was also not the Appointing Authority of the plaintiff-appellant.
It was, however, submitted by the defendants-respondents that the services of the plaintiff-appellant were terminated by the impugned order on the written advice of the Controlling Authority, i.e. the District Education Officer, Sirsa, which was passed upon the enquiry held on 8.7.1983; that the services of the plaintiff-appellant were purely on temporary basis and the same could be terminated at any time and without any notice; that the appointment of the plaintiff-appellant was not according to the rules and procedure adopted by the Department; and that, accordingly, the suit is liable to be dismissed with special costs.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the order dated 791983 is liable to be set aside, as mentioned in the plaint, and the plaintiff is entitled to work as P.T.I. ?
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
3.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi and cause of action to file the present suit ?
4.
Whether the suit is bad for want of notice under section 80, CPC ?
5.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
6.
Relief.
The trial Court in paragraphs 15 and 16 of its judgment dated 7111986 held as under  "15.
Headmaster, Government High School, Talwara Khurd, was the Appointing Authority of the plaintiff as per the admitted case of the parties and as is clear from letter of appointment Exhibit D-2.
The impugned order was, however, passed by defendant No. 2 who was not the Headmaster, Government High School, Talwara Khurd, at that time and was rather Incharge Headmaster.
It is well settled that only the Appointing authority or the higher authority can terminate the services of an employee.
Even if defendant No. 2 terminated the services of the plaintiff at the instance of the DEO, then also the fact remains that termination could not be ordered by a person below the rank of Headmaster, Government High School, Talwara Khurd.
Defendant No. 2 Dharam Pal Godara was a Social Studies Master at the relevant time.
He was, thus, not competent to terminate the services of the plaintiff.
16.
Secondly, the impugned order on the face of it, is penal.
It is written therein that services of the plaintiff were being terminated as his appointment was illegal.
In these circumstances, a regular full-fledged enquiry into this matter was essential.
Even the elementary principles of natural justice required that a full-fledged enquiry was essential before passing this penal order as contemplated under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
7.
The suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant was decreed by the trial Court on 7111986.
The defendants-respondents filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Sirsa, and challenged only the finding of the trial Court on issue No. 1.
They assailed the approach of the trial Court on the plea that no opportunity of hearing whatsoever was required to be afforded to the plaintiff-appellant, as, from the very beginning, his appointment was found to be invalid.
The plea, in the alternative, was that the six months' period for which the appointment of the plaintiff-appellant had been made by the then Headmaster was over and the plaintiff-appellant cannot be directed to be retained in service after that period.
The lower appellate Court held that the appointment of the plaintiff-appellant was invalid from its very inception.
Exhibit D-1 is the copy of the enquiry report.
The enquiry was held by the Deputy District Education Officer.
He recorded a finding that the then Headmaster had illegally conducted the interview at his house without constituting the required Selection Committee and further he had done so to the exclusion of one Nijan Singh, another candidate for that post and that there is no allegation on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant that the said Deputy District Education Officer was inimically disposed towards him.
The Lower appellate Court held that the appointment of the plaintiff-appellant was invalid and that he was thus not entitled to any opportunity of hearing or regular enquiry before his services were terminated.
The finding of the trial Court on issue No. 1 was reserved and it was held that the impugned order dated 791983 is not liable to be set aside.
The appeal filed by the defendants-respondents was allowed by the Additional District Judge, Sirsa, and the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant was dismissed.
8.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has argued that the finding of the trial Court in paragraph 15 of its judgment has not been set aside by the lower appellate Court.
This finding of the trial Court has not been even assailed by the defendants-respondents.
The finding of the trial Court in paragraph 15 of its judgment is that the Headmaster was the Appointing Authority of the plaintiff-appellant and, as per the admitted case of the parties and as is clear from the letter of appointment (Exhibit D-2), the impugned order of termination was, however, passed by defendant-respondent No. 2 who was not the Headmaster at that time and was rather the Incharge Headmaster.
It is well settled that only the Appointing Authority or the higher authority can terminate the services of an employee.
Even if defendant-respondent No. 2 terminated the services of the plaintiff-appellant at the instance of the District Education Officer, then also the fact remains that the termination could not be ordered by a person below the rank of Headmaster.
Defendant-respondent No. 2 Dharam Pal Godara was a Social Studies Master at the relevant time.
He was thus not competent to terminate the services of the plaintiff-appellant.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has placed reliance upon the judgments reported as Wing Commander SK Singh v. Lt.
Governor, UT Delhi, and others, 1987(1) S.L.R.
98, and Krishna Kumar v. The Divisional Assistant Electrical Engineer, Central Railway and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1912, which are fully applicable to be facts of the present case.
Since defendent-respondent No. 2 was not the Headmaster, therefore, he was not competent to terminate the services of the plaintiff-appellant.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has further argued that the plaintiff-appellant was appointed by the Headmaster who has the power to appoint the plaintiff-appellant and, therefore, he was rightly appointed.
9.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has challenged the finding of the lower appellate Court on issue No. 1 that no enquiry was required as the appointment of the plaintiff-appellant was wrong from the very inception on the ground that the impugned order dated 791983, passed by defendant-respondent No. 2, terminating the services of the plaintiff-appellant, is punitive and violative of the principles of natural justice.
It deserves to be observed here that the enquiry was held behind the back of the plaintiff-appellant.
It was further argued by the learned counsel that the initial selection of the plaintiff-appellant was perfectly legal and justified.
Defendant-respondent No. 2 had no authority to pass the impugned order of termination dated 791983.
Vijay Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1986(3) SLR 575, has been relied upon by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant, which is fully applicable to the facts of the present case.
Learned Counsel for the defendants-respondents has contended that the services of the plaintiff-appellant were purely temporary inasmuch as he was appointed only for a period of six months.
This plea does not make any difference.
Even the services of a purely temporary employee or, for that purpose, even the services of an ad hoc employee cannot be terminated by passing a penal order without holding a regular enquiry.
In Jarnail Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1626, the services of the petitioners were terminated on the ground that the posts were no longer required.
The petitioners were ad hoc employees.
Even, in these circumstances, the Supreme Court lifted the veil and determined the true character of the termination order as penal and set aside the same.
The enquiry report Exhibit D-1 cannot be said to be a regular enquiry because the plaintiff-appellant was not associated during this enquiry.
The defendants-respondents have also taken the stand that the plaintiff-appellant had received the training in Physical Education from the Directorate of Sports and Youth Services, Government of Maharashtra, in March and April, 1980, which is not recognised in the State of Haryana as per Article No. 154 of the Haryana Education Code.
Even this ground for terminating the services of the plaintiff-appellant is not valid, as Exhibit D-6 is a letter dated 2171984 from the Directorate of School Education, Haryana, in which it is written that the ad hoc teachers, whose services were terminated on the basis of some instructions contained in the letter dated 3111983 and who have done training as mentioned in the annexed list, were to be reappointed.
In the attached Annexure (Exhibit D-7), the training course from the Directorate of Sports and Youth Services, Poona (Maharashtra) has been recognized.
Accordingly, it is held that the impugned order dated 791983, terminating the services of the plaintiff-appellant, is wholly illegal and the same is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
The finding of the lower appellate Court on issue No. 1 is reversed and the same is decided in favour of the plaintiff- appellant and against the defendants-respondents.
10.
In view of the above-mentioned discussion, the appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant is accepted, the judgment and decree dated 2291987 passed by the Additional District Judge, Sirsa, is set aside and the judgment and decree dated 7111986 passed by the trial Court is restored.
No costs.
Appeal accepted.