GR Majithia, J - In this petition the only prayer made is that the respondents be directed to comply with the directions made in Civil Writ Petition No. 9558 of 1988, decided on April 5, 1989.
2.
Reference to the relevant facts is necessary to appreciate the question of law raised in the petition.
The petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in Philosophy in Government College for Women, Amritsar, on ad hoc basis on November 26, 1986.
She apprehended that her services will be terminated.
She moved Civil Writ Petition No. 8676 of 1987 in this Court and the following order was passed;  "Same order as in CW No. 8622 of 1987".
In Civil Writ Petition No. 8622 of 1987, the following order was passed;  "Notice of motion for 411988.
To be heard with CWP No. 8600 of 1987.
Termination of the petitioner's services stayed till further orders."
Despite the order dated November 20, 1987, passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 8676 of 1987, the petitioner's services were terminated.
The petitioner moved COCP No. 21 of 1988 in this Court and the learned Single Judge on September 6, 1988, made the following order :  "Undoubtedly, the order of termination of services of the petitioner was passed after the order of the Division Bench of this Court restraining the respondents from terminating the services.
Prima facie case of contempt is made out against the Director Public Instructions (Colleges), respondent No. 2.
The respondent is directed to withdraw the order of termination of services of the petitioner forthwith and positively within a week from today.
Notice of motion issued to the Principle respondent No. 1 is discharged.
Rule against respondent No. 2 for 6.10.1988."
The order was complied with and the petitioner was reappointed as Lecturer in Philosophy in Government College for Women, Amritsar.
Waryam Singh was selected as a Lecturer in Philosophy by Punjab Service Commission.
His name was recommended for appointment as Lecturer in Philosophy.
He moved Civil Writ Petition No. 9858 of 1988 in this Court for quashing the order of reinstatement in service passed by the respondents pursuant to the directions given in COCP No. 21 of 1988.
The Writ Petition was disposed of by the learned Single Judge of this Court on April 5, 1989, with the following observations :  "Since the petitioner was recruited through Public Service Commission on regular basis, he has to take preference over ad hoc employees appointed during this period.
The impugned order Annexure P-2, though purported to have been passed in compliance with the orders of the High Court in the contempt matter, was required to be passed in accordance with the interim order dated January 13, 1988, passed in the writ petition, as reproduced above.
There was no direction given in the writ petition to disturb the regular appointment like that of the petitioner to accommodate ad hoc employee.
With the result, this writ petition is allowed with costs.
Counsel fee Rs. 1000/-.
The impugned order Annexure P-2 terminating the service of Wayram Singh petitioner is quashed, with the direction to reinstate him with consequential service benefits within two months from today.
Since the learned counsel for respondent No. 4 does not desire any directions to be given regarding posting of respondent No. 4 in accordance with the interim orders of the High Courts passed in her writ petition or in the contempt matter, the matter is left over to the State Government to pass appropriate orders to adjust her."
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the High Court while disposing of Civil Writ Petition No. 9858 of 1988 specifically directed that the matter is left to the State Government for passing appropriate order in view of the directions given in the contempt petition and Civil Writ Petition.
Despite the directions given by the learned Judge, no action has been taken by the State Government.
The matter was taken to the apex Court also and the reference of the order passed by the apex Court is made in Civil Writ Petition No. 8676 of 1987 and it reads thus :  "Heard counsel for both the sides.
It appears that a similar matter has been disposed of by this Court on August 24, 1987 in Writ Petition No. 317 of 1987 where this Court directed :- "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to continue the petitioners in service until persons regularly selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission are appointed to the posts presently held by the petitioners and point these posts.
Those petitioners who (have) been appointed to posts in leave vacancies will continue in these posts until the employees who have produced on leave return and join these posts."
We dispose of this petition by adopting that order subject to one clarification that the State of Punjab would not be permitted to terminate the services of any of the petitioners by transferring a regular recruit from another institution to any institution where any of the petitioners may be serving.
Termination would be valid only when direct recruits through the Public Service Commission are recruited to such posts."
4.
It could not be disputed that there are still vacancies of Lecturers in Philosophy which have not been filled.
The petitioner could be adjusted against any of those vacancies, yet the respondents despite the observation made in Civil Writ Petition No. 9858 of 1988, decided on April 5, 1989, have not so far reinstated the petitioner.
The petitioner has not been dealt with fairly.
The respondent has not implemented the directions given by the apex Court referred to above.
No one has vested right to a post but if a right has been safeguarded under the orders of the Court, the same cannot be put at naught on unjust grounds.
This case reveals the callous attitude of the respondents.
Under the circumstances, I direct that the petitioner will be reinstated as a lecturer in Philosophy in Government College for Women, Amritsar, even if an additional post has to be created, within one month from the date of receipt of this order.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.