KP Bhandari, J - This is second appeal against the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, Faridkot.
The case was heard after notice of motion in great detail.
This regular second appeal is admitted.
2.
Now I proceed to decide the regular second appeal on merits.
3.
The admitted facts of the case are that the appellant was appointed as Clerk in the office of the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, Kotkapura on 30111972.
Thereafter his services were regularised.
The appellant applied for leave for three months on 711974.
However, he was granted only 17 days leave.
As the appellant was unable to join his duty, he continued applying for leave.
During his absence on leave, a case under Sections 409, 471 and 467 of Indian Penal Code was registered against him at Police Station Kotwali, Faridkot, vide FIR No. 135 dated 27121976, the appellant reported on duty on 1.1.1977 in the office of the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, Moga for joining his duty but he was not allowed to resume duty due to registration of a criminal case against him.
The appellant was finally acquitted by the High Court on 121985.
After his acquittal, the appellant again approached the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, Moga on 1231985 but his joining report was not accepted.
On 13.3.1985 the plaintiff-appellant approached the Divisional Soil Conservation Officer, Muktsar.
He too did not allow him to join duty.
On 1431985, the plaintiff-appellant sent an application through registered post to the Chief Conservator of Soil, Punjab but to no effect.
The department in fact did not allow him to join duty because it terminated his services, because he absented himself from duty, on 1791974.
Aggrieved against the order of termination of his services dated 1791974 terminating his services on the ground of absence from duty, the appellant filed a civil suit for declaration that the impugned order of termination was an action by way of punishment.
As the order was passed on account of absence from duty due to overstaying leave and as such no such order could be passed unless the plaintiff was given reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action as provided under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
The Sub Judge, Faridkot, vide his judgment and decree dated 22121987 decreed the suit of the plaintiff thereby declaring that the order dated 1791974 is void and the plaintiff continued to be in service as Clerk and is entitled to all consequential reliefs.
One of the issues raised in the suit was Issue No. 3 which related to the question of limitation.
The trial Court came to the conclusion that the order of dismissal from service was void and, therefore, such an order should be ignored and it was not necessary to get it set aside.
The State of Punjab aggrieved against the order of the Sub Judge, Faridkot, preferred an appeal to the court of Additional District Judge, Faridkot, who vide order dated 6.6.1989 accepted the appeal and reversed the judgment and decree of the trial Court solely on the ground that suit of the plaintiff was barred by limitation.
The learned Additional District Judge did not disagree with the findings of the trial Court on Issue No. 1 that the impugned order passed in this case was on the ground of absence from duty and the same was passed without holding any enquiry against the plaintiff.
4.
It is well settled that if the Government wants to terminate the services of a Government servant on the ground of absence from duty, it is obligatory on the part of the authority concerned to hold an enquiry against the Government servant according to the procedure laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Admittedly, in this case no enquiry was held and the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution were not observed before terminating the services of the plaintiff-appellant.
Once provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution are not complied with the resultant order has to be void in the eye of law.
This proposition of law is fully supported by the authoritative pronouncement in High Commissioner v. IM Lal, AIR 1948 Privy Council 101.
The decision of the Privy Council was followed by the Supreme Court in Khem Chand's case in AIR 1958 Supreme Court 300.
Thus, there can be no doubt in that if the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution are not observed, the order of termination of services would be wholly void.
5.
The learned Additional District judge was thus not right in making distinction that an order which is passed without authority of law is void in the eye of law.
However, an order which is contrary to the mandatory provision of law is not void in the eye of law.
This approach of the learned Additional District Judge is wholly erroneous as an order passed by the authority may be void if it has no power to pass such an order.
Likewise, an order which he passed contrary to the mandatory provision of law is also void.
There is no difference in the eye of law in the character of the order passed in both the cases.
In both the cases, the resultant order would be void.
The distinction made by the Additional District Judge is wholly untenable in the eye of law in view of authoritative pronouncement of the Privy Council in IM Lal's case (supra).
Judgment of Privy Council was followed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Khem Chand's case (supra).
I, therefore, set aside the findings of the learned Additional District Judge in so far as he holds that the impugned order is not void.
6.
Once the offer of terminating of services is contrary to the mandatory provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution, the same would be void in the eye of law.
It has been laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Syed Qamarali, 1967 SLR 228 SC that if an order of dismissal or removal is contrary to the mandatory provisions of police rules, the said order is void.
It is not necessary to get it set aside.
Such an order should be ignored.
It is not necessary to bring a suit for declaration for setting aside the order within a period of three years.
In Mohinder Singh ex-Patwari v. Punjab State, Hon'ble Chinnappa Reddy, J held that an order of termination of services can be challenged at any time.
The same view has been taken in Amrik Singh Constable v. State of Punjab in 1980(2) SLR 616.
In Regular Second Appeal No. 1613 of 1963 (Man Singh v. State of Punjab) decided on 14121973, Hon'ble SP Goyal, J (as his Lordship then was) has taken the same view.
Thus, I find that the finding of the learned Additional District Judge treating the suit to be barred by limitation is contrary to the law laid down by this Court.
7.
For the reasons aforesaid, the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge is set aside.
It is not necessary to remand this case for decision afresh because the facts of the case are admitted.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in great detail on the merits of this case and am of the considered view that in the interest of justice, the appeal should be decided on merits.
As in the present case, the order of termination of services of the appellant was based on the ground of absence from duty and no enquiry was held as laid down by Article 311(2) of the Constitution, therefore, the impugned order of termination of services is void and the appellant is entitled to be reinstated.
At the time of hearing of the appeal, I put it to the counsel for the appellant that the appellant has been admittedly absent from duty deliberately for a considerable period and as such his services were terminated on account of his own fault.
It has also come on record that he has gone abroad.
Therefore, counsel for the appellant agreed that the appellant may be reinstated and he will not claim back wages.
However, his past period of service will be counted towards fixation of pay, seniority and pension etc. Nachhattar Singh appellant made a statement to this effect in this Court on February 2, 1990.
8.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this appeal is accepted.
The judgment and decree of the learned Additional District Judge is set aside and a declaration is granted that the impugned order of termination of services of the appellant is illegal, ultra vires and void and the appellant continues to be in service of the State.
It is directed that the entire period of service of the appellant will be counted towards fixation of his pay in the revised scale of pay, seniority and grant of pension.
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, the appellant will not, however, be entitled to any arrears of pay.
The parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Orders accordingly.