TS Doabia, J - In terms of Rule 13(A) of the Army Rules a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
This was because the Central Government formed an opinion that the petitioner had failed to qualify the departmental examination.
This notice was issued on 3111996.
This resulted in further order being passed.
This was on 2981996.
Show cause notice as also the final order passed is being reproduced below :  Show Cause Notice  1.
Army Rule 13A and Special Army Instruction (SAI) 1985 as amended provided that a permanent commissioned officer who does not pass Promotion Examination Part B within stipulated period will be issued a Show cause Notice for termination of service on completion of 11 years reckonable service.
2.
Lt. M Murugam (44472) Sigs has failed to qualify on Promotion Examination Part B within the stipulated period.
3.
In accordance with provisions of Army Rule 13A show cause notice is required to be served on this officer with a view to retire him from the service.
In order to save time this notice as being served directly to the officer through his unit.
A copy of the show cause Notice is enclosed for your record.
The unit of the officer is also being instructed to send one copy of the reply of the officer to the show cause Notice directly to this HO for preliminary examination of his case.
4.
A copy of the officer's reply is however required to be processed through normal staff channels as per this HQ letter No. 04588/MS : Policy dated 09 Oct 90 to enable various officers in the chain of Command to endorse their remarks on his reply.
You are requested to issue suitable instructions to the formations/unit concerned to obtain reply of the officer within 15 days of serving of the show Cause Notice and processing the same so as to this HQ within 90 days of the receipt of Show Cause Notice by the officer.
5.
Please acknowledge."
Final Order  "1.
Reference your letter No. 10011/29/9/MS dated 14 Jun 96.
2.
A Central Govt order has been issued calling upon IC 44472 LT M Murugan, Sigs to apply for retirement and in the event of his refusal to do so to retire him compulsorily from the service.
A copy of the Govt of India Ministry of Defence order No. 12(12)/96/D(MS) dated 16 Aug 96 is being forwarded to his present unit for delivery to the officer in original.
A copy thereof is enclosed for your record.
3.
IC 44472 Lt. M. Murgugan Sigs will be called upon to submit a simple application for retirement from service (quoting Govt order) within 15 days of the receipt of this Central Govt order.
One advance copy of the officer's reply be forwarded to this HQ (MS BC) direct and the other copy through staff channel.
If no reply is received from the officer within the prescribed limit of 15 days the fact may be intimated to this HQ by Signal.
4.
It shall be impressed upon the officer that should he fail to submit his application for retirement from service within the stipulated period of 15 days he will be compulsorily retired from service.
5.
The officer will be struck off strength from service within one month of issue of the retirement orders from this HQ."
2.
Petitioner submits that after issuance of notice he was permitted to take part in the examination.
He was successful.
It is submitted that this aspect of the matter was required to be taken note of.
What is urged is that petitioner having passed examination though after issuance of notice under Rule 13(A) of the Army Rule is entitled to reap the benefit of result of this examination also.
It is not in dispute that examination as indicated in Rule 13(A) of the Army Rules is required to be passed.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioner was unable to pass this examination within the prescribed period.
All that is urged is that as the petitioner was permitted to appear in the examination and as he was successful he be permitted to reap the fruits of this result.
In addition to this it is submitted that the petitioner had taken part in operation Pawan in Shri Lanka.
He submits that he is entitled to one extra compensatory chance also.
Thus what is submitted is that :  (i) petitioner has passed examination after the issuance of Rule 13(A) of the Army Rules.
(ii) petitioner having passed examination is entitled to benefit of this fact also.
(iii) petitioner is entitled to compensatory chance.
3.
Rule 13(A) of the Army Rules and also the Army Instructions which requires passing of promotion examination are being reproduced below :  "13-A Termination of service of an officer by the Central Government on his failure to qualify at an examination or course.
(1) When an officer does not appear at or having appeared fails to qualify at the retention examination or promotion examination or any other basic course or examination within the time or extended time specified in respect of that examination or course, the Chief of the Army Staff shall call upon the officer to show cause why he should not be compulsorily retired or removed from the service.
(2) In the event of the explanation being considered by the Chief of the Army Staff to be un-satisfactory the matter shall be submitted to the Central Government for orders together with the officer's explanation and the recommendation of the Chief of the Army Staff as to whether the officer should be :  a) called upon to retire ; or  b) called upon to resign  (3) The Central Government after considering the explanation if any of the officer and the recommendation of the Chief of the Army Staff may call upon the officer to retire or resign and on his refusing to do so the officer may be compulsorily retired or removed from the service on pension or gratuity if any admissible to him."
(a) Promotion Examination Part A or b  (i) Show Cause Notice : Show cause notice will be served to officers who fail to qualify in these examinations on completion of 11 years reckonable service for officers commissioned before 31 July 84 and 9 years reckonable service in case of officers commissioned on or after 31 July 84  (ii) Termination of service: Services of all officers who fail to qualify in the above examination on completion of 13 years reckonable service for officers commissioned before 31 July 84 and 11 years reckonable service in case of officers commissioned on or after 31 July 84 will be terminated as per provisions contained in Army Rule 13-A"  4.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties I am of the opinion that the petitioner should have passed examination in terms of Rule 13-A of the Army Rule.
He having not done so would not be entitled to the benefit of result of the examination in which he took part after issuance of notice under Rule 13-A of the Army Rule.
Again so far as taking part in the operation Pawan is concerned minimum period for which an army officer should have stayed in Sri Lanka is six months.
Petitioner was there only for a period of 90 days and this period was six months not prior to holding of examination.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by the Letters Patent Bench in Letters Patent Appeal (S) No. 265/2000 decided on 2862000.
Circular in question was noticed and was interpreted.
What is said by the Division Bench is reproduced below :  "The appellant was physically present in India.
He took part in the promotional course examination.
Having taken part in the examination, he cannot factually contend that he was not given a compensatory chance.
Even otherwise he was physically present in India and therefore, the interpretation which has been placed on the first part to paragraph 2 has been rightly placed by the learned Single Judge.
So far as the contention based on second part of the circular on which much emphasis has been laid and which portion reads as "or should have physically served at any time at these places during the last six months prior to the examination is concerned even on this count the appellant is on slippery grounds.
He has not served for six months in operation Pawan.
This concession would be available only to those officers who were so serving for six months and were physically absent from India.
This is the only interpretation which can be placed on the circular in question.
We are accordingly of the view that the appellant is not entitled to any relief because  (i) the appellant was physically present in India on the date when the examination was conducted.
(ii) the appellant was on Operation Pawan in Sri Lanka for a period which is less than six months.
(iii) the appellant availed of the chances but was un-successful."
5.
The aforementioned observation would apply to this aspect of the matter and therefore this plea of the petitioner cannot be accepted.
Other submission of the petitioner is that he having taken part in the process of examination was entitled to a notice before his examination could be cancelled.
He is placing reliance on Division bench judgment of this Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case reported as Govt. of India v. Captain HR Singha, 1995(2) SCT 313.
Judgment of the learned Single Judge which was subject matter of an appeal at the instance of Government of India which decision has been noticed above has also been placed on the record.
This is marked as C/1.
Other decisions on which reliance is being placed is one reported as Shri Krishan v Kurukshetra University, AIR 1976 SC 376.
A decision of the Delhi High Court reported as University of Delhi v. Ashok Kumar Chopra, AIR 1968 Delhi 131 is also pressed in service.
It is accordingly urged that if petitioner's result was to be declared null and void then he should have been issued a show cause notice and should have been heard.
6.
Stand taken by the respondents is that petitioner gave false certificate and it was no this basis he was permitted to take part in the examination.
As fraudulent representation was made by the petitioner, therefore, he cannot seek parity with decision which has been given by the Andhra Pradesh High Court and other decisions relied upon by the petitioner.
So far as the decision given in Shri Krishan v Kurukshetra University quoted above and the decision of Delhi High Court quoted above are concerned these dealt with the examination conducted by the University.
As such ratio of these judgment would not be attracted to the fact of this case.
So far as judgment given by the Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court quoted above is concerned, this has laid down the proposition that before passing an order in terms of Rule 13-A of the Army Rule, opportunity of hearing should have been given.
At the same time it has been observed that principle of natural justice need not be complied with if there are exceptional circumstances.
7.
In the present case stand of the Union of India is that the petitioner gave false information and thereby was able to sit in the examination.
The Union of India has explained the legal and factual position.
If this be the position and if on the face of it petitioner was not eligible to take part in the examination then question of giving an opportunity would be mere empty formality.
Supreme Court of India in case reported as AIR 1994 SC 1074 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) Managing Director ECIL v. B Karunakar has observed that principles of natural justice are not to be observed in each and every case.
Before recording a finding that on account of non-observance of the principle of natural justice it has to be shown that some prejudice has been caused.
What was said is quoted below :  "The theory of reasonable opportunity and the principles of natural justice have been evolved to uphold the rule of law and to assist the individual to vindicate his just rights.
They are not incantations to be invoked nor rites to be performed on all and sundry occasions.
Whether in fact prejudice has been caused to the employee or not on account of the denial to him of the report has to be considered on the facts and circumstances of each case."
The petitioner in this case was entitled to sit in the examination when Rule 13-A of the Army Rules was taken note of.
As such of hearing or compliance of principles of natural justice would not improve his position.
This petition is as such found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.