GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is being employed as seasonal worker (Sprayman/Swasth Sahayak) since 1982 has been compelled to file this writ petition on account of wholly arbitaray and unreasonable action of the respondents to deny re-employment to him.
2.
In compliance of the direction given by the High Court while deciding C.W.P.
No. 11015 of 1991, the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab prepared and circulated a scheme on 9121991 for employment/re-employment of seasonal staff.
One of the features of this scheme is that the seniority of the seasonal worker in a particular category shall be the criteria for re- employment and the Civil Surgeons are required to prepare seniority list of Fieldmean (Spraymen/Supervisors) with 1988 as the base year.
3.
In 1996, the respondent No. 2 employed junior persons ignoring the seniority of the petitioner on the ground that he has become over-age.
This was challenged by him in C.W.P.
No. 9496 of 1996, which was allowed by the High Court on 20111996 with a direction to the respondent No. 2 to consider the petitioner's case for recruitment as a seasonal worker as per his seniority.
4.
For the year 1997, the name of the petitioner was recommended by the employment exchange for appointment as seasonal worker as per his seniority, but the respondent No. 2 again ignored his claim.
He, therefore, served a notice of demand for justice through his counsel with the hope that the respondents would rectify their mistake.
This, however, failed to yield any result and this is the precise reason why the petitioner has again invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court.
5.
A look at the contents of paragraph 10 of the writ petition and the reply thereof shows that Shri Malook Singh son of Shri Karnail Singh and Shri Samarjit Singh son of Shri Fauja Singh, who are admittedly junior to the petitioner in the seniority list of the seasonal staff, have been employed during the season of 1997 and in this mannar, the petitioner's right of equality has been violated.
6.
The petitioner has accused the respondents of having acted in violation of the conditions incorporated in the scheme and also in violation of the Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
7.
In the reply, the respondents have admitted that the petitioner has worked as a seasonal worker since the year 1982.
According to them, the petitioner has gained 16 months, 17 days experience as per the calculation made in terms of the scheme.
In paragraph 10 of the reply, the respondents have admitted that Shri Malook Singh son of Shri Karnail Singh and Shri Samarjit Singh son of Fauja Singh have been employed.
However, they have justified the appointment of junior persons by stating that the petitioner belongs to reserved category of Scheduled Caste whereas the two persons named by him belong to the general category.
8.
In order to decide whether the petitioner has a right to be employed as a seasonal worker in accordance with the scheme framed by the respondents in compliance of the direction given by the High Court, it will be useful to take notice of the paragraphs No. 1, 2, 3 of the Scheme Annexure P1.
The same read as under :-  "1.
The seasonal staff i.e. Superior Field Workers and Field Workers will be recruited through Employment Exchange.
Due consideration will be given to the experience in N.M.E.P.
Spary Work/Seniority, taking 1988 as the base year and the work and conduct of the workers if they have already served.
2.
Seniority list of Superior Field Worker/Field Workers of Spray Operation at each District Headquarter will be prepared by the Civil Surgeon concerned.
Their seniority will be determined on the basis of date of their initial appointment.
Their length of service will be counted in the manner as if the workers even have been employed for a part of the year and have worked every year for the said period without break.
The seniority of workers will be determined by adding up the number of months for which they have already served as Field Workers in short term fixed period seasonal Spray Operations.
The inter-se seniority of those workers who were initially appointed on the same date would be according to the age.
The baseline for determining the seniority will be the year 1988.
3.
The reservation policy set by the Punjab Government from time to time for various categories will be followed strictly as per guidelines of the Punjab Government."
9.
While deciding C.W.P.
No. 9496 of 1996 Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab and others on 20111996 along with two other petitions, the Division Bench rejected the stand taken by the respondents that the petitioner had crossed the upper age limit and observed :-  "The only ground on which the petitioners are not being considered for appointment as seasonal staff is that they have crossed the upper age limit prescribed by the government for direct recruitment in the State Services.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 have relied upon the circular dated 2251996 whereas respondent No. 3 has relied on the circular dated 1911989.
A careful reading of these circulars shows that the government has prescribed the upper age limit for direct recruitment to the State Services.
At the same time, it has been given certain relaxation in age of recruitment to the technical and non-technical posts.
The learned Deputy Advocate General could not show as to how the appointment on seasonal basis can be equated with the direct recruitment to the State Services.
In its very nature, the appointment of seasonal staff is contingent upon the availability of the work.
These appointments are made for specific duration.
Therefore, appointment of seasonal staff cannot be termed as an appointment by way of direct recruitment in the State Services.
Thus, the instructions contained in the circulars dated 1911989 and 2251996 cannot be applied for the purpose of making appointment of seasonal staff.
Thus, we have no hesitation to hold that the respondents have denied consideration to the petitioners for appointment as seasonal staff on a wholly irrelevant consideration.
Even otherwise, we are of the opinion that the decision of the respondents is wholly arbitrary and capricious.
The petitioners are serving the respondents as seasonal workers for more than a decade and half.
Till this time, no objection has been raised to their eligibility on the ground that they have crossed upper age limit.
It is, therefore, wholly unjustified on the part of the petitioners on the ground that they did not fulfil the age qualification prescribed for direct recruitment.
For the reasons stated above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the cases of the petitioners for recruitment as seasonal staff strictly in accordance with their seniority.
If the petitioners are otherwise entitled to be recruited as seasonal staff, then they should be so recruited irrespective of their age."
10.
Indeed, it is unfortunate that in spite of the direction given by the High Court, the respondents have failed to employ the petitioner as a seasonal worker.
This time they have devised a new ground to defeat the petitioner's right to be employed as a seasonal worker.
The plea of the respondents that the persons junior to the petitioner have been employed because they belong to general category is nothing but a manifestation of the sick mentality of the competent authority against a member of the Scheduled Caste.
It is impossible to accept the respondents' plea that the petitioner has been superseded merely because he belongs to Scheduled Caste and the junior persons, namely, Shri Malook Singh and Shri Samarjit Singh belong to general category.
In our opinion, the action of the respondent No. 2 cannot be justified on any rational ground.
In Indira Sawhney v. Union of India, JT 1992(6) SC 273 : 1997(2) SCT 177(SC) and Jaskaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab, 1995(1) SLR 641 : 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H) (DB), it has been held that a meritorious candidate of reserved category is entitled to be appointed against the general vacancy and his right cannot be confined to the reserved vacancies.
This principle has to be followed while making appointment of seasonal worker.
In our opinion, the action of the respondent No. 2 is clearly against the constitutional ethics of equality and as it has already caused serious injustice to the petitioner, a direction deserves to be given to the said respondent to employ the petitioner forthwith.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed with costs of Rs. 2000/-.
The respondent No. 2 is directed to give seasonal appointment to the petitioner from tomorrow.
We make it clear that the amount of costs shall be recoverable from the official, who has ignored the direction given by the Court on flimsy ground and superseded the petitioner in complete disregard of the scheme framed by the government.