Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This Writ Petition has been filed by Col. BK Gawari under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 30121995, a copy of which is Annexure P-4, with the Writ Petition, whereby by invoking the provisions of Section 123 of the Army Act, the order of attachment of petitioner has been passed.
2.
The case of petitioner, in brief, is that he had superannuated on 31121995.
He was served with order dated 30121995, whereby by invoking the provisions of Section 123 of the Army Act, his attachment has been ordered.
3.
The counsel for the petitioner has invited this Court's attention to Section 123(1) of the Army Act which reads as under:-  ``123.
Liability of offender who ceases to be subject to Act - (1) Where an offence under this Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he may be taken into and kept in military custody and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to be so subject.''
4.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Section 123 of the Army Act can be invoked if a person is subject to the Act and once he ceases to be so, these provisions cannot be invoked subsequently.
The counsel further contends that there is no allegation or finding in the impugned order that the petitioner has committed any offence under the Army Act and as such invoking the provisions of Section 123 is void, illegal and without jurisdiction.
It is further contended that it was really unbecoming on the part of the Army Authorities that while the petitioner had packed his luggage, vacated the residential house allotted to him and his family was in transit on the eve of his retirement, the impugned order was served upon him and he was relegated to the military custody without even informing his family members.
One Col. PS Ghuman was also attached along with the petitioner on account of proceedings initiated against him.
On the basis of apprehension, said Col. Ghuman filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir challenging the action of the Army Authorities of invoking provisions of Section 123(1) of the Act.
The High Court of Jammu and Kashmir had ordered on 6.1.1995 that Col. Ghuman be not taken into military custody.
5.
On notice of motion having been issued, detailed written statement has been filed controverting the pleas raised by the petitioner in the writ petition.
6.
Mr. Pipat, Senior Standing counsel for the Union of India has argued that the provisions of Section 123(1) of the Army Act have been rightly invoked and that the impugned order is legal and valid.
The counsel has brought to the notice of this court that the order of attachment was challenged by Col. H.PS Ghuman in the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir and by Lt. Col. SS Grewal in Rajasthan High Court and both the Writ Petitions have been dismissed by the said High Courts.
The counsel has further argued that keeping in view the judgments in those Writ Petitions, it is apparent that a prima facie case against the petitioner has been established and that the provisions of section 123(1) of the Army Act have been rightly invoked.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot have any benefit from the judgment as both the writ petitions have been dismissed.
The counsel for the petitioner has further argued that no such individual can be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within six months after he had ceased to be subject to this Act.
7.
We have perused the provisions of this Section.
Section 123 was amended and in section 123 of the Principal Act, in sub-Section (2), for the words ``within six months after he had ceased to be subject to this Act'' the following has been substituted; -  ``Within a period of three years after he had ceased to be subject to this Act and in computing such period, the time during which such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himslf or where the institution of the proceeding in respect of the offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.''
8.
It is apparent from the above amended provisions of the Army Act that while computing period of three years after such person had ceased to be subject to the Army Act, the time during which such individual has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself or where the institution of the proceeding in respect of the offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made and the day on which it was withdrawn is to be excluded.
The proceedings have been started against the petitioner within a period of three years after he had ceased to be subject to the said Act.
9.
The proposition of law is well settled that a retired military person can be tried by GCM in respect of offences committed by him during the period of his actual service and can be committed and punished in the same manner as of he was subject to the Army Act.
Where trial commences within the statutory time limit after his superannuation, awarding of punishment would be valid.
Finding no merit in this Writ Petition, the same is dismissed.