Rajiv Sharma, J - The brief facts necessary for the adjudication of this petition are that the disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner under Rule 29 of the "NHPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeals Rules" vide memorandum dated 17 July, 2006.
The gist of the charges levelled against the petitioner as per statement of article of charges was that while working as Sr. PGT, Grade-I at Baira Siul Power Station, he had been writing letters to outside authorities for which he was not authorized and has also sent a representation to higher authorities without routing the same through proper channel and accordingly he had violated Rules 55, 56, 520, 521, 526 of the NHPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeals Rules.
He filed reply to the memorandum dated 17th July, 2007 on 21-7-2006.
He also filed supplementary reply to the memorandum of charges on 24th July, 2006.
Shri BD Bali, Manager (Mechanical), Baira Siul, Surangani was appointed Inquiry Officer to look into the charges framed against the petitioner vide letter dated 4th August, 2006.
He was called upon vide order dated 28th August, 2006 to appear before the Inquiry Officer on 30th August, 2006 at 1100 am He sent a communication to the Chief Engineer (Civil)-II, i.e. the disciplinary authority Baira Siul Power Station, Surangani on 8th September, 2006.
The inquiry proceedings held on 30th August, 2006 were adjourned to 15-9-2006.
The relevant text of the letter dated 8th September, 2006 is reproduced verbatim as under :  "With reference to the above, I Naresh Chand Verma tender apology and admit my fault without getting extend the aforesaid enquiry proceedings and I assure you to not repeat any such mistake in future."
2.
The disciplinary authority vide letter dated 14th September, 2006 on the basis of letter dated 8th September, 2006 imposed a penalty of withholding of two increments of pay with cumulative effect.
He preferred an appeal before the appellate authority on 23rd September, 2006.
The appellate authority vide order dated 13th November, 2006 remanded the case to the Inquiry Officer to give its findings on the basis of the evidence adduced during the course of proceedings.
Consequently order dated 14th September, 2006 passed by the disciplinary authority was set aside.
The Inquiry Officer submitted the inquiry report to the disciplinary authority and the petitioner was called upon to send his comments and observations on the inquiry report within three working days as per communication dated 28th November, 2006.
He submitted his reply on 12-12-2006.
The disciplinary authority again imposed the penalty of withholding two increments of pay with cumulative effect on the petitioner vide order dated 19-12-2006.
3.
Mr. Rameshwar Sharma, Advocate appearing for the petitioner had strenuously argued that the initiation and culmination of the inquiry proceedings initiated against his client are in violation of the NHPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeals Rules.
He contended that his client never admitted his guilt as projected in the disciplinary proceedings on the basis of which the penalty of withholding of two increments of pay with cumulative effect has been imposed.
He also contended that there is violation of the principle of natural justice and the petitioner has not been dealt with in just and fair manner.
He had further contended that the reply filed to letter dated 28th November, 2006 has not been taken into consideration in order dated 19th December, 2006 which has resulted in grave prejudice to his client.
4.
Mr. KD Shreedhar, Advocate appearing on behalf of the Corporation had supported the order dated 19-12-2006 and had vehemently argued that once the petitioner had admitted his guilt as per letter dated 8th September, 2006, he is stopped from challenging the imposition of penalty.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
6.
The respondent-Corporation has framed the rules called the "NHPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeals Rules" which came into force with effect from 14th May, 1979.
Clause 5 of the Rules defines the expression "misconduct".
Clause 27 defines the penalties, minor as well as major.
Clause 27 reads thus:  "The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on an employee : Minor Penalties : 271 Censure;  272 Withholding the increments of pay with or without cumulative effect.
273 Withholding of promotion.
27.4 Recovery from pay of such other amount as may be due to him of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Corporation by negligence or breach of orders.
Major Penalties : 275 Reduction to a lower grade or post, or to a lower stage in a time scale;  276 Removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for future employment;  277 Dismissal.
Explanation : The following shall not amount to be a penalty within the meaning of this rule.
(i) withholding of increment of an employee for his failure to pass a prescribed test or examination; (ii) stoppage of an employee at the efficiency bar in the time scale on the ground of his unfitness to cross the bar; (iii) non-promotion, whether in an officiating capacity or otherwise of an employee to a higher post for which he may be eligible for consideration but for which he is found unsuitable after consideration of his case;  (iv) revision to a lower grade or post, of an employee officiating in a higher grade or post, on the ground that he is considered, after trial, to be unsuitable for such higher grade or post, or on administrative grounds unconnected with his conduct; (v) revision to his previous grade or post, of an employee appointed on probation to another grade or post, during or at the end of the period of probation, in accordance with the terms of his appointment.
(vi) Termination of service; (a) of an employee appointed on probation, during or at the end of the period of probation, in accordance with the terms of his appointment; (b) of an employee appointed in a temporary capacity otherwise than under a contract or agreement, on the expiration of the period for which he was appointed, or earlier in accordance with the terms of his appointment;  (c) of an employee appointed under a contract or agreement, in accordance with the terms of such contract or agreement; and  (d) of any employee on reduction of establishment.
7.
The detailed procedure for imposing major penalties has been enumerated under Clause 29.
Clause 297 being relevant is reproduced in its entirety as under :  "On the date fixed by the Inquiring Authority, the employee shall appear before the Inquiring Authority at the time, date and place specified in the notice.
The Inquiring Authority shall ask the employee whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make and if he pleads guilty to any of the articles of charges, the Inquiry Authority shall record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signature of the employee concerned thereon.
The Inquiring Authority shall record a finding of guilt in respect of those articles of charges to which the employee concerned pleads guilty."
8.
The petitioner was directed to make himself available before the Inquiry Officer on 30th August, 2006.
The inquiry proceedings were held by the Inquiry Officer on 30th August, 2006 at 300 pm The petitioner appeared before the Inquiry Officer on 30th August, 2006 and requested that Sh. Kripa Ram, Senior Assistant may be nominated to contest his case.
He had denied the charges levelled against him in the proceedings held on 30th August, 2006.
He had sent a communication to the Inquiry Officer on 8th September, 2006.
The relevant text of the same has already been reproduced above.
It was on the basis of this statement made by the petitioner that the disciplinary authority has imposed the penalty of withholding of two increments of pay with cumulative effect vide order dated 13th September, 2006.
He preferred an appeal before the appellate authority.
He had retracted from the statement made to the Inquiry Officer dated 8th September, 2006 by explaining the circumstance in which the letter was sent to the Inquiry Officer on 8th September, 2006.
The appellate authority on the basis of the grounds taken in appeal had remanded the matter to the Inquiry Officer after setting aside the penalty imposed upon him vide order dated 13th September, 2006.
The Inquiry Officer again on the basis of the letter dated 8th September, 2006 held that the charges levelled against the petitioner were proved.
9.
Now, this Court has to consider whether the procedure as per clause 297 of the Rules has been complied with or not after the receipt of communication dated 8th September, 2006.
It is evident from the language employed in clause 297 that the Inquiring Authority has to ask the employee whether he pleads guilty or not and if he pleads guilty to any of the article of charges, the Inquiring Authority has to record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signature of the employee thereon.
In the proceedings held on 30th August, 2006, the petitioner had not pleaded guilty.
The Inquiry Officer in the present case after the receipt of the letter dated 8th September, 2006 was required to record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signatures of the petitioner.
The respondents have not placed any material on record to show that the plea of the petitioner was recorded in the proceedings by the Inquiry Officer and he had signed the record and thereafter obtained the signatures of the petitioner.
The Inquiry Officer was required to record finding of guilt with respect to the charges levelled against him.
Since the mandatory provisions of clause 297 have not been complied with in letter and spirit by the disciplinary authority, the major penalty of withholding of two increments with cumulative effect could not be imposed on the basis of the inquiry report annexed with letter dated 28th November, 2006.
10.
The law about admissions made by an employee during the course of disciplinary proceedings has been dealt with extensively by their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jagdish Prasad Saxena v. The State of Madhya Bharat (now Madhya Pradesh) AIR 1961 SC 1070.
Their Lordships have held as under :  "It is true that the appellant specially admitted during the course of the previous enquiry that illegal liquor had been delivered to the contractor, and that he had given the key of the receiver to Narona.
It is on the strength of those admissions that the High Court took the view that the appellant had substantially admitted his guilt and so there was really no need for holding a formal enquiry against him after the charge-sheet was supplied to him.
In this connection it is necessary to remember that the previous enquiry was not directed against the appellant as such, and he was certainly not in the position of an accused in the said enquiry.
In fact, as we have already indicated, the result of the said enquiry was that the appellant was absolved from any complicity in the commission of the offence, and the only criticism made against him was that he was slack in his supervision, that is why he was transferred.
In such a case, even if the appellant had made some statements which amounted to admission it is open to doubt whether he could be removed from service on the strength of the said alleged admissions without holding a formal enquiry as required by the rules.
But apart from this consideration, if the statements made by the appellant do not amount to a clear or unambiguous admission of his guilt, failure to hold a formal enquiry would certainly constitute a serious infirmity in the order of dismissal passed against him.
Under Article 311(2) he was entitled to have a reasonable opportunity of meeting the charge framed against him, and in the present case, before the show-cause notice was served on him he has had no opportunity at all to meet the charge.
After the charge sheet was supplied to him he did not get an opportunity to cross-examine Kethulekar and others.
He was not given a copy of the report made by the enquiry officers in the said enquiries.
He could not offer his explanation as to any of the points made against him; and it appears that from the evidence recorded in the previous enquiries as a result of which Kethulekar was suspended an inference was drawn against the appellant and show-cause notice was served on him.
In our opinion, the appellant is justified in contending that in the circumstances of this case he has had no opportunity of showing cause at all, and so the requirement of Article 311(2) is not justified.
11.
The Andhra Pradesh High Court in Thotapalli Radhakrishna Murthy v. The Divisional Manager, United India Insurance Co Ltd, 1982 Lab IC 1745, has held that it is not safe to act upon admission when it is denied and when the same has been obtained by coercion.
His Lordship has held as under :  "It is stated by the delinquent that blank papers with his signatures thereon were extorted from him by threat and coercion.
The vitality of the admission is wiped out when the delinquent resiled and the unequivocal retraction of admission is not tantamount to admission of guilt.
The Management and the Enquiry authorities proceeded upon the footing that it is no admission at all and embarked on a full-fledged enquiry.
The order in the appeal was passed without any reference to the admission and as such the contention that the admission made in the appeal petition can be considered to have set off the earlier retraction lacks substance.
It is true that there cannot be better evidence than one's own admission but it is not safe to act upon the same when it is denied and when it is alleged to have been extracted by coercion."
12.
A Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Allahabad Bank v. Pronab Kumar Mukherjee and others, (1993)1 Banking Cases 600, had the occasion to go into the effect of admission of guilt made by the delinquent during the course of disciplinary proceedings.
Their Lordships have held as under :  "The question is whether, in fact, the charged officer admitted the article of charge.
An admission has to be construed strictly because it deprives a delinquent officer of his right to appear before a duly constituted enquiry to show that the allegations had no basis at all; in other words, he was innocent.
An admission may deprive a person of his livelihood as was sought to be done in this case by removing the respondent from service.
The admission of a guilt and moral obligation are quite different and distinct.
It may be that a charged officer may because of the dictates of his conscience and moral values, make an admission of his guilt.
He may also feel that he has a moral obligation to safeguard the interest of the subordinates and the Bank as well and he volunteers to make good the shortage.
This cannot be taken to be an admission of his guilt.
The Disciplinary Authority did not enquire as to whether it was an act of the in-charge of the counter or the employees under him which resulted in the shortage as detected.
In our view, unless the statement made by the charged officer amounts to a clear and unambiguous admission of his guilt, failure to hold a formal enquiry would certainly constitute serious infirmity in the order of removal passed against him.
Under the Regulations of the Bank, the respondent was entitled to have a reasonable opportunity of meeting the charges framed against him and in the present case, before the show-cause notice was served on him; he has had no opportunity to meet the charges.
In the instant case, there is no admission by the respondent and consequently, the action of the Bank in passing the order of removal without holding an enquiry under the Regulations cannot be sustained."
13.
The learned single Judge of Gujarat High Court in Natavarbhai S Makwana v. Union Bank of India and others, 1985(2) LLJ 296 has held that disciplinary proceedings by the department are in the nature of quasi-criminal proceedings and ordinarily admissions made cannot be regarded as sufficient proof of misconduct as well as facts constituting misconduct.
His Lordship has held as under :  "Counsel for the petitioner contended that the so-called admission or confession cannot be made the sole basis of conviction and punishment as is sought to be done by the respondent-Bank.
In his submission, even though there may be clear-cut admission and/or confession about certain alleged misconduct, no conviction and punishment can be based on such admission alone, if there is no evidence to prove the factum of misconduct.
In this case it is an undisputed position that there is no evidence with regard to the allegation that Shri RJ Arya, the Union Leader was requested to threaten and for intimidate Shri JK Shah, Acting-in-Charge of the Staff Training Centre, Ahmedabad.
In the departmental proceedings Shri RJ Arya has not been examined.
No other evidence has been led in this behalf.
The Enquiry Officer has submitted the report on the basis of admission alone.
It is contended that admission made by the delinquent cannot be made the sole basis for conviction and imposition of punishment.
Contended that, if a person is charged with the misconduct of theft of bank money, and if he confesses the misconduct, can such a person be convicted and punished only on the basis of his confession ?
If so can the possibility be ruled out that there may not be an occurrence of theft at all ?
Therefore in his submission first of all the factum of the offence or that of misconduct should be proved.
After the misconduct is established, either by documentary evidence or by oral evidence the further question as to whether the employee concerned is guilty of the misconduct charged or not may be required to be examined.
At that stage, if the employee concerned makes admission, then further evidence may not be necessary.
In a given case where the delinquent officer/employee makes admission immediately after the charge-sheet is served, even then the departmental authorities would not be relieved of their duty to establish the factum of offence or the facts constituting the misconduct by producing oral or documentary evidence.
This may be proved even by an affidavit of certain persons.
There is much force in the contention and arguments advanced by the counsel for the petitioner.
It may happen that the Bank authorities may bona fide believe that there is theft or misappropriation of bank money.
The delinquent officer charged with misconduct of theft or misappropriation may be induced to confess the guilt for one reason or another - say informal understanding that he shall be dealt with leniently.
Or that he himself might have been lost in the jungle of account books and he himself may not be sure as to whether he has committed any mistake or not.
He may be on the verge of retirement and may be desirous to put an end to any such inquiry.
He may not have resources to fight the case put against him.
For any of these reasons or say on account of mere foolishness, he may confess the misconduct charged against him and be punished for the same without there being any evidence or proof for the same, i.e. theft/misappropriation.
Later on in audit it may be discovered that there was only accounting mistake and no theft/misappropriation whatsoever.
To avoid such possibility, it is always necessary that the factum of misconduct be established.
Moreover disciplinary proceedings by the department are in the nature of quasi-criminal proceedings much more so from the view point of consequences of such proceedings.
An employee may be visited with the penalty of removal or dismissal from service which would be almost equivalent to economic death sentence.
Therefore, proof of the facts constituting misconduct has got to be emphasized.
Ordinarily, admission alone of the delinquent officer cannot be regarded as sufficient proof of misconduct as well as the facts constituting misconduct."
14.
In the present case the petitioner has retracted from the statement made in the grounds of appeal.
He had specially taken the ground in his appeal that the statement was made on the basis of coercion exercised by the Inquiry Officer during the course of proceeding held on 30th August, 2006.
Once the petitioner had retracted from the statement made on the basis of letter dated 8th September, 2006, a regular inquiry was required to be held as per the provisions of law.
15.
The matter is also required to be considered from another angle.
On the basis of the appeal preferred by the petitioner, appellate authority had set aside the order whereby the major penalty was imposed upon the petitioner with direction to the Inquiry Officer to hold inquiry as per the Rules.
In view of this also, the Inquiry Officer was required to hold a regular inquiry on basis of the letter written by the petitioner dated 8th September, 2006.
The Inquiry Officer as well as the disciplinary authority have reiterated their earlier stand in the inquiry report as well as in the order whereby the penalty has been imposed upon the petitioner.
16.
Mr. Rameshwar Sharma, Advocate also submitted that the petitioner had filed detailed reply to the letter dated 28th November, 2006 vide Annexure P- 17, but the same has not been taken into consideration by the disciplinary authority.
I have read the order dated 19th December, 2006 carefully.
It is evident from the contents of order dated 19th December, 2006 that there is only bald assertion that the reply of the petitioner was considered without referring to the points raised in the reply.
The disciplinary authority though was not required to give very detailed reasons, but the points raised by the petitioner in his reply to the letter dated 28th November, 2006 were required to be dealt with.
The copy of the inquiry report is supplied to the delinquent to enable him to point out the deficiencies and shortcomings while conducting the inquiry as has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad and others v. B Karunakar and others, 1994(1) SCT 319 : (1993)4 SCC 727.
Their Lordships have held as under :  "The reason why the right to receive the report of the enquiry officer is considered an essential part of the reasonable opportunity at the first stage and also a principle of natural justice is that the findings recorded by the enquiry officer form an important material before the disciplinary authority which along with the evidence is taken into consideration by it to come to its conclusions.
It is difficult to say in advance, to what extent the said findings including the punishment, if any, recommended in the report would influence the disciplinary authority while drawing its conclusions.
The findings further might have been recorded without considering the relevant evidence on record, or by misconstruing it or unsupported by it.
If such a finding is to be one of the documents to be considered by the disciplinary authority, the principles of natural justice required that the employee should have a fair opportunity to meet, explain and controvert it before he is condemned.
It is negation of the tenets of justice and a denial of fair opportunity to the employee to consider the findings recorded by a third party like the enquiry officer without giving the employee an opportunity to reply to it.
Although it is true that the disciplinary authority is supposed to arrive at its own findings on the basis of the evidence recorded in the inquiry, it is also equally true that the disciplinary authority takes into consideration the findings recorded by the enquiry officer along with the evidence on record.
In the circumstances, the findings of the enquiry officer do constitute an important material before the disciplinary authority which is likely to influence its conclusions.
If the enquiry officer were only to record the evidence and forward the same to the disciplinary authority, that would not constitute any additional material before the disciplinary authority of which the delinquent employee has no knowledge.
However, when the enquiry officer goes further and records his findings, as stated above, which may or may not be based on the evidence on record or are contrary to the same or in ignorance of it, such findings are an additional material unknown to the employee but are taken into consideration by the disciplinary authority while arriving at its conclusions.
Both the dictates of the reasonable opportunity as well as the principles of natural justice, therefore, require that before the disciplinary authority comes to its own conclusions, the delinquent employee should have an opportunity to reply to the enquiry officer's findings.
The disciplinary authority is then required to consider the evidence, the report of the enquiry officer and the representation of the employee against it."
The position in law can also be looked at from a slightly different angle.
Article 311(2) says that the employee shall be given a "reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the charges against him."
The findings on the charges given by a third person like the enquiry officer, particularly when they are not borne out by the evidence or are arrived at by overlooking the evidence or misconstruing it, could themselves constitute new unwarranted imputations.
What is further, when the proviso to the said Article states that "where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed", it in effect accepts two successive stages of differing scope.
Since the penalty is to be proposed after the inquiry, which inquiry in effect is to be carried out by the disciplinary authority (the enquiry officer being only his delegate appointed to hold the inquiry and to assist him), the employee's reply to the enquiry officer's report and consideration of such reply by the disciplinary authority also constitute an integral part of such inquiry.
The second stage follows the inquiry so carried out and it consists of the issuance of the notice to show cause against the proposed penalty and of considering the reply to the notice and deciding upon the penalty.
What is dispensed with is the opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed and not of opportunity of making representation on the report of the enquiry officer.
The latter right was always there.
But before the Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution, the point of time at which it was to be exercised had stood deferred till the second stage viz., the stage of considering the penalty.
Till that time, the conclusions that the disciplinary authority might have arrived at both with regard to the guilt of the employee and the penalty to be imposed were only tentative.
All that has happened after the Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution is to advance the point of time at which the representation of the employee against the enquiry officer's report would be considered.
Now, the disciplinary authority has to consider the representation of the employee against the report before it arrived at its conclusion with regard to his guilt or innocence of the charges."
17.
The order dated 19th December, 2006 is held to be bad in law since the representation filed by the petitioner to the inquiry report has not been discussed at all by the disciplinary authority.
18.
The upshot of the above discussion is that :  (i) that the inquiry officer has not complied with clause 297 of the NHPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeals Rules;  (ii) it was incumbent upon the Inquiry Officer to hold a regular inquiry after the matter was remanded to him by the appellate authority vide order dated 13th November, 2006 instead of closing the same on the basis of the statement made by the petitioner on September, 2006; and  (iii) it was incumbent upon the disciplinary authority to consider the representation made by the petitioner.
19.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 19th December, 2006 is quashed and set aside.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.