MM Kumar, J - This is plaintiff's appeal under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity `the Code'), challenging judgment and decree dated 1242004 passed by the Learned Additional District Judge, Kurukshetra dismissing his suit while accepting the appeal of the respondents.
The plaintiff-appellant had filed a suit for declaration with consequential benefits which was decreed in his favour by the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Kurukshetra holding that order dated 881998 withholding his two increments with cumulative effect was illegal and void.
However, the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Judge was reversed by the learned Additional District Judge vide his impugned judgment and decree.
The plaintiff-appellant feeling aggrieved has approached this Court by filing the instant appeal under Section 100 of the Code.
2.
Brief facts of the case necessary for disposal of this appeal are that the plaintiff-appellant has been working with the respondent-State on the post of Constable.
He was posted in the Police Line, Kurukshetra as Assistant of Clothing Head Constable.
A charge-sheet was issued to him on the complaint made by one Basheshar Nath, a retiree alleging misappropriation of funds.
After preliminary enquiry conducted against the plaintiff-appellant, complainant UGC, Basheshar Nath disclosed that plaintiff-appellant had taken Rs. 668/- from him illegally.
In the preliminary enquiry prima facie, findings were returned against the plaintiff-appellant as per the order of the Inquiry Officer dated 2851997.
However, on the regular departmental enquiry held against plaintiff-appellant, the Inquiry Officer recorded the finding that the charge against the plaintiff-appellant was not proved and exonerated him.
3.
The Punishing Authority recorded its disagreement with the Inquiry Officer and the details with regard to disagreement were incorporated in the show- cause notice dated 3071998 (Ex. P-4).
It was pointed out that Basheshar Nath had specifically alleged that the plaintiff-appellant had taken Rs. 668/- from the retiree on account of clothing recovery which he failed to deposit.
He deposited only Rs. 180/- on 18.4.1995 and again Rs. 17960 on 1271995 after a gap of three months.
4.
During inquiry Basheshar Nath resiled from his statement.
The plaintiff- appellant filed reply to the show-cause notice.
However, the punishing authority passed the order on 881998 stopping two increments of the plaintiff-appellant with future effect (Annexure P-6).
The appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant also failed which was dismissed vide Ex. P-9.
The plaintiff-appellant succeeded in persuading the trial Court for passing a decree in his favour on the ground that the Punishing Authority could not have recorded a note of dissent and was under an obligation to get the enquiry conducted afresh or refer the matter back to the same Inquiry Officer for further enquiry.
However, the aforementioned view taken by the Civil Judge has been reversed by the learned Additional District Judge by placing reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of AN D'Silva v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1130, for holding that punishing authority is not bound to accept the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and if there is ample evidence on record to sustain the charges then, the Punishing Authority would be within its powers to record the finding that the delinquent officer was guilty of the charge(s).
The views of the learned Additional District Judge in this regard read as under :  "It is clear on record that the present case cannot be termed as a case of "no evidence" especially in view of the admissions made by the delinquent employee himself wherein he had categorically admitted that he had take Rs. 668/- from UGC Basheshar Nath and kept the same with himself out of which he deposited a sum of Rs. 180/- on 18.4.1995 and Rs. 17960 on 1271995 and he has further stated that he returned the balance amount to Basheshar Nath at his house.
The mere taking and retention of the money by the delinquent without depositing the same in the Government Treasury on the same day is in itself illegal.
Further there is no record of return of the balance money except a bald statement made in this regard.
UGC Basheshar Nath in the first instance, in his complaint as well as during preliminary enquiry categorically brought out that balance money was never received by him though later on he resiled from this statement during the regular enquiry.
It is apparent that the enquiry officer was influenced by the fact that Basheshar Nath later on stated that he does not want to pursue his complaint.
However, this statement of Basheshar Nath cannot in any way absolve the plaintiff- respondent.
Thus, it is clear that Basheshar Nath was later on won over after the preliminary enquiry.
The Punishing Authority has clearly spelled out all these points in show-cause notice Ex. P-4.
Therefore, I am of the view that neither the present case is of "no evidence" nor the reasons given by the Punishing Authority are perverse."
5.
After hearing the learned counsel at some length, I am of the considered view that no explanation is provided to doubt the principle of law on which learned Additional District Judge has proceeded.
It is well settled that the Punishing/Appointing authority is not bound by the findings and recommendations made by the Enquiry Officer.
If on scrutiny, the Punishing/Appointing authority finds that on the basis of available evidence, the charges against delinquent officer are proved then nothing stops the Punishing/Appointing Authority to record his dissent and given the findings that the officer is guilty.
The aforementioned proposition of law has been laid down by the Supreme Court in AN D'Silva's case (supra).
The aforementioned view has also been followed in the case of High Court of Judicature, Bombay v. Shashikant S Patil, 2000(1) SCC 416 and Union of India v. HC Goel, AIR 1964 SC 364.
6.
When the aforementioned principles are applied to the facts of the present case, it cannot be successfully argued by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant that the findings recorded by the Punishing Authority are based on no evidence and, therefore, were unsustainable in the eyes of law.
From the coded paragraph of the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge, it is evident though the plaintiff-appellant has also made an admission with regard to obtaining a sum of Rs. 668/- from UGC, Basheshar Nath.
It was further assumed that the aforementioned amount belonging to the Government was kept by the plaintiff-appellant with himself although after few days some of the amount was deposited in the treasury.
Therefore, the charge against the plaintiff-appellant stood proved.
This Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 100 of the Code cannot go into the question of quantum of evidence.
If there is evidence accepted by the Punishing/Appointing Authority to sustain the charges then this Court will not discard that evidence in order to reverse the findings.
Re-appreciation of evidence in order to record a finding different than one recorded by the Punishing/Appointing Authority is impermissible in law.
Therefore, the appeal cannot be admitted and no question of law warranting its admission has been framed or arises which is sine qua on for its admission.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.