MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of two petitions namely Civil Writ Petition No. 1392 of 1986 and No. 2469 of 1985.
In the first petition, the Managing Committee, Arya High School, Thanesar Distt.
Kurukshetra (for brevity the Managing Committee) has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing order dated 31.1.1986 (Annexure P-7) passed by the Director of School Education, Haryana, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2) reinstating respondent No. 3 in service.
In the second petition filed by Shri Ram Pal Gollan who is respondent No. 3 herein, a prayer has been made for the issuance of a writ of Mandamus directing the Managing Committee to implement decision dated 2221983 which is the basis of the order dated 31.1.1986.
In this manner, the questions of fact and law are identical and the teacher seeks enforcement of the order and the Management Committee has prayed for quashing of the order dated 31.1.1986 which by and large is based on an interim order dated 22021983.
2.
Brief facts of the case are being referred from first petition No. 1392 of 1986.
There was one post of Master/Mistress lying vacant with the Managing Committee.
For appointment to the post of Master/Mistress statutory rules known as the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974 (for brevity `the Rules') have been promulgated in pursuance to powers conferred on the Government.
According to Rule 6 read with serial No. 4 column 3 of Appendix `A' of the Rules for appointment to the post of Master/Mistress, the educational qualifications prescribed are BABT or BAB.Ed.
The pay scale was 220-500 (unrevised).
It was against that post of Master/Mistress that Rampal Singh Gollan, respondent No. 3 who possessed J.B.T.
qualification was appointed as a teacher on ad hoc basis on 4121980 and was relieved on 3131981.
The total period of service is three months.
After a gap of over nine months, he was again appointed on 411982 and was relieved on 3131982.
In accordance with the terms of his appointment letter (Annexure P-1), he was to remain on ad hoc basis upto 3131982 and his services were terminable by one month notice or salary in lieu thereof.
On 131982, a letter was issued to respondent No. 3 intimating him that his services were no longer required and accordingly he should hand over the charge to the Headmaster.
On 841982 respondent No. 3 submits to the Managing Committee in writing that he had settled his entire account upto 3131982 with the Headmaster of Arya High School, Thanesar and nothing was due to him (Annexure P-3).
3.
However, respondent No. 3 challenged his termination before the District Education Officer on 24.6.1982 (Annexure P-4).
The District Education Officer sought explanation of the Management Committee which was to the effect that the teacher was kept by the Management Committee at its own expense because of increase in number of students and the sanctioned strength of the teachers was far less.
It was further submitted that no grant was taken from the Government for paying salary to the respondent No. 3 (Annexure P-1 in the IInd petition).
Then the matter was taken to Director School Education Haryana (for brevity `Director') in appeal.
On 22021983, the Director passed the order which has become subject matter of controversy before the Director himself and then before this Court.
That order passed by the Director reads as under :-  "Subject :- Appeal of Shri Ram Pal Singh Golan under the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971 against the order dated 11101982 of the District Education Officer, Kurukshetra.
This case was put up before the Director of School Education, Haryana on 311983 in the presence of both the parties.
After hearing both the parties, he observed that if the Manager submits a proposal to the Directorate for conversion of BA BEd.
post into JBT post, then after the requisite approval, Shri Ram Pal Golan can be taken back in service (sic.).
If the Manager does not make/send a proposal for the requisite conversion, then the Management after taking Shri Ram Pal Golan into service, shall have to pay him the salary from its own resources.
Please intimate this Directorate within a month about the action taken on the above orders, so that final decision could be taken in the matter."
4.
The Management, however, expressed its difficulty in complying with the order because even if the post of BA BEd.
was converted as JBT post, then after approval the Management was under obligation to advertise the post, invite applications and after interviews, appointments could be made.
It was further pointed out that the Management was governed by 1971 Act and `the Rules' framed thereunder.
It has been further alleged that the Management undertook to re-employ respondent No. 3 if the conversion was allowed.
There was said to be an agreement by the Headmaster of the School at the time of hearing that the Management would refer the matter for conversion of the post to the Director and if no request for conversion was made then the Management Committee was to employ respondent No. 2 and to pay him salary from its own funds.
The afore-mentioned decision is stated to have been conveyed to the Management on 2231983 (Annexure P-5) against which the Management had represented that there was no right of respondent No. 3 to seek appointment to the post as he had been appointed purely on ad hoc basis upto 3131982.
That request of the Management is stated to have been declined vide order dated 1841983.
A reference to that order has been made in the impugned order Annexure P-7.
The Director, after hearing both the parties, construed clause 1 of the appointment letter as vague and held that the benefit of vagueness was to be extended to the respondent No. 3.
The reasoning adopted by the Director is discernible from the concluding two paras of the impugned order which read as under :-  "I have carefully considered the points raised by both the parties and gone through the relevant record.
In fact that construction of clause (1) of the appointment letter of Shri Golan is vague.
From the construction of this clause, it cannot be concluded that the appointment was purely adhoc and was only upto 3131982.
Benefit for such ambiguity must go to Shri Golan.
The appointment letter or advertisement must state clearly and unambiguously the nature of appointment.
Owing to conditions of large scale unemployment we cannot allow exploitation of teachers through ambiguous and unenforceable terms of appointment.
In these circumstances, I do not find any force in the points raised on behalf of the management.
On the other hand I fully agree with the contention of Shri Golan that the orders passed under the Act (have) become final and are binding on both the parties.
Under these circumstances, I find no point to interfere with the orders dated 2231983.
The management is directed to reinstate Shri Golan in service immediately and in case post of Master in available Shri Golan be adjusted against the said post.
In the prevailing circumstances of the case, I do not make any order in respect of payment of salary and allowances to Shri Golan from the date of his termination to the date of rejoining service.
However, the abovesaid period may be treated as leave of the kind due."
5.
Mr. Adarsh Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that a perusal of appointment letter issued to respondent No. 3.
Annexure P-1, would make it patent that there is no ambiguity in clause 1 of the terms and conditions of appointment letter.
Learned counsel has also submitted that the appointment of respondent No. 3 was in the nature of Adhoc appointment and that no right could be said to have been conferred by the afore-mentioned appointment letter on respondent No. 3.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on two Division Bench judgments of this Court in the cases of Miss Sukhwinder Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(3) Recent Services Judgments 703 and Bhartendu Sharma v. The State of Haryana, 1995(2) SCT 523 (P&H) : 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments 452 and argued that no right of regularization would arise in favour of respondent No. 3 merely by serving for three months from 411982 to 3131982.
Learned counsel after referring to notice Annexure P-2 dated 131982 and acceptance of his relieving by respondent No. 3 vide Annexure P-3 has further pointed out that no doubt has been left with regard to the meaning of clause 1 of the terms and conditions in the mind of respondent No. 3 himself.
6.
When the matter came up for arguments on 6102004, some dispute was raised with regard to document, Annexure P-5, dated 2221983 on the ground that in fact the order has been issued on behalf of Director, School Education Haryana by some official and it would be necessary to look into the original record to find out the actual tenor of that order.
The matter was posted for hearing during post lunch session but the record was not produced.
The matter had to be adjourned to 13102004 i.e. today with the direction for the production of the record.
The learned State counsel has pointed out that the record has been weeded out in accordance with the Rules.
Therefore, Annexure P-5 cannot be further authenticated by referring to the original record.
However, the Hindi copies of Annexure P-5 filed by the Management Committee are in consonance with the translation, Annexure P-5.
The State counsel has argued that the order of Director of School Education is absolutely clear.
The Management was to apply for conversion of BA BEd.
post into JBT post, otherwise, the Management was to reinstate the petitioner by paying his salary from its own funds.
7.
Mr. Anuj Raura, learned counsel for respondent No. 3 in the first petition (the petitioner in the second petition) has argued that respondent No. 3 has now been working as a regular Government teacher with effect from 29101993 and presently he is posted at Government High School, Sagga.
The learned counsel has pointed out that once there is a consent order and promise has been held out by the Management to respondent No. 3, then no writ petition would be competent to assail a consent order.
He has also argued that a perusal of impugned order dated 31.1.1986 makes it absolutely clear that the Management Committee has given an undertaking before the Director to re-employ respondent No. 3.
The learned counsel has also argued that the order dated 2221983 (Annexure P-5) has been recorded and issued by some official which may lead to a confusion with regard to undertaking because the order has not been issued by the Director School Education himself.
The learned counsel has raised legal submissions that once there is availability of work, no termination should have been ordered and contract of appointment of 89 days is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In support of his submissions, the learned counsel has placed reliance on two Division Bench judgments of this Court in the cases Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(4) Recent Services Judgments 709 and Surinder Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(3) SCT 1058 (P&H) : 2002(3) Recent Services Judgements 499.
8-9.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the first writ petition filed by the Management deserves to be accepted.
There is hardly any substance in the interpretation adopted by the Director to clause 1 of the appointment letter dated 411982.
A perusal of appointment letter Annexure P-1, shows beyond any doubt that the appointment of petitioner was for ad hoc period of three months ie upto 3131982.
The letter of appointment was issued on 411982 with a clear stipulation that he was to continue upto 3131982.
The interpretation of clause 1 of appointment letter becomes further clear when notice, Annexure P-2, dated 131982 was issued to respondent No. 3 on 841982.
There he himself accepted that his entire account has been settled upto 3131982 (Annexure P-3).
Therefore, the reasoning adopted by the Director suffers from patent illegality.
Moreover, by working for a short spell of three months twice does not confer any right to hold the post especially when he did not even fulfil the qualifications of the post.
In this regard, a reference may be made to the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(3) SCT 201 (P&H) : 1992(4) SCC 118, which read as under :-  "45.
The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation effort should always be to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete along with others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected well and good, but if he does not he must give way to the regularly selected candidate.
The appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee.
46.
Secondly, an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
47.
Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange, some appropriate method consistent with the requirements of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words, there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly.
48.
An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when qualified persons are not available through the above processes.
49.
If for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the State."
Similar principle has been laid down in the cases of Beena v. State of Kerala, 1994 SCC (L&S) 834 and Chanchal Goyal (Dr.) v. State of Rajasthan, 2003(2) SCC 485.
10.
In the present case, the petitioner has not continued for such a long period so as to warrant assumption of any right by the incumbent.
11.
Even otherwise, a perusal of order dated 2221983 (Annexure P-5) does not disclose recording to any undertaking of the Management or that of the Headmaster by the Director.
This order is the basic order which is being interpreted to mean that there as an undertaking on the part of the Management Committee or by its Headmaster to re-employ respondent No. 3.
Therefore, once such an undertaking is missing from the interim order, nothing could be imported in the final order dated 31.1.1986 passed by the Director by interpreting the order dated 2221983 as an order based on undertaking.
On that basis also, the impugned order dated 31.1.1986 is liable to be quashed.
12.
There is considerable force in the arguments raised on behalf of the Management Committee that if the order dated 2221983 (Annexure P-5) was accepted, then the Management Committee would have filed an application to the Director for conversion of BA BEd post to JBT post.
Thereafter according to the provisions of the Rules, the post has to be advertised.
In accordance with Rule 7(3)(i) of the Rules only after advertisement, the Selection Committee is to select a suitable person for appointment to the post.
The Management Committee could not be compelled to violate the provisions of Rule 7 by the Director.
Therefore, the impugned order dated 31.1.1986 flagrantly violates Rules 7(3)(i) of the Rules.
13.
The argument of learned counsel for respondent No. 3 which is based on two Division Bench judgments of this Court in Shamsher Singh and others' case and Surinder Kumar and others' case (supra) that no contract of appointment should be made does not require any detailed consideration because in those cases against regular post, contracts of appointments were made on consolidated salary in order to exploit the unemployed eligible persons without resorting to any regular appointments.
Such a manner of appointment by the State was held to be oppressive and undue enrichment.
However, in the present case, the Management has employed respondent No. 3 for a period of three months on two occasions namely from 4121980 to 3131981 and 411982 to 3131982.
Such types of appointments for a short period would not confer any legal right to respondent No. 3 to seek regularization or become permanent.
Moreover, the post against which respondent No. 3 was employed was BA BEd.
post and respondent No. 3 was a JBT Teacher.
14. for the reasons stated above the first writ petition namely C.W.P.
No. 1392 of 1986 is allowed and order, Annexure P-7, dated 31.1.1986 is quashed.
However, the second petition namely CWPNo.
2469 of 1985 is dismissed.
15.
Before parting, I cannot help recording my displeasure with regard to the non-production of original record by the respondent-State.
It was well within the knowledge of respondent-State that the writ petition is pending since 1986 and the record has still been weeded out in the year 1991.
The Chief Secretary, Haryana, is directed to hold an enquiry into the matter and find out as to how the record has been weeded out without permission of the Court.
Needful shall be done within a period of three months from today and a report be submitted to this Court.
A copy of this order be sent to the Chief Secretary Haryana immediately.
Petition allowed.