MM Kumar, J - This regular second appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant challenges the judgment and decree dated 1112003 passed by the District Judge, Karnal affirming the findings recorded by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Karnal.
The suit of the plaintiff-appellant seeking declaration for correction of his date of birth as 17101945 instead of 1611945 as recorded in his service record has been dismissed.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant filed a civil suit No. 151/99 on 26101998 seeking a declaration that his date of birth has been wrongly recorded in his service record.
He claimed that his correct date of birth is 17101945 instead of 1611945.
A further relief of mandatory injunction with all consequential benefits directing the defendant-respondent to correct his date of birth has also been claimed.
The plaintiff-appellant has joined the defendant-respondent's bank as a Law Officer on 1451976 and then his date of birth given was as 1611945 which is recorded in his matriculation certificate.
It was claimed that on visiting his native village Kaimla, District Karnal he came to know that his correct date of birth is 17101945 and thereafter he applied to the Additional District Registrar (Births and Deaths) for issuance of birth certificate.
According to the certificate, now issued his date of birth recorded is 17101945 and on that basis he filed an application before the defendant-respondent for change of his date of birth which was declined.
The crucial issue raised before the Courts below was issues No. 1 and 2.
Findings recorded on issue No. 1 regarding the date of birth of the plaintiff-appellant by both the Courts below are that the plaintiff-appellant has been working on the post of Additional General Manager in the defendant-respondent's bank.
He applied for appointment to the post of Legal Adviser in March 1976 and was selected from amongst three candidates by the Staff Committee.
His application Ex. D1 and appointment letter Ex. D4 dated 1451976 have been proved on record.
At the time of his selection, he submitted his matriculation certificate in which his date of birth recorded is 1611945 as has been proved by Ex. D5 and his service book has been proved as Ex. D6.
The findings of the Civil Judge have been affirmed by the District Judge which read as under :  "In my opinion there is a great force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the respondent-defendant.
It is not disputed that the plaintiff was appointed as a Law Officer vide order dated 1451976 the copy of which is Ex. D3 and he joined as such on the same day forenoon as is clear from Ex. D4.
It is also not disputed that the plaintiff applied for change of his date of birth in the service record on 5.12.1994 vide his application, the copy of which is Ex. D7.
Thus admittedly, the plaintiff applied for change of his date of birth after a period of more than 18-1/2 years of his service.
Even the date of superannuation of the plaintiff is very close now being 3112003.
Thus the plaintiff is now due for retirement after a period of 20 days.
Therefore, how the date of birth of the plaintiff can be corrected at the fag end of his career.
Even if we say that the plaintiff had filed this suit on 26101998 then also it can be said that the plaintiff filed this suit when he was to retire after a period of about 3 years.
In such circumstances, the plaintiff has woken up from his slumber at the fag end of his career and the courts are always reluctant to correct the date of birth at such a stage.
The representation of the plaintiff dated 5.12.1994 made to the department was rejected by the department vide order dated 2251997 as is clear from the copy of the order Ex. D9 but thereafter also the plaintiff filed this suit on 26101998 after a period of about 1/1-2 years without any explanation."
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant who has argued that Notes 1 and 4 of Rule 2.5 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I Part I as applicable to the State of Haryana read with Annexure A of Chapter 7 of Punjab Financial Rules Volume I stipulates that an employee could make an application to the competent authority for correction of his date of birth within a period of two years of his entry into service and the Government has the right to relax the period of limitation of two years provided sufficient cause is shown for delay in making the application.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Rachan Singh, 1991(1) SCT 298 (P&H) : 1991(1) RSJ 552.
He has further submitted that the principles of estoppel invoked by the learned District Judge, Karnal would be applicable in cases where the entry in service has been secured in order to attain the eligibility of age and by misrepresenting the date of birth at that stage.
According to the learned counsel, in the instant case the petitioner entered into service on 1451976 and if this date of birth is taken to be 17101945 as per the certificate issued by the Registrar (Births and Deaths) he would still be eligible and no estoppel would operate because he did not take any advantage on the basis of representing that his date of birth is 1611945.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a Full Bench judgment of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of M Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy v. High Court of AP, 2002(2) SCT 880 (A.P.)
and another judgment of this Court in the case of State of Punjab and another v. Sat Parkash and another, 2002(4) SCT 182 (P&H) : 2002(3) RSJ 763.
4.
I have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel and am of the view that this appeal does not merit acceptance is well settled that date of birth of an employee is important for the employee as well as the employer.
The person next in line of promotion is likely to be adversely affected if change in date of birth is permitted at a belated stage and any change particularly at the fag end of the career of an employee should not ordinarily be accepted.
In this regard, reliance can be placed on a judgment of the Supreme Court in GM Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. West Bengal v. Shib Kumar Dushad and Others, (2000) 8 SCC 696.
The observation of Their Lordships reads as under :  "The date of birth of an employee is not only important for the employee but for the employer also.
On the length of service put in by the employee depends the quantum of retiral benefits he would be entitled to.
Therefore, while determining the dispute in such matters courts should bear in mind that a change of the date of birth long after joining service, particularly when the employee is due to retire shortly, will upset the date recorded in the service records maintained in due course of administration should not generally be accepted.
In such a case the burden is heavy on the employee who comes to the court with the case that the date of birth in the service book maintained by the employer is untrue and incorrect.
The burden can be discharged only by producing acceptable evidence of a clinching nature."
Similar observations have been made in the case of State of Orissa v. Brahamarbar Senapathi, 1996(2) SCT 651 (SC) : (1994) 2 SCC 491.
In the case of Union of India v. C Rama Swamy and others, 1997(2) SLR 584 the Supreme Court has observed that principles of estoppel would be applicable to the cases where date of birth is sought to be altered after considerable time.
The observation of Their Lordships in this regard reads as under :  "In matters relating to appointment to service various factors are taken into consideration before making a selection or an appointment.
One of the relevant circumstances is the age of the person who is sought to be appointed.
It may not be possible to conclusively prove that an advantage had been gained by representing a date of birth which is different than that which is latter sought to be incorporated.
But it will not be unreasonable to presume that when a candidate, at the first instance, communicates a particular date of birth there is obviously his intention that his age calculated on the basis of that date of birth should be taken into consideration by the appointing authority for adjudging his suitability for a responsible office.
In fact, where maturity is a relevant factor to assess suitability, an older person is ordinarily considered to be more mature and, therefore, more suitable.
In such a case, it cannot be said that advantage is not obtained by a person because of an earlier date of birth, if he subsequently claims to be younger in age, after taking that advantage.
In such a situation, it would be against public policy to permit such a change to enable longer benefit to the person concerned.
This being so, we find it difficult to accept the broad proposition that the principle of estoppel would not apply in such a case where the age of a person who is sought to be appointed may be a relevant consideration to assess his suitability."
(emphasis supplied).
5.
When the principles enunciated in the aforementioned judgments are applied to the facts of the instant case, it becomes evident that the petitioner was selected and appointed as Law Officer by representing his particular date of birth and throughout for long and 22 years he has maintained that date of birth in his service record.
The suit filed on 26101998 has been rightly dismissed by the Courts below.
Therefore, I do not find any legal infirmity in the views taken by the Courts below.
The appeal is, thus, liable to be dismissed.
6.
The first argument of the learned counsel is liable to be rejected for the simple reason that the plaintiff-appellant is an employee of the Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Ltd The Civil Service Rules on which the reliance has been sought to be placed by the learned counsel would not be attracted because the plaintiff-appellant is not a civil servant.
There is nothing on record to show that these rules have been followed or adopted by the defendant-respondent.
Therefore, I have no hesitation in rejecting the first submission made by the learned counsel.
7.
The other submissions made by the learned counsel are based on the judgment of this Court in Sat Parkash's case (supra) would also not require a serious consideration in view of the fact that the State of Punjab has lifted the ban by issuing policy letter on 2161994 inviting application for correction of date of birth which provided that in cases where no undue advantage has been secured by person concerned, he could apply within a specified period.
It was on the basis of the policy reflected in instructions dated 2161994 that an employee filed an application before the Punjab University for correction of his date of birth in his matriculation certificate.
A committee after due consideration, ordered change of his date of birth and thereafter the employee applied for the correction of his date of birth to the concerned department.
The findings of fact recorded in favour of the employee were that he never took any undue advantage, therefore, it is obvious that it was on account of instructions issued by the State of Punjab for its employees that the change in the date of birth was permitted and in the instant case there is neither any policy letter nor the plaintiff-appellant is an employee of the State.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.