M Katju, J - Heard Sri VB Singh, learned Senior Advocate and Sri P S Bhagel, Advocate for the Petitioner, and learned counsel for the Central Govt.  2.
Learned counsel for respondent prays for and is granted 3 weeks to file counter affidavit.
3.
Issue notice to respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 returnable at an early date.
4.
List peremptorily on 24-3-2002 on which date the petition may be finally disposed.
5.
The petitioner has prayed for quashing the panel prepared for the posts of Vice Chairmen in various benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as CAT).
6.
Section 6(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 states :  "A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Vice Chairman unless he is, or has been (or is qualified to be) a judge of a High Court;  (a) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under the Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Secretary to the Government of India; or  (b) has, for at least five years, held the post of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under the Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India :  (c) has, for a period of not less than three years, held office as a Judicial Member or an Administrative Member."
7.
At first glance a perusal of the above provision gives the impression that even a Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India can be appointed as Vice Chairman.
However, we are of the opinion that Section 6(2) cannot be read in isolation but it must be read alongwith Article 50 of the Constitution, which states :  "Separation of judiciary from executive - The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State."
8.
The object of Article 50 of the Constitution was that there should be separation of the judiciary from the executive so that there may be an independent judiciary in which alone the public can have confidence.
This view is also supported by the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra v. Labour Law Petitioners' Association, 1998(2) SCT 133 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 1233.
9.
In our `prima facie' opinion the Vice Chairmen of CAT can only be a sitting or retired High Court Judge or an Advocate who is qualified for appointment as a High Court Judge.
10.
A person who has been in executive service for 20 to 30 years naturally develops a pro-executive approach and his thinking process becomes coloured whereby.
However, since the CAT is a judicial body that has to decide judicial matters it must function as an independent body, as that alone can inspire the confidence of the public.
A person who comes from a legal background has an independent mind, whether he is or has been a High Court judge or an advocate having more than 10 years practice.
11.
We are not expressing any opinion on the point whether a member of the Tribunal should also be a person with a legal background.
However we are certainly of the opinion that the Vice Chairman must be a person with a legal background since the person who presides over a bench must inspire confidence in the public.
The very object of Article 50 will be subverted, in our opinion, if the Presiding Officer is a person from the executive.
The Directive Principles in the Constitution cannot be treated as merely ornamental, as held by the Supreme Court in Keshavananda Bharti v. State of Kerala, (1973)4 SCC 225 : (AIR 1973 SC 1461), Minerva Mills v. Union of India, 1980 SC 1789 and Unnikrishnan v. State of AP, 1993(2) SCT 511 (SC) : 1993 SC 2178.
In our opinion the person who has been a Secretary or Additional Secretary of the Govt. of India can only be appointed as Vice Chairman in exceptional circumstances if no person with a legal background as mentioned in clause (a) of Section 6(2) is available, and even in this situation such appointment can only be a stop - gap arrangement for a short period till the person mentioned in Clause (a) of Section 6(2) becomes available.
12.
We make it clear that we are not making any derogatory comment on members of the executive, many of whom are doing their duty excellently and honestly.
We are only concerned with the confidence of the public in the judiciary, which is only possible if the judiciary is not only independent but also appears to be independent.
13.
In the circumstances we direct that in the panel which has been prepared for appointment of Vice Chairmen of various benches of CAT and in future panels also, only the persons referred to Section 6(2)(a) can be appointed as the Vice Chairmen of the various benches of the CAT.
14.
Let a copy of this order be communicated forthwith by the Registrar General of this Court as well as the learned counsel for the Central Govt. to the Union Law Secretary, New Delhi and Chairman of the CAT, New Delhi.
The petitioner may also communicate it to the appropriate authorities.
15.
Let a copy of this order be given to the counsel for the parties on payment of usual charges today.
Order accordingly.