RL Anand, J - Shri Rachhpal Singh, Technical Assistant Grade-II has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the Food Corporation of India (hereinafter called the Corporation), Zonal Manager (North) and Senior Regional Manager, Punjab Region and it has been prayed that a writ petition of prohibition be issued against respondent No. 3 i.e.
Regional Senior Manager, Punjab Region restraining him from imposing any major penalty on him in pursuance of the impugned show cause notice dated 3042001 (Annexure P-4), forwarded to the petitioner vide letter dated 29112001/3122001, as he has no jurisdiction to do so.
It has also been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued quashing the impugned show cause notice Annexure P-4 as the same is patently without jurisdiction as it has been issued by an authority lower in rank than that of appointing/disciplinary authority.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he joined the Corporation as Technical Assistant Grade-II and subsequently he was promoted to the next higher post of Technical Assistant Grade-II by the Zonal Manager (North).
While serving with the Corporation he was issued a charge-sheet dated 1832000 under Regulation 58 of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 for major penalty by the Senior Regional Manager for failing to maintain absolute integrity and due devotion to duty and for acceptance and despatch of substandard rice stocks Ex-Talwandi Bhai to Olavakot and causing loss to the Corporation.
The petitioner refuted the charges levelled against him and contended that he was not responsible for accepting or dispatching substandard rice stocks as he had neither accepted the stocks in question nor he despatched the said stocks in the rice special under complaint.
However, the Senior Regional Manager of the Corporation appointed Mr. RP Sood as Inquiry Officer to look into the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
The said Inquiry Officer did not appreciate the points in controversy and held that the charge-sheet has been proved against the petitioner.
The petitioner alleges that his service conditions are governed by the statutory rules known as Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971.
The post of Assistant Grade-I (Depot), Assistant Grade-II (Depot) and Assistant Grade-III (Depot) belonging to the Depot Cadre and also the posts of Technical Assistant Grade- I, Technical Assistant Grade-II and Technical Assistant Grade-III belonging to the Technical Cadre are Category-III posts under the said Regulations and the senior Regional Manager is the appointing authority to these posts.
The petitioner is Technical Assistant Grade-II.
His appointing authority is only the Zonal Manager of the Corporation, who alone is competent to impose any major penalty or issue show cause notice to him as to why the major penalty should not be imposed on him.
The Senior Regional Manager, who is junior to Zonal Manager, has no competency to issue the show cause notice and in these circumstances the notice Annexure P-4 has been issued by an officer subordinate in rank and his (Senior Regional Manager) action is without jurisdiction.
The petitioner replied to the show cause notice and took a specific objection that respondent No. 3 had no jurisdiction to issue show cause notice to him.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner made the above mentioned prayer.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at a considerable length at the motion stage and are of the considered opinion that the present writ petition is liable to be dismissed: firstly, as it is premature at this juncture and secondly, that the contentions raised by the learned counsel of the petitioner are prima-facie devoid of any merit.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the orders Annexure P-1 dated 1051991 vide which the petitioner was promoted as Technical Assistant Grade-II and vehemently submitted that these orders were issued though by the Deputy Manager (Admn.
I) but were issued on behalf of the Zonal Manager (North) and thus the Zonal Manager (North) is the appointing authority of the petitioner, who alone has the jurisdiction, if any, to take disciplinary action against the petitioner including the show cause notice.
The counsel further submitted by relying upon the show cause notice that this has been issued under the signatures of Assistant Manager (Vigilance) on behalf of the Senior Regional Manager.
The Senior Regional Manager is not the appointing authority of the petitioner and, therefore, he had no jurisdiction to issue the show cause notice Annexure P-4 vide letter Annexure P-5.
Therefore, a declaration may be given that this action on the part of Senior Regional Manager is without any jurisdiction and against the rules and regulations of the Corporation.
In support of his contentions the learned counsel for the petitioner also cited some case law at the Bar which we shall refer tin the later portion of this judgment.
5.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that the show cause notice Annexure P-4 has been issued by an officer who was not the appointing authority of the petitioner and as such he had no jurisdiction to take such action.
Is it so ?
In order to adjudice this controversy we will have to refer to the statutory regulations.
The services of the petitioner fall in Category-II and the following heads will make the position clear :-  Sl.
No. Post Appointing Authority Authority competent to relax age limit and qualifications.
Authority competent to impose penalties and penalties it may impose Authority Penalties + Appellate Authority 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7 1.
Category-IV Distt.Office Distt.
Manager Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager.
District Manager.
All  Sr Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager.
Regional/Port Office Deputy Manager/Deputy Regional Manager Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager Deputy Manager/Deputy Regional Manager All  Sr Regional Manager Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager.
Zonal Office/Headquarters  Deputy Manager Dy.
Zonal Manager/Joint Manager Deputy Manager All  Zonal Manager/Executive Director (Personnel) 2.
CATEGORY-III + District Regional/Port Office Sr. Regl.
Manager/Regional Manager/Joint Manager Executive Director (Personnel) District/Deputy Regional Manager/Dy.
Manager Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager.
All Minor  Sr Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager., Zonal Manager.
Zonal Office Deputy Zonal Manager Executive Director (Pers.
)/Zonal Manager Deputy Zonal Manager All  Zonal Manager Headquarters Joint Manager Executive Director (Pers.)
Joint Manager All  Executive Director (Personnel) 3.
CATEGORY-II Zone Zonal Manager Managing Director Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Joint Manager Minor Zonal Manager Zonal Manager All  Managing Director Headquarters Executive Director (Pers.)
Managing Director Joint Manager Minor  Executive Director (Pers.)
Executive Director (Pers.)
All  Managing Director 4.
CATEGORY-I Category-I Managing Director Chairman Managing Director All  Chairman 6.
The reading of these Regulations further shows that the Zonal Manager is the appointing authority of the petitioner but so far as the penalty aspects is concerned, if a minor penalty is to be imposed, it is within the domain of the Senior Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager and in this eventuality the appeal will lie to the Zonal Manager.
if any penalty other than the minor penalty is to be imposed, it will be within the domain of Zonal Manager who is competent to impose all types of penalties and against the action of the Zonal Manager, the Appellate Authority is the Managing Director.
Further to appreciate the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner, it will be necessary for us to reproduce the entire notice Annexure P-4 which is under challenge :-  "Shri Rachpal Singh TA-II was charge-sheeted under major penalty in a case of District Ferozepur vide memorandum dated 1832000.
Shri RP Sood DM (G) Retd.
Inquiry Officer, FCI, RO (Pb.)
Chandigarh was appointed as Inquiry Officer to enquire into charges framed against him.
The inquiry officer has since submitted his enquiry findings vide inquiry report dated 26.3.2001 (copy enclosed).
The disciplinary authority will take suitable decision after considering the report.
If he wishes to make any representation or submission he may do so in writing to the disciplinary authority within seven days of receipts of this memorandum.
If no representation is received within the stipulated period, it would be presumed that he has nothing to say and case would be decided EX PARTE."
7.
The reading of the above would show that no penalty whatsoever has been imposed upon the petitioner.
This notice only indicates that the Inquiry Officer had submitted the report which was enclosed to the petitioner and the petitioner was asked to submit his representation within seven days from the date of the receipt of the memorandum.
Failing which it will be presumed that he had nothing to say.
Through the impugned show cause notice an intimation has been given to the petitioner that disciplinary authority will take suitable decision after considering the report and in case the petitioner wishes to make any representation or submission, he may do so in writing to the disciplinary authority within seven days.
In these circumstances, we are of the considered opinion that no substantive action whatsoever has been taken against the petitioner.
The stage is yet to come whether the petitioner is to be awarded minor penalty or major penalty.
If tomorrow a decision is taken that the petitioner is only to be awarded minor penalty, certainly it is within the domain of Senior Regional Manager.
If the department decides to impose a major penalty and it is imposed as such, then the Zonal Manager has the power to do so.
In fact, the petitioner has put the cart before the horse.
He has unnecessarily tried to read the mind of the punishing authority.
Why he is becoming panicky, is for him to explain.
Assuming that the authority impose a minor penalty upon the petitioner after taking into consideration his reply Annexure P-6, then how he can seek a declaration that the issuance of show cause notice Annexure P-4 issued under the orders of the Senior Regional Manager is bad.
Moreover, the petitioner has already stated in sub-para (e) of his reply that his punishing authority is Zonal Manager.
8.
Similar point came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 13937 of 1999, titled Sham Lal Jindal v. Food Corporation of India & Others, and the following reply was given by the Division Bench :-  "An analysis of the various clauses of Regulation 59 shows that the disciplinary authority can adopt either of the four courses incorporated hereinabove.
Clause (21) of Regulation 58 which requires forwarding of the record of enquiry to the disciplinary authority competent to impose penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 comes into play only when the authority competent to initiate proceedings is not empowered to impose the major penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54.
No doubt, proviso to Regulation 56 lays down that the major penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 shall not be imposed by any authority other than the appointing authority and if more than one authorities have been vested with the power to make appointment or there is a difference of rank between the appointing authority and the authority which actually appointed, then the higher authority shall be entitled to impose the major penalties but, as already mentioned above, this provisions has relevance only at the stage of actual imposition of penalty and not prior to that and the petitioner could have invoked the same only if respondent No. 3 had passed final order imposing any of the major penalties enumerated in Regulation 54 and as that stage has not reached so far, we do not find any valid ground to interfere with the pending disciplinary proceedings by assuming that respondent No. 3 will necessarily impose one of the penalties enumerated in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 and that too, without considering the plea raised by the petitioner about his competent to impose such penalty.
In our opinion, any interference with the pending departmental action should be treated as totally unwarranted and unjustified because there is no warrant for the Courts intervention with the exercise of discretion by respondent No. 3.
He may, after considering the representation submitted by the petitioner, impose any of the minor penalties enumerated in clauses (i) to (iv) of Regulation 54.
He may also remand the case to the enquiring authority for recording of further evidence.
If, at all, he forms an opinion that penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 should be imposed on the petitioner, then he may, a consideration of the objection raised by the petitioner to his competence, refer the matter to the Zonal Manager for appropriate consideration and then it will be for the concerned authority to take final decision in the matter."
9.
We are in respectful agreement with the observations made by the Hon'ble Division Bench in the aforesaid Civil Writ Petition disposed of on 1522000.
At the cost of repetition we are of the considered opinion that the present writ petition is premature.
10.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon Chief of the Army Staff and others v. Major Dharam Pal Kukrety, AIR 1985 SC 703 and drew our attention to para 5 of the said judgment which runs as follows :-  "5.
The same contentions, as were raised before the High Court, were taken before us at the hearing of this Appeal.
We will first deal with the appellants preliminary objection that the Respondent's writ petition was not maintainable as being premature.
It was the Respondents case that the Chief of the Army Staff had no jurisdiction to issue the impugned show cause notice after he had been again found not guilty by the court-martial on revision.
The said notice expressly stated that the Chief of the Army Staff was of the opinion that the respondent's misconduct as disclosed in the proceedings rendered his further retention in service undesirable and asked him to submit his explanation and defence, if any, to the charges made against him.
If the Respondent's contention with respect to the jurisdiction of the Chief of the Army Staff to issue the said notice, were correct, the Respondent was certainly exposed to the jeopardy of having his explanation and defence rejected and be being removed or dismissed from services.
Were the said notice issued without jurisdiction, the Respondent would have then suffered a grave, prejudicial injury by an act which was without jurisdiction.
Where the threat of a prejudicial action is wholly without jurisdiction, a person cannot be asked to wait for the injury to be caused to him before seeking the Court's protection.
If, on the other hand, the Chief of the Army Staff had the power in law to issue the said notice, it would not be open to the Respondent to approach the court under Article 226 of the Constitution at the stage of notice only and in such an event his writ petition could be said to be premature.
This was, however, not a contention which could have decided at the threshold until the court had come to a finding with respect to the jurisdiction of the Chief of the Army Staff to issue the impugned notice.
Having held that the impugned notice was issued without any jurisdiction, the High Court was right in further holding that the Respondent's writ petition was not premature and was maintainable."
This judgment cannot be followed in view of the fact that in the present case minor penalty is within the domain of Senior Regional Manager while all types of penalties can be imposed by the Zonal Manager.
In the case in hand it is yet to be decided by the authorities whether a minor or major penalty is to be imposed upon the petitioner.
The cause of action with regard to jurisdiction will arise to the petitioner moment a final action with regard to imposition of penalty is taken.
11.
The learned counsel then drew our attention to S Gobinda Menon v. Union of India and another, AIR 1967 SC 1274 his judgment only deals the field where a writ of prohibition can be issued.
It was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that jurisdiction for grant of a writ of prohibition is primarily supervisory and the object of that writ is to restrain Courts or inferior tribunals from exercising a jurisdiction which they do not possess, at all or else to prevent them from exceeding the limits of their jurisdiction.
In other words, the object is to confine Courts or tribunals of inferior or limited jurisdiction within their bounds.
There is no quarrel with the proposition as laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In the present writ petition for the time being there is no material before us to hold or say that notice Annexure P-4 has been issued by an officer who has prima-facie no jurisdiction to issue the same.
Only the action will tell whether the punishment which may be passed in pursuance of Annexure P-4 has been passed by a competent authority or not.
Consequently, this writ petition is hereby dismissed.
However, we make it clear that while taking final decision in the matter, the competent authority shall consider the objections raised by the petitioner in the reply to show cause notice.
Petition dismissed.