TS Doabia, J - Admitted.
2.
Time and again, the judicial opinion has been expressed to the effect that the policy of adhocism adopted by the State employer is nothing but the archaic hire and fire policy since demolished by the Constitution and the law of the land.
It has been described as a charter for arbitrary preference.
It neither serves the cause of the State nor it gives assurance of permanency to a person who is so appointed.
Keeping the sword of damocles hanging over such appointee is not conducive to the public service and it has to be avoided.
Notwithstanding the above position, adhoc appointments came to be made by the Chief Education Officer.
The orders to this effect came to be passed on 27th May 99.
When these appointments came to the notice of the State Government, it rose to the occasion and passed an order whereby the orders passed by the Chief Education Officer, Rajouri, by which the appointments were made to the post of Laboratory Assistants were ordered to be kept in abeyance.
This orders passed on 13th March 2000, and 17th May, 2000 are the subject matter of challenge in this petition.
3.
The State has taken a plea that the appointments which were made by the Chief Education Officer were made in breach of Rule 14 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services Classification, Control and Appeal Rules, 1956.
It is urged that the prior approval of the Chief Minister was not obtained, and therefore, these appointments were ordered to be held in abeyance.
Two Government orders issued in this regard are of 13th March, 2000 and 17th May, 2000.
4.
The total number of posts regarding which action was taken by the State Government are enumerated in the orders, annexure RA and R.B, attached with the reply filed by the State.
For Facility of reference, these are being reproduced below :  "Annexure RA It is hereby ordered that 46 (forty-six) appointment orders issued by the Chief Education Officer, Rajouri against the post of Laboratory Assistants without observing the selection procedure as set out in the rules i.e. without reference of these posts to the J&K Service Selection Board are hereby kept in abeyance.
By order of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir."
Annexure R.B.
"In partial medication of Government Order No. 307-GAD of 2000 dated 1332000, it is hereby ordered that 89 (Eighty-nine) appointment orders in respect of the various categories, as indicated below, issued by the Chief Education Officer, Rajouri without observing the selection procedure as set out in the rules i.e. without reference of these posts to the Jammu and Kashmir Service Selection Board are hereby kept in abeyance, with retrospective effect : Laboratory Assistant 60 Library Assistant 25 Junior Assistant 04" 5.
Petitioners submit that in line with the earlier decisions given by this Court reported as SLJ 1989 J&K 337 and SLJ 1989 J&K 138, the petitioners are entitled to continue on the posts till regular selection is made.
In a nutshell, the arguments advanced are :  i. that if the letters of appointment are perused, then it becomes apparent that in these letters, it was mentioned that these incumbents would continue to perform their duties till regular selection is made and as no regular selection has been made therefore, petitioners should be permitted to continue; ii.
that as the petitioners had joined the services and continued for almost a year, therefore, if any order was to be passed to their detriment, then they should have been heard in the matter; iii.
that in terms of R 14 of the Rules aforementioned, the requisite approval of the Minister in the Education Department was taken, and therefore, this should be good and sufficient for the purposes of Rule 14 of the above rules.
6.
I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the assertions made by the writ petitioners.
7.
The argument that the petitioners should have been given an opportunity of hearing was noticed in another case titled `Mohd.
Yousuf v. State of J&K and others, 2000(3) SCT 27.
It was observed that those who came to be appointed without following the due procedure cannot claim that procedural safeguards should be given to them when orders of termination are passed.
The illegal appointments made in the aforementioned case were quashed.
An appeal was preferred being LPA (SW) No. 2 of 99 titled Mohinder Singh and others v. State and others.
This came to be dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on 24th May 2000.
The Division Bench observed that as the applicants were appointed without inviting the applications, their appointment was illegal, and therefore, they were not entitled to contend that principles of natural justice should be observed in their case.
In this regard, it would be apt to mention that even Lord Denning who has been espousing the cause of observing principles of natural justice has made exception in certain circumstances.
8.
In Ward v. Bradford Corporation, 1971(70) L.G.R.
27 a female student was expelled for having had a man in her room, contrary to regulations.
The disciplinary board recommending this decision to the Board of Governors had been referred the case by the Governors themselves, who gave themselves the power of referral (previously vesting only in the principal herself) by a retrospective amendment to the rules.
On top of all this an assistant education Officer was present throughout the hearing and advised the committee of the policy they ought to adopt and apply in the particular case.
The action of the respondents was sustained notwithstanding the fact that hearing was not given.
Lord Denning said :  "She had broken the rules most flagrantly.
She had invited a man to her room and lived there with him for weeks on end.
I say nothing about her morals.
She claims they are her own affairs.
So be it.
If she wanted to live with this man, she could have gone into lodgings in the town and no one would have worried, except perhaps her parents.
Instead of going into lodgings she had this man with her, night after night, in the hall of residence where such a thing was absolutely forbidden.
This is a fine example to set to others !
And she a girl training to be a teacher !
I expect the governors and the staff all thought that she was quite an unsuitable person for it.
She would never make a teacher.
No parent would knowingly entrust their child to her care.
Six members of the disciplinary committee voted decisively for her expulsion.
Not a single vote was cast agasint it, nor or (for ?)
any less sentence.
Three abstained for reasons best known to themselves".
9.
In view of the above and in view of the decision given by Letters Patent Bench in LPA (SW) No. 2 of 99 referred to above, the argument put across by the petitioners that principles of natural justice have not been observed in this case, and therefore, the orders passed by the State Government, which orders have been quoted above, are required to be quashed, cannot be sustained.
10.
Independently of the above, it be seen that in case, any relief is granted to the petitioners that would amount to enforcing an order, which is itself illegal.
This cannot be done in view of the observations made by the Supreme Court of India in Gadde Venkateswara Rao v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and others, AIR 1966 SC 828.
At page 837, the Supreme Court made following observations :  "In these circumstances was it a case for the High Court to interfere in its discretion and quash the order of the Government dated April, 18, 1963.
If the High Court had quashed the said order it would have restored an illegal order, it would have given the Health Centre to a village contrary to the valid resolution passed by the Panchayat Samithi.
The High Court therefore, it our view, rightly refused to exercise its extraordinary discretionary power in the circumstances of the case."
Similar view was taken in the case of MC Mehta v. Union of India and others, 1999(1) SCT 561 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 2583  11.
Independently of the above, it be further seen that any appointment made without resorting to giving advertisement and not giving a chance to everyone to participate in that process, would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
See BS Minhas v. Indian Statistical Institute and others, AIR 1984 SC 363 and Ashwani Kumar v. State of Haryana, AIR 1997 SC 1628.
Thus, the arguments put across by the petitioners noticed at serial (i) and (ii) above.
cannot be sustained.
12.
So far as the non-compliance of R 14 is concerned, the State is right in its contention that if any adhoc appointment was to be made beyond a period of three months, then prior approval of the Chief Minister of the State was required.
This is missing in this case.
With regard to argument put across at serial No (i) that the tenure of the petitioners is to last till regular selection is made all that is said is that these appointments being void ab inito cannot be kept alive with aid of court of process.
This policy of first making illegal appointment and then protecting them through the court process would not be apt.
This argument is, therefore, found to be without basis and is rejected.
Thus looking from any point of view, there is no merit in this petition which is dismissed as such.
The writ petition, as indicated above shall stand dismissed.
Petition dismissed.