VS Aggarwal, J - Jatinder Pal Singh has filed the present writ petition seeking quashing of the order purported to have been passed whereby the admission of the petitioner in 2 years Diploma of Pharmacy has been cancelled by the Principal, Government Polytechnic, Ambala City.
2.
The relevant facts are that respondents 1 and 2 invited applications for Diploma in Pharmacy for the Session 1991-92.
The applications were to reach respondent No. 2 by 691991 upto 5.00 P.M.
The interview was fixed for 10th September, 1991.
Respondents 1 and 2 were to select the students for four colleges i.e. Gandhi College of Pharmacy, Karnal, Maharishi College of Pharmacy, Tarori, Maharaja Agarsain College of Pharmacy Agroha and Lord Shiva College of Pharmacy, Sirsa.
The admission was to be made strictly on merits and it was for all the institutions.
After the selection the candidates were required to pay the fees failing which the offer of admission was deemed to have been cancelled.
The petitioner had also applied for one of the seats within time and had attached all the necessary documents.
The application of the petitioner was found to be correct and he appeared in interview on 1191991.
He was asked to deposit the fee.
The petitioner was directed by respondent No. 1 to report for his studies in the college at Sirsa.
3.
It is asserted that a telegram was received by the petitioner whereby his admission was cancelled stating that he had wrongly been admitted.
The complaint of the petitioner is that there was no candidate with a better merit than the petitioner.
No name of the candidate who had better merit had been mentioned in the telegram.
Certain things had been manipulated to deprive the petitioner of his admission.
In these circumstances, the order withdrawing the admission of the petitioner had been challenged.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 the petition was contested.
The plea set up by the respondents was that respondent No. 2 regulates these admissions for and on behalf of State of Haryana.
The admissions were made strictly on merits of available candidates.
The admission of the petitioner was provisional.
For the session 1991-92, total 360 admissions were to be made and out of which 20 seats were to be filled up of General Category candidates on All India basis.
The petitioner was seeking admission in those 20 seats.
The petitioner had secured 79327% marks in the qualifying examination while the last admitted candidate possessed 79555% marks in the qualifying examination.
The candidates were invited for interview alongwith the petitioner.
They were asked to make a line merit-wise.
For selection of candidates two rooms were provided.
One room was for checking the documents and the other for allotment of seats.
The last admitted candidate Ms. Savita Gupta was present at the time of interview.
She could not appear before the Selection Committee.
The petitioner was admitted wrongly as he managed to appear before the Selection Committee before her.
At the conclusion of admission process, it was found that there was one extra candidate.
It was in this backdrop that admission of the petitioner was cancelled.
5.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner only raised one pertinent argument.
It was urged that before cancelling the admission of the petitioner, no opportunity of being heard was given to him and in this regard no show cause notice even had been served.
It is an admitted fact that before cancelling the admission of the petitioner, no show cause notice had been issued to the petitioner.
Thus, it was urged that in the peculiar facts, it was not necessary to issue a show cause notice.
Reliance in this regard is being placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The Maharashtra State Financial Corporation v. M/s. Suvarna Board Mills, AIR 1994 SC 2657.
In that case there was a notice given to the defaulter to repay the dues after certain dates in which it was mentioned that failing which possession of the factory will be taken.
The Supreme Court held that this was a sufficient notice and would meet the requirement of principles of natural justice.
The findings recorded by the Supreme Court were :-  "But then, the Section 29 notice did call upon the respondent to repay the dues by 211192, failing, which the respondent was put to notice that possession of its factory premises would be taken.
This did meet the requirement of natural justice, according to us.
No separate show cause notice was required, as held by the High Court.
Section 29 action could not have therefore been set at naught because of absence of an independent show cause notice."
Thus, it is obvious from the nature of the facts that the cited decision is patently distinguishable.
It was confined to its peculiar facts.
6.
The principles of natural justice have made rapid inroads even in certain administrative matters after the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of AK Kraipak v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150.
The Supreme Court held :-  "This takes us to the question whether the principles of natural justice apply to administrative proceedings similar to that with which we are concerned in these cases.
According to the learned Attorney-General those principles have no bearing in determining the validity of the impugned selections.
In support of his contention he read to us several decisions.
It is not necessary to examine those decisions as there is a great deal of fresh thinking on the subject.
The horizon of natural justice is constantly expanding."
Thereafter the Supreme Court went on to hold :-  "If the purpose of the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice one fails to see why those rules should be made inapplicable to administrative enquiries.
Often times it is not easy to draw the line that demarcates administrative enquiries from quasi-judicial enquiries.
Enquiries which were considered administrative at one time are now being considered as quasi-judicial in character.
Arriving at a just decision is the aim of both quasi-judicial enquiries as well as administrative enquiries."
In certain domestic enquiries where rights of the persons were materially affected, it was held that principles of natural justice must be adhered to.
Similarly, in the case of SN Mukherjee v Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
241 the Supreme Court went on to hold that even reasons in this regard should also be forthcoming and held :-  "The object underlying the rules of natural justice "is to prevent miscarriage of justice" and secure "fair play in action."
As pointed out earlier the requirement about recording of reasons for its decision by an administrative authority exercising quasi-judicial functions achieves this object by excluding chances of arbitrariness and ensuring a degree of fairness in the process of decision-making.
Keeping in view the expanding horizon of the principles of natural justice, we are of the opinion, that the requirement to record reason can be regarded as one of the principles of natural justice which govern exercise of power by administrative authorities.
The rules of natural justice are not embodied rules.
The extent of their application depends upon the particular statutory framework whereunder jurisdiction has been conferred on the administrative authority.
With regard to the exercise of a particular power by an administrative authority including exercise of judicial or quasi-judicial functions the legislature, while conferring the said power, may feel that it would not be in the larger public interest that the reasons for the order passed by the administrative authority be recorded in the order and be communicated to the aggrieved party and it may dispense with such a requirement."
Same was the view expressed in the later decision in the case of Rattan Lal Sharma v. Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram (Co-education) High Secondary School, AIR 1993 SC 2155 : 1993(3) SCT 525 (SC).
The Supreme Court held :-  "In Administrative Law, Rules of natural justice are foundational and fundamental concepts and law is not well settled that the principles of natural justice are part of the legal and judicial procedures."
7.
Reverting back to the facts of the present case, as mentioned above, admittedly no notice to show cause had been given to the petitioner after he had been admitted and deposited fee.
Even in case of urgency short notice could be given.
This is for the added reason that petitioner challenges the claim of the respondents that any other person with better percentage of marks had appeared or was to be admitted before the petitioner.
He should not have been condemned unheard.
Rules of the game must be followed.
8.
On behalf of the respondents it was further pointed that admission of the petitioner was provisional and, therefore, it could be cancelled at any time.
Even on this score the contention has to be rejected because the petitioner was admitted and he had deposited the necessary fee.
He was directed to go and attend classes in the College at Sirsa.
In that view of the matter, the admission for all practicable purposes was complete.
Even if for the sake of argument it be taken that it was provisional, in the fitness of things the petitioner should have been heard and given chance to state.
Unfortunately that was not done.
Keeping in view the same, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
For these reasons, the civil writ petition is allowed and the impugned order is quashed.
However, it is for the respondents to consider if after such a long time they would like to issue a show cause notice to the petitioner or not.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.