Satya Brata Sinha, J - This writ application is directed against an order dated 5.4.99 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioner herein was dismissed in limine, directing -  "Heard the Ld.
Advocates for both the parties.
It is found from the Annexure-F that the petitioner was engaged as a casual worker under Rural Functional Literacy Project sometime in the year 1986.
It is found that the Treasury Officer, Jangipur refused to pass the bill for monthly remuneration.
From this it is established that the petitioner is not holding the civil post and this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to give any direction to the authority concerned and hence, this petition is rejected.
However, the petitioner is given liberty to move before the appropriate forum."
2.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has strongly relied upon in the case of Union of India and Ors. v. Deep Chand Pandey reported in AIR 1993 SC 382 : 1992(3) SCT 718 (SC) and submitted that in terms of Section 14(1) of the Administrative Tribunal Act an application filed by a casual employee working in Government Department questioning an order of termination would come within the purview of Section 14(1) of the Act.
The Apex Court held :-  "The present respondents are claiming the right to continue in the employment of the Union of India as before, with additional claim of temporary status and it is, therefore, idle to suggest that such a claim is not covered by the Act.
The necessary conclusion, therefore, is that the remedy of the respondents was before the Tribunal and not the High Court.
We, accordingly, hold that the High Court did not have the jurisdiction to entertain the claim of the respondents.
Consequently the impugned judgment is set aside, the writ petition before the High Court is dismissed and these appeals are allowed, but without costs."
3.
However, having regard to the nature of the application we thought it fit to consider the merit of the matter assuming that a writ application is maintainable.
The fact of the matter is as follows :-  4.
The petitioner was appointed as Group-D staff on daily wages on 4th April, 1986 in the office of the respondent No. 5 under the Directorate of Mass Education Extension, West Bengal.
By a Memo No. 17/AD/E dated 7th January, 1993, the respondent No. 3 in reply to a Memo dated 411993 informed the respondent No. 5 that the case for absorption of all the casual workers including that of the petitioner has been sent to the Government for consideration and thus arrangement may be made to pay the monthly wage bill of the petitioner.
However, the respondent No. 5 in reply informed the respondent No. 3 that since February 1993 the payment has been withheld as there was no post facto approval.
5.
The only question which, inter alia, arises for consideration, is as to whether the petitioner has a legal right to claim regularisation in service or not.
6.
When questioned, the learned Counsel seeks to place reliance upon a Memorandum dated 3rd August, 1979 issued by the Labour Department, from perusal whereof it appears that therein it has been stated -  "Further recruitment of causal and such other categories of workers shall not be normally made.
Initial recruitment of such workers, if considered unavoidable by any employing authority shall henceforth be invariably made through the employment exchange, so already decided in the case of filling up of vacancies on non-P.SC non-promotional posts.
Ad hoc appointment of persons from the open market, may, however, be made for a period not exceeding 15 days to meet any situation of emergent nature.
Such ad hoc appointments will have to be claimed in future for absorption in the required establishments under the State Government.
Casual and such other categories of workers who have engaged in a perennial type of work for continuous period of more than three years may be absorbed in the required establishments on temporary basis in existing vacancies.
If suitable vacancies are not available necessary steps may be taken by the respective authorities to create the requisite number of posts for the purpose of absorption of such categories of workers in consultation with the Finance Department".
7.
It has not been disputed that the petitioner was appointed on an ad hoc basis.
At the time of his appointment recruitment rules framed in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India had not been followed.
The State while granting appointment to a person is not only bound to follow the recruitment rules made in terms of the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India but is also bound to give effect to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
No right far less any enforceable right flows from such illegal appointments.
The recruitment rules, inter alia, provide for grant of equal opportunity to be considered for appointment to all eligible candidates.
A person who is appointed through back-door cannot claim permanence only because he had been working for sometime.
Reference in this connection may be made to the case of Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra reported in AIR 1995 SC 962 : 1994(4) SCT 398 (SC) and several decisions of the Apex Court following the same.
It is further well known in view of several decisions of the Apex Court that only an irregular appointment can be regularised and not an illegal appointment.
It is further well settled that regularisation cannot be a mode of recruitment.
(See RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmiah reported in 1972(2) SCR 799 and BN Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka reported in 1979(3) SCR 937 which decisions have been considered by the Apex Court in V Sreenivasa Reddy v. Government of Andhra Pradesh reported in AIR 1995 SC 586 : 1995(1) SCT 353 (SC).
It is now also well settled in view of the recent decision of the Apex Court in State of M.P. v. Dharam Bir reported in 1998(6) SCC.
165 : 1998(3) SCT 301 (SC) that the status of a person cannot be changed with the passage of time.
A person who was appointed on temporary or ad hoc basis, thus cannot claim the status of a permanent servant only because he had worked for sometime.
The said decision along with other decisions had been considered by this Court in a large number of cases.
Reference in this connection, however, may be made to Biman Ch.
Karmakar v. State of West Bengal reported in 1999(2) CHN 289 and West Bengal Essential Commodities Supply Corporation Ltd. v. Md Sarif reported in 2000(1) CHN 2110.
The aforementioned circular letter dated 3rd August, 1979 is not a statute.
Even a policy decision cannot be adopted in derogation of a statutory rules.
Even the said purported memorandum dated 3rd August, 1979 is not an executive instruction within the meaning of Article 162 of the Constitution of India.
8.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that no legal right if any, can be claimed by the petitioner for regularisation of his service and/or for his absorption.
However, so far as the remuneration payable to the petitioner, if any, is due, it will be open to him to approach an appropriate forum in this regard.
9.
With the aforementioned observations, this application is dismissed.
However, there cannot be any doubt that the petitioner's case for regular appointment may be considered along with other eligible candidates and if he has become overaged, the appropriate Government may consider the matter relating to relaxation thereof if law permits.
There will be no order as to costs.
Application dismissed.