TS Doabia, J - The circumstances under which this petition has come to be filed be noticed.
2.
The petitioner seeks appointment on compassionate ground.
It is her case that her father died on 21-07-1988.
The petitioner applied for appointment on compassionate ground in the year 1995.
This was so done after the petitioner acquired requisite educational qualification (matriculation).
The application seems to have been submitted somewhere in the year 1995 (no date is given thereupon).
A letter by which the application was forwarded is dated 19th of October, 1995.
3.
The claim of the petitioner was rejected on the ground that the petitioner could seek appointment within six months from the date of death of the employee.
It is submitted that the application was submitted after a period of six months, therefore, the appointment could not be made.
4.
It be seen that the Supreme Court of India in case reported as Haryana State Electricity Board and another v. Hakim Singh, 1997(8) Supreme 518 has observed as under :  "This Court has considered the scope of the aforesaid circulars in Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar and another, 1996(2) JT 542 : 1996 (2) Supreme 552 : 1996(2) SCT 778."
"In that case widow of a deceased employee made an application almost twelve years after the death of her husband requesting for accommodating her son in the employment of the Board, but it was rejected by the Board.
When she moved the High Court the Board was directed to appoint him on compassionate grounds.
This Court upset the said directions of the High Court following two earlier decisions rendered by this Court, one in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana & ors. 1994(4) SCC 138 : 1994(3) S.C.T.
174, the other in Jagdish Prashad v. State of Bihar & Anr, 1996(1) SCC 301.
In the former a Bench of two judges has pointed out that "the whole object of granting compassionate employment is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crises.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post must less a post for the post held by the deceased."
In the later decision which also was rendered by a Bench of two judges, it was observed that "the very object of appointment of a dependent of the deceased employee who dies in harness is to relieve unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family."
The learned Judges pointed out that if the claim of the dependant which was preferred long after the death of the deceased employee is to be countenanced it would amount to another mode of recruitment of the dependant of the deceased government servant "which cannot be encouraged, de hors the recruitment rules."
"It is clear that the High Court has gone wrong in giving a direction to the Board to consider the claim of the respondent as the request was made far beyond the period indicated in the circular of the Board dated 1.10.1986.
Respondent, if he is interested in getting employment in the Board, has to pass through the normal route now."
In view of the above position of law as enunciated by the Supreme Court of India, it is not possible to issue any direction to the State to make appointment of the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there is a provision for relaxation.
To this limited extent a direction is given to the respondent-State to consider the case of the petitioner.
If relaxation can be given then the needful may be done.
The discretion would, however, purely rest on the respondent-State.
This petition is disposed of with the observations made above.
Order accordingly.