Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Are the petitioners entitled to be considered for promotion prior to those who are senior to them merely because they had acquired the requisite qualification earlier than the persons senior to them ?
This is the basic issue that arises for consideration in this bunch of 21 petitions.
Learned counsel for the parties have primarily referred to the facts in Civil Writ Petition No. 11524 of 1993.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined as a Junior Engineer (Mechanical) in the Haryana Public Works Department, Irrigation Branch, on September 27, 1973.
He passed the AMIE examination in the year 1982.
He, thus, became eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer on January 1, 1983.
He is a Member of the Haryana Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Overseers Engineering Service.
As against this, Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had joined service as Junior Engineers on October 17, 1968 and October 3, 1961 respectively.
They were, thus, senior to the petitioner.
However, they had qualified the AMIE examination in the year 1983.
As such, they had become eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer on January 1, 1994.
3.
In the year 1992, certain posts of Sub Divisional Officers became available.
Vide order dated November 30, 1992, the State Government ordered the promotion of nine officers including respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
Aggrieved by this order or promotion, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
According to the petitioner, a junior person who acquires eligibility earlier, is entitled to be promoted in preference to his senior as and when the promotional post becomes available.
Accordingly, the petitioner maintains that since he had qualified the AMIE examination earlier than Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, he had a right to be considered for promotino in preference to them.
Reliance in support of the submission has been placed on certain decisions.
On these premises, the petitioner prays that the order dated November 30, 1992 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.2 with the writ petition be quashed in so far as it relates to respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
He also prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the claim for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been inter alia stated that Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 "are senior to the petitioner as they had joined service in the department on 17.10.1968 and 3101961 respectively........." In fact, the respondents maintain that all the 10 officials promoted from the source to which the petitioner belongs are senior to him.
The respondents maintain that the action is in conformity with the rules and calls for no interference.
It is in view of those pleadings that the question as posed at the outset arises for consideration.
5.
On behalf of the petitioners, these cases have been argued by M/s SK Sud and CM Chopra, Advocates.
Since the cases relate to the Engineering Services in the Irrigation as well as Buildings and Roads Branches, the counsel have referred to the provisions of the rules applicable to the Buildings and Roads Branch.
Relying on these rules, the counsel have submitted that the members of the Class III service have to be considered for promotion not in the order of seniority in which their names are borne in the Class III service but in the order of dates on which they have acquired the eligibility for promotion to the class III service.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned Deputy Advocate General to the State of Haryana and the other counsel appearing for the respondents have contended that the claim made by the petitioners is wholly untenable.
6.
Before proceeding to consider the respective submissions, a brief reference to the rules may be made.
The conditions of service governing the Overseers/Sectional Officers are laid down in the rules called 'The Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads) Branch Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service (Class III) Rules, 1964.'
These rules were published in the Punjab Government Gazette of January 1, 1965.
By a notification issued in the year 1970, it was directed that in various provisions, the word 'Punjab' shall be substituted by 'Haryana'.
Rule 11 of these rules inter alia provides that "the seniority of the members of the service appointed after the commencement of these rules shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment in the service irrespective of their date of joining."
Various other provisions have also been made which are not relevant for the present controversy.
The members of the Class III service are eligible for promotion to the Class II service.
The provisions in this behalf are laid down in the rules called 'The Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, PWD (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965.'
Rule 6 lays down the method of recruitment to the service.
It inter alia provides are under :-  "Recruitment to Service - (1) Recruitment to the Service for Cadre and Ex-Cadre post shall be made in the following manner only from the sources listed below in the proportions and the order indicated against a lot of every 40 vacancies :- Method of Recruitment Proportion Allocation to each sources in lot of 40 vacancies + + + + 1.
Direct appointment 26 5 6 5 5 5 2.
Promotion from the members of the Punjab PWD (B&R), Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service 8 2 1 2  1 2 3.
Promotion from draftsmen members of the Draftsmen and Tracers Service 2 1 .. .. 1 .. 4.
Promotion from members of the Punjab PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and the Draftsmen members of the Draftsmen and Tracer Service, possessing qualifications prescribed in Appendix 'B 4 .. 1 1 1 1 40 8 8 8 8 8 Rule 7 prescribes the qualifications.
Rule 8 relates to direct recruitment.
It is not necessary to notice the provisions of these rules.
Rule 9 which lays down the procedure for appointment by promotion provides as under :-  "Appointment by promotion - (1) A committee consisting of Chairman of the Punjab Public Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend, any other member of the Commission representing it, Secretary, PWD, Building and Roads Branch, and Chief Engineers of PWD, Building and Roads, shall be constituted.
(2) The Chairman or the member of the Commission, as the case may be, shall preside over the meeting of this Committee.
(3) The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year and consider the cases of all eligible officials for promotion to the service, as on the first day of January of that year.
(4) The Committee shall prepare a list of officials suitable for promotion to the Service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
(5) The names of the officers included in this list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Punjab PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and members of Draftsmen and Tracers Service.
Provided that any junior officer, who, in the opinion of the committee, is of exceptional merit and suitability may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him in his own class.
(6) The list so prepared shall be revised every year.
(7) If in the process of preparing the list or its revision, it is proposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the Committee shall draw up a list of such officials and may record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
(8) The list prepared or revised in accordance with sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by Government along with :- (i) the records of all officials included in the list; (ii) records of all officials proposed to be superseded as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee; (iii) the reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any official; and (iv) the observations, if any of the State Government on the recommendations of the Committee.
(9) The Commission shall consider the list prepared by the Committee along with the other documents received from the State Government, and, unless it considers any change necessary, approve the list.
(10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from Government, the Commissioner shall make the changes it proposes and forward the list it considers suitable to the State Government.
(11) Appointment to the Service shall be made by Government from this list in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission.
(12) Appointment by promotion may be made to an ex cadre post, or to any post in the cadre in an officiating capacity from the list prepared under this rule.
Note - This rule will also apply for assessing the suitability of Temporary Assistant Engineer, for the service, as provided in Appendix (G)."
7.
In the Irrigation Branch, the conditions of service governing Class III employees viz. Overseers and Sectional Officers are laid down in the rules called 'The Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Overseers' Engineering State Service, Class III Rules, 1955.
Certain provisions of these rules were amended vide notification dated September 24, 1965.
Rule 12 of these rules inter alia provides that "in the case of members who have rendered temporary or officiating service, credit shall be given for half of the continuous temporary or officiating service in the Irrigation Branch and the length of service thus calculated shall determine the seniority amongst the existing members of the service".
The appointment of the Class II service is governed by the provisions of the Rules called 'The Haryana Service of Engineers Class II, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1970'.
The provisions of these rules are broadly the same as those of the Class II Rules of 1965 which govern the members of the Service in the Buildings and Roads Branch.
8.
On a perusal of the rules, it is apparent that the seniority of the members of the Class III Service is determined by the date of continuous appointment.
Even in cases, where there are no rules, the date of continuous appointment provides a fair method for determination of seniority.
A person who is recruited earlier ranks senior to the one who is appointed later.
Under the Class II rules, there are four sources for recruitment.
Besides the direct recruitment, the members of the Overseers' Engineering Service as well as Draftsmen are eligible to be considered for promotion.
Separate quota of 10% has been reserved for the persons who possess any of the qualifications prescribed in Appendix 'B'.
The provisions in the rules governing recruitment etc. to Class II service in the Irrigation Branch are almost identical.
The only noticeable difference is that the Committee postulated under Rule 9 of the rules governing the Buildings and Roads Branch is substituted by the 'Government' in rules for the Irrigation Branch.
The Committee has to ordinarily meet every year and consider the cases of eligible officials for promotion.
The eligibility has to be determined on the first day of January of the particular year.
Thereafter, a list of officials found suitable for promotion has to be prepared.
The selection for inclusion in the list has to be made on the basis of merit with due regard to seniority.
The names of persons who are found suitable have to be "arranged in order of seniority in the Punjab PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and members of Draftsmen and Tracers Service".
In case, the Committee is of the opinion that a junior person "is of exceptional merit and suitability", he can be assigned a place in the list "higher than that of officers senior to him in his own class".
The list has to be revised every year.
It is further provided that if in the process of preparation or revision of the list, any eligible candidate has to be superseded, the committee has to record reasons for the supersession.
Thereafter, the entire record has to be forwarded to the Commission.
The list as finally approved by the Commission forms the basis for promotion to the Class II Service.
9.
Admittedly, the seniority of the Overseers/Sectional Officers is determined on the basis of the date of continuous appointment.
Under the law, every eligible person has a right to be considered in order of his seniority.
It is undoubtedly correct that the rule requires that the Committee should meet at intervals ordinarily not exceeding one year.
However, in a case where there are no vacancies and the competent authority knows that there is no likelihood of any vacancy occurring in a particular year, the meeting of the committee may become an exercise in futility.
It is for this reason that even the rule making authority has provided that the Committee shall meet at intervals which shall not ordinarily exceed one year.
It is, thus, not mandatory for the committee to meet every year.
Still further, when the Committee meets and prepares the list of suitable candidates, the names of the officers included in the list have to be "arranged in order of seniority" in the cadre of Sectional officers or Draftsmen.
Whenever a departure is made and a junior person is placed above others, the committee has to find that he is of exceptional merit.
It is, thus, clear that due regard has to be paid to the seniority in the cadre of Overseers/Sectional Officers/Draftsmen, at the time of the preparation of the list.
10.
Counsel for the petitioners contended that it is incumbent on the Committee to meet every year.
Even though, the language of the rule shows that the provision is only directory and not mandatory, yet, even if it is assumed to the contrary, the result cannot be different.
Supposing a particular candidate like the petitioner in CWP No. 11524 of 1993 is eligible to be considered for promotion on January 1, 1983.
He is actually considered and his name is included in the list of suitable officials.
This list has to be revised next year.
On January 1, 1984, Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 who are senior to him have also become eligible.
At the time of the revision of the list, the names of the senior persons have to be considered.
It may happen that they are found suitable and are included in the list.
In that event, the petitioner's name shall be placed below Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 who are senior to him.
Thus even though the petitioner had acquired the requisite qualification earlier than Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the seniority in the parent cadre would be determined only under the Rules.
The passing of examination only makes a person eligible to be considered for promotion.
However, until he gets actually promoted, he does not steal a March over those who are senior to him.
11.
Counsel for the petitioners submitted that the names of persons falling in source 4 have to be considered in the order of date of eligibility and not in the order of seniority as determined in the Class III service.
Admittedly, the Overseers as well as the Draftsmen are eligible to be considered against the quote fixed for sources 2, and 3.
It was not disputed that their names have to be considered in order of seniority in the respective sources.
That being so, it is not understandable as to how a different yardstick can be adopted while considering the names of persons belonging to source 4.
If on the date of consideration, the junior as well as the senior persons are eligible, the date on which they had passed the relevant examination is really of no consequence.
They are just eligible.
That is a fact which the authority cannot ignore.
Still further, Rule 9 specifically provides that the selection shall be made on the basis of merit and suitability with "due regard to seniority".
This seniority is in the cadre to which a person belongs and from which candidates are being considered for promotion.
Still further, on inclusion in the list, the names have to be arranged in order of seniority in the Overseers Engineering Service or the Draftsmen and Tracers Service as the case may be.
The rule does not provide that the names shall be arranged in order of the date of passing of the qualifying examination.
The position continues to be the same even on revision when the list is prepared de novo.
12.
The plain language of the rules, thus, shows that the seniority of the members belonging to the Overseers Engineering Service has to be determined on the basis of the date of continuous appointment.
This seniority does not get altered by the date of passing the qualifying examination or acquiring the eligibility.
The names have to be considered in the order of seniority as fixed under the rules or the relevant executive orders.
The rules do not postulate that the date of qualifying the examination would determine the seniority or that the names of selected candidates shall be placed in the list in the order in which they have acquired the requisite qualifications.
13.
Counsel for the petitioners placed strong reliance on two decisions.
Firstly, the counsel referred to a Full Bench decisions of this Court in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, AIR 1990 P&H 117.
They also placed reliance on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Surinder Mohan Sharma v. The State of Haryana, CWP No. 1302 of 1992.
In Surinder Mohan Sharma's case, the question that arose for consideration was identical to the one raised in the present set of petitioner.
The grievance of the petitioner was that he having "qualified the AMIE examination earlier to respondent No. 3 to 12, his seniority should have been determined on the basis of the date of acquiring the AMIE qualification ..............." Reliance had been placed on the decision in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioner was accepted.
The Bench held that "the claim of the petitioner is well- merited and is squarely covered by the law laid down by the Full Bench decision of this Court in AIR 1990 P&H 117".
Accordingly, the writ petition was allowed.
If the matter had rested there, the petitioners would have had a good case.
However, as was pointed out on behalf of the respondents, the decision of the Division Bench was reversed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 7294 of 1993 (Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board v. Shri Surinder Mohan Sharma and others), Their Lordships noticed the decisions in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case and observed as under :-  "It is obvious from Rule 12 of the rules, quoted above that the inter se seniority between Surinder Mohan Sharma and Dinesh Kumar could only be fixed on the basis of continuous length of service in the cadre of Sub-Divisional Officers subject to the applicability of any of the clauses under proviso to the said rule.
The rule nowhere provides that the seniority is to be fixed on the basis of the date of acquiring the eligibility qualifications.
The rule which was before the Full Bench in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case was entirely different than the rule in this case.
The High Court became totally oblivious to Rule 12 of the Rules and fell into patent error in allowing the writ petition following the judgment in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case which has no relevance whatsoever to the present case.
We, therefore, allow the appeal with costs and set aside the order of the High Court dated February 1, 1993 and dismiss the writ petition filed by Surinder Mohan Sharma before the High Court.
We quantify the cost as Rs. 11,000/- to be paid by respondent No. 1 Surinder Mohan Sharma to respondent No. 3 Dinesh Kumar."
The above observations clearly show that the seniority of the Overseers, the Sectional Officers or the Draftsmen has to be determined on the basis of the rule governing the service and not the date of acquiring "the eligibility qualifications."
14.
In view of this authoritative pronouncement of the Apex Court, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that their inter se seniority had to be determined on the basis of the date of acquiring the qualifications cannot be sustained.
15.
Counsel for the petitioners also referred to the decision of a Division Bench of this court in Prithvi Singh and another v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others, 1993(5) SLR 108 and a Single Bench decision in Raj Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(2) All Instant Judgments 502.
However, the observations in so far as these are relevant for the present case, were based on the decision of the Full Bench in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case.
In Surinder Mohan Sharma's case, it has been clearly ruled that seniority as determined under the rule cannot be altered on the basis of the date of acquiring the "eligibility qualifications."
In view of this pronouncement, counsel for the petitioners can derive no advantage from both the above-mentioned decisions.
The counsel also referred to the decision in Avinash Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) SLR 139.
This case is clearly distinguishable.
In this case, the basic controversy was as to whether the eligibility has to be seen on the date of the issue of the order of promotion or on the date of the occurrence of a vacancy.
No such question arises in these cases.
16.
It may also be mentioned that it is not the case of the petitioners that even though vacancies were available yet their claim for promotion was not considered.
That being so, it cannot be said that the authority had acted arbitrarily or that the petitioners were deprived of any existing right.
If, in fact, no vacancy had occurred for promotion form source 4 till the year 1992 when promotions were actually made or persons senior to the petitioners were available, no legitimate grievance can be made by them.
17.
It may laso be noticed that in CWP No. 14130 of 1994, it was submitted by Mr. JS Khehar, counsel for the petitioner that the seniority of the persons belonging to the cadres of Overseers or Draftsmen has to be determined in accordance with the date of continuous appointment and the claim for promotion has to be considered in the order of that seniority.
Learned counsel appears to be right in his submission.
No other point was urged.
18.
Accordingly, the question posed at the outset is answered in the negative.
It is held that the petitioners have to be considered for promotion in the order of their seniority as determined under the relevant rules and not on the basis of date of acquiring the qualification prescribed for the higher post.
Resultantly, all the petitions except CWP No. 14130 of 1994, are dismissed.
CWP No. 14130 of 1994 has to be allowed.
It is directed that the Seniority shall be determined in accordance with Rule 11.
There will be no order as to costs.