Nikhil Nath Bhattacharjee, J - This matter arises out of an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India filed jointly by 10 petitioners who are supervisors/statistical supervisors/investigators and posted at Manpower and Evaluation branch under the Development and Planning Department,Government of West Bengal, Raj Bhavan, Calcutta.
They were appointed during the period from May 1975 to February 1977 as investigator/computer.
The minimum basis qualification for appointment in the said posts is B.A/B.Sc.
with Statistics, Economics Mathematics and Physics.
In additions to the minimum qualification each one of them petitioners acquired higher qualification, namely MSc.
in Mathematics, MA in Economics, MA in Rural Economics and Co-operation, MSc.
in Physics or MSc.
in Statistics on various dates, mostly prior to their appointment.
It is their cas that by circular No. 10035-A dated 24th October, 1974, the Government of West Bengal in the Finance (Audit) Deptt.
ordered that to attract talent and to avoid frustration six incremental benefits may be give to those who possess post graduate degree at the time of their entry into the service or obtain afterwards.
The petitioners' further case is that by a circular No. 3780-F dated 11th April, 1980 the respondent authority instead of advance increments granted one time incremental benefit, called qualification-pay upto Rs. 200 pm for possessing higher qualification than the basic qualification.
It is their case that the petitioners were entitled to the said qualification-pay but they were deprived of the same.
By a notification No. 5371-F dated 7th June, 1985, the Governor was pleased to frame rules, called the West Bengal Services (Qualification Pay) Rules, 1985, regulating the admissibility of qualification pay for the services and posts under the administrative control of the Government of West Bengal.
It came into effect on 1st day of August, 1974 and accordingly the qualification pay that was previously being available came to be abolished with effect from the date of enforcement of the said rules.
Of the ten petitioners herein, seven were appointed in the post of investigator and three were appointed in the post of computer.
There were separate recruitment rules for the post of investigator and computer at the time of their appointment but following the order dated 4th June, 1987 passed by the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohitosh Majumdar in Civil Rule No. 15369 (W) of 1980 a single cadre of investigator and computer was constituted and a single recruitment rule for the said posts was made, vide notification dated 23rd July, 1990 and 19th March, 1992.
The petitioners state that they came to know about the said orders sometime in the month of the January 1988 and immediately submitted representations before the respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 for obtaining six incremental benefits and qualification pay.
The applications were submitted separately.
After waiting for several months in vain the petitioners approached various authorities and inquired about the fate of their applications when they were informed that a file had been opened with their applications and placed before the higher authorities with favourable recommendations.
Sometime in November 1992, the petitioners came to know that although their claim for six incremental benefits and qualification pay had been accepted, approved and upheld by the respondentsNos.
2, 3 and 4 and recommended to the respondents No. 5 for accepting the claims as bona fide and valid and accordingly to sanction the amounts to them.
But respondents No. 5, Finance Deppt.
did not grant the sanction.
The petitioners maintain that they were entitled to the six incremental benefits and qualification pay for the reasons that the qualification are specialised and technical in nature, the qualifications are added qualifications which are used for more efficient discharge of their official duties and that the recruitment rules do not require such added qualifications as the minimum qualification for entry into the service.
By denying the benefits to the petitioners, the respondents acted illegally, mala fide, with arbitrariness and in violation of statutory rules.
Moreover, the respondents have granted the final benefits of advance increments and qualification pay to one Smt. Sabita Guha, Senior Research Officer (Evaluation) posted at Development and Planning Department.
Besides, the Scheduled Castes and Tribal Welfare Department, Government of West Bengal have also granted six increments and qualification pay, vide SC and TW Deptt.
order No. 2310-TW to 2317 dated 26th July, 1984 and No. 194-TW dated 29th January, 1985 with the concurrence of the Finance Department, vide their unofficial No. 263 ``J'' dated 10th July, 1984, on the self-same ground to the Research Investigators.
The respondents are thus guilty of indulging in discrimination.
A demand notice dated 23rd December, 1992 through their learned Advocate was served but the petitioners continue to be deprived of their lawful financial benefits.
Hence by filing this writ application the petitioners have prayed for issuance or a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to give effect to the order dated 21st October, 1974 and 11th April, 1980 in favour of the petitioners granting them increments as admissible up to 30th April, 1977 with effect from their date of joining the respective posts and qualification pay @ Rs. 200 pm each with effect from 1st May, 1977 and accordingly to fix up their pay and to pay all their benefits of pays and arrear salaries.
2.
The State of West Bengal contest this writ application by affirming an affidavit.
It has been stated that in terms of memorandum dated 20th October, 1974 incremental benefits for post graduate qualification are admissible only in those cases where possession of post graduate qualification of the specialised and technical nature are considered as added qualification for more efficient discharging of official duties.
The representations of a petitioners were received and duly examined and referred to the Finance Deptt.
But the said department did not approve of the proposal.
It is stated that the court is not the authority to grant any relief to the petitioners.
It is the administrative deptt.
which in consultation with the Finance Department, can only give such relief to the petitioners and the petitioners having failed to make out a case as to how the added qualification could be of advantage in due discharge of their official duties, the question of granting them financial benefits in the form of six advance increments and qualification pay cannot and should not arise.
3.
The relevant portion of memorandum No. 10035-F dated 21st October, 1974 is quoted below:-  ``2.
The Committee submitted their reports containing their recommendations in June 1974.
These recommendations have been carefully considered and the Governor is pleased to decide as follows : (iii) In order to attract men of quality and also for removing frustration, the benefits of three increments shall be given to those who acquired specialised knowledge of technical nature by obtaining Post-Graduate Diploma of recognised Universities and six incremental benefits for those who obtained the Post Graduate Degrees of recognised Universities subject to the condition that these incremental benefits shall be available once in their career who have not got it at the time of entry, may get it as soon as those Post Graduate qualifications are obtained or who have already obtained provided that :- (a) These incremental benefits for Post Graduate qualifications shall be admissible only in such cases where possession of those Post Graduate qualifications of a specialised and technical nature would be considered as an added qualification for the due discharge of their official duties and not otherwise.
(b) These incremental benefits due to Post Graduate qualifications of a specialised nature would not be admissible in respect of posts whose recruitment rules require such Post Graduate Qualifications of a technical nature as the minimum qualifications.''
4.
Thus to attract the aforesaid provision, the following ingredients are necessary -- (a) The added qualifications must be obtained before or after entry into the service;  (b) The added qualification must be of a specialised and technical in nature ; (c) the added qualification is required for more efficient discharge of official duties; and (d) such benefits are not admissible in respect of posts whose recruitment rules require such added or post graduate qualification as minimum qualification.
5.
Mrr.
Kashikanta Moitra, learned senior advocate assisted by Mr. GC Dey and Mr. CK Saha on my request prepared and submitted a chart showing basic qualification required and post graduate qualification obtained by each of the incumbents and served a copy upon the learned State Advocate.
It appears therefrom that whereas the minimum educational qualification as per recruitment rules is B.A./B.Sc.
with Statistics, Economics, Mathematics and Physics, the petitioners possessed post graduate degree in Mathematics or Economics or Rural Economics and Co-operation or Physics or Statistics even at the time of their entry into the service.
The question for consideration is whether the post graduate qualifications acquired by the petitioners are of specialised and technical in nature and may be considered as added qualification for more efficient discharge of official duties.
It is beyond comprehension how the post graduate degree in Economics, Mathematics, Statistics, Rural Economics and Co-operation, or of Physics could not be considered as specialised and technical in nature.
Whoever has some academic attainment may very well visualise that an MSc.
in Mathematics or Statistics or Physics or Economics in really having special and practical knowledge.
According to Merriam Webster, `technical' means special and practical knowledge, especially of a mechanical or scientific subject.
Economics, Physics, Mathematics and Statistics etc. ae no doubt scientific subjects and there can be no denying that a post graduate degree holder in any of such subjects should be considered as having special or practical knowledge.
6.
Regarding whether the said post graduate qualification could be treated as added qualification for more efficient discharge of official duties, the representation of Md Siddique, a petitioner submitted before the Director of Evaluation, Monitoring and Manpower and Ex officio Joint Secretary, Development and Planning Deptt.
on 9th November, 1988, made Annexure `C' to the writ petition, may be gone into.
The assertions made therein have not been controverted or denied by the respondent authority in their Affidavit-in-opposition.
7.
It appears from the said representation which has been attached as a Specimen as each of the other petitioners also submitted similar representation, that what the petitioners are to perform in their day-to-day work is to make survey of different schemes said to have been executed by the technical agencies of the departments like Power, Irrigation, Health and Family Welfare, Education, Agriculture, Hill Affairs, Public Health, Engineering, Rural Development, Rural Energy, Animal Husbandry, Solar Energy, Fishery, Seriulture, Tea Gardens, Forest, PWD (Roads), Town and Country Planning etc. and the results of their survey are published in reports which are very useful to the concerned technical departments of the State Government as well as the Central Government.
The petitioners represented as also as it being not controverted seems to me, that the nature of their duties require special scientific method to facilitate the survey work collection of data from the field and analysis and evaluation of the information as to claims both technical and non-technical - of the Department concerned.
It is further stated that the investigators are required to be technically oriented and specially trained as otherwise their whole approach and purpose will be of no consequence.
The distribution and projection of facts and figures also require specialised knowledge and experience.
The evaluation activities as carried on by the petitioners help in programme planning by assessment of community needs and programme monitoring in terms of reaching the target of examining whether delivery services are in consonance with the programme and design.
Successful programme evaluation require not only adequate understanding of programme objectives, scope and targets to be achieved but also require scientific research skill in planning and executing evaluation studies.
The petitioners further represented that on the basis of their reports on shallow tubewell in West Bengal (I) and (II), on seed farms, on T.C.P.C.
for Scheduled Tribes in West Bengal, on rural water supply, on river lift irrigation schemes, on fisheries projects at Maharajgung, on rural electrification programme, on family planning programme, minor irrigation schemes in Hooghly and Nadia districts, on drinking water supply and housing schemes forScheduled Tribes of Mlda., on tank improvement scheme in the district of Purulia and Bankura under drought prone area programme, sericulture development schemes in hill areas of Darjeeling, on Social Forestry in West Bengal, on rural energy programme in Kaliagung block, on shortage of qualified pharmacists in hospital and dispensary etc. were of immense help to the development and planning department.
It was asserted that their job being of technical in nature there is a proposal for the creation of the post of Additional Director (Technical) for Evaluation, Monitoring and Manpower Directorate.
This being the position, in my view the names of jobs carried on by these petitioners must be treated to be of technical in nature requiring specialised knowledge and skill.
8.
The basic minimum qualification for entry into the cadre is B.A./B.Sc.
Degree and each of the petitioners having acquired the post graduate degree in MA or MSc.
in various specialised subjects of technical nature, there is no doubt that this post-graduate qualification would be an added advantage to each of the petitioners for more efficient discharge of his official duties.
9.
In this view of the matter, there can be no denying that the provision of the circular dated 21st October, 1974 is wholly attracted to the case of the petitioners and accordingly they are entitled to get the benefit of advance increments as provided therein.
It appears that the administrative department accepted the said position and recommended to the Finance Deptt.
(Respondent No. 5) for according approval for grant of the said financial benefit to the petitioners.
10.
Surprisingly however, a high official in the Finance Department noted that as the job may very well be done by an I.Sc.
or IA the same cannot be treated as technical and specialised in nature and accordingly the proposal does not warrant the grant of incremental benefits vide Annexure `A' of the affidavit of Jagannath Jana dated 24th November, 1993.
The notes and orders in the original office file No. EV/7E-3/88 on the subject : qualification pay for Investigators/Computers of the Deptt.
of Development and Planning, Evaluation, Monitoring and Manpower Branch, 3 Middleton Row, Calcutta - 71, bears testimony to the authenticity of the said remark.
But on the fact of it, it is difficult to conceive of a more fallacious approach.
Whereas the minimum qualification prescribed for the post of investigator being B.A./B.Sc.
as per notification dated 23rd October, 1975 and 19th January, 1970, Annexure `B' to the writ petition which must have been approved by the West Bengal Cabinet before it was issued, it seems to be the height of audacity for any officer, however high he may be, to say that the job of the investigator can be carried on with educational qualification of I.Sc.
or IA Mr. Moitra,.
A learned senior advocate in his written note branded such arbitrariness on the part of the respondent authority by quoting , ``be you ever so high , the laws are above you.''
11.
Words fail to denounce such practice of making wreckless comments which show hollowness and self-conceit.
IA/I.Sc.
means passed HS Exams.
Can one with such educational background evaluate the progress made in the fields of various plans and programmmes undertaken and executed?
If that was possible why did not you make such qualification the minimum qualification for entry into such service?
The duty of evaluation is onerous and with post-graduate degree in the fields as possessed by the petitioners, their day-to-day jobs are bound to be more efficiently done.
Such higher qualification is an added advantage for due discharge of official duty.
12.
Qualification pay is a one time financial benefit given in place and stead of advance increments for possessing post graduate qualification of a specialised and technical in nature as added qualification.
Whoever is entitled to the advance increments is also entitled to the qualification pay.
The applicability of the circular dated 11th April, 1980 is also automatic.
The Government in the Finance Department subsequently framed rules, called West Bengal Services (Qualification Pay) Rules, 1985 under Article 309 of the Constitution of India wherein qualification pay has been defined as advance incremental benefits available with effect from 1st August, 1974 upto 30th April, 1977 or the monetory benefit in absolute amounts sanctioned with effect from 1st May, 1977 for post graduate degree or diploma which is not the basic minimum educational qualification for entry into service.
In Rule 3(d) it is laid down that qualification pay should be admissible only if it is declared by the administrative department concerned with prior consultation with the Finance Deptt.
that a particular educational qualification is an added qualification of technical and/or specialised nature which is useful for the efficient discharge of official duties by the concerned government employee or government servant and not otherwise.
13.
In the instant case the administrative department accepted the post graduate qualification of the petitioners herein as added qualification of a technical and specialised nature and recommended for being declared as useful for efficient discharge of official duties.
But the Government in the Finance Department practically pooh poohed the proposal with the remark that their job is such which can be done by any person having IA or I.Sc.
as an educational background.
14.
In the writ petition itself petitioners have stated the case of Smt. Sabita Guha, Sr. Research Officer (Evaluation) posted at Development and Planning Department, 3, Middleton Row, Calcutta-700 071 and SC and TW Deptt.
Order No. 2310-TW to 2317-T.W.
26th July, 1984 and 194/T.W.
dated 29th January, 1985 which had the concurrence of the Finance Deptt.
vide their unofficial No. U/O-663 Group J dated 10th July, 1984 wherein six advance increments and thereafter qualification pay was allowed.
If a `cultural officer' obtaining MSc.
in Anthropology can be treated to have acquired an additional qualification of specialised and technical nature which would help him in carrying on his official duty more efficiently, denial of the said benefit to the present petitioners almost on the self-same ground is highly discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
15.
Mr. Prasanta Banerjee, learned advocate appearing for the State on the other hand argued that grant of advance increments or qualification pay is an absolute discretion of the authority concerned and further that the same yardstick applicable to certain orders of the SC and TW Deptt.
cannot be made applicable to the case of the petitioners as every case is to be judged on its own merit.
His point is that since the administrative department could not satisfy the Finance Deptt.
the necessity of granting the financial benefits to the petitioners by the Finance Deptt.
could not at all arise.
But with due respect to Mr. Banerjee I must say I am unable to agree with his contention.
16.
In denoting such refusal to the petitioners being arbitrary, irrational unreasonable and in violation of statutory rules and in gross violation of all principles of fair play and natural justice, Mr. Moitra for the petitioners referred to the following judgments :-  (1) S.G. Jaisinghani v. Union of India, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 1427 : [1967 SLR 482 (SC)].
At page 1434, Paragraph 14 their Lordships observed as follows :- ``In this context it is important to emphasise that the absence of arbitrary power is the first essential of the rule of law upon which our whole constitutional system is based.
In a system governed by rule of law, discretion, when conferred upon executive authorities must be confined within clearly defined limits.
The rule of law from this point of view means that decisions should be made by the application of known principles and rules, and in general, such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should know where he is.
If a decision is taken without any principle or without any rule it is unpredictable and such a decision is the antithesis of a decision taken in accordance with the rule of law.
(See, Dicey, ``Law of the Constitution'' -- Tenth Edn.
Introduction CX).
``Law has reached its finest moments'' stated Douglas, J in United States v. Wunderlich (1951) 342 US 98, ``when it has freed man from the unlimited discretion of some ruler..... where discretion is absolute, man has always suffered.''
It is in this sense that the rule of law may be said to be the sworn enemy of caprice.
Discretion, as Lord Mansfield stated it in classic terms in the case of John Wilkes, (1770) 4 Burn.
2528 at page 2539 ``means sound discretion guided by law.
It must be governed by rule, not by humour; it must not be arbitrary, vague and fanciful.''
(2) AIR 1991 Supreme Court, page 537 : [1990(6) SLR 1 (SC)] : 1991(1) SCT 575(SC).
Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of U.P..
In paragraph 35 of the said judgment the Apex Court observed ``It is now too well settled that every State action, in order to survive, must not be susceptible to the vice of arbitrariness which is the crux of Article 14 of the Constitution and basic to the rule of law, the system which governs us.
Arbitrariness is the very negation of the rule of law.
Satisfaction of this basic test in every State action is sine qua non to its validity ........'' 17.
In paragraph 36 of the said judgment it was held:  ``.........
The question, whether an impugned act is arbitrary or not, is ultimately to be answered on the facts and in the circumstances of a given case.
An obvious test to apply is to see whether there is any discernible principle emerging from the impugned act and if so, does it satisfy the test of reasonableness.
Where a mode is prescribed for doing an act and there is no impediment in following that procedure, performance of the act otherwise and in a manner which does not disclose any discernible principle which is reasonable, may itself attract the vice of arbitrariness.
Every State action must be informed by reason and it follows that an act uninformed by reason, is arbitrary.
Rule of law contemplates governance by laws and not by humour, whims or caprices of the men to whom the governance is entrusted for the time being ........'' 18.
Mr. Moitra pointed out that denial of the financial benefit to the petitioners violated the petitioners' legitimate expectation and in this respect relied on the decision reported in 1993(1) RRR 127 (SC) : AIR 1993 Supreme Court page 155, Navjyoti Co-op.
Group Housing Society v Union of India.
In paragraph 16 of the said judgment, their Lordship held ``It may be indicated here that the doctrine of `legitimate expectation' imposes in essence a duty on Public Authority to act fairly by taking into consideration all relevant factors relating to such `legitimate expectation.......''  19.
He further relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in Collector of Nadia v. Subir Kumar Ghosh, Vol. 99 CWN page 298 and a single judgment of Patna High Court reported Sachindra Kumar v. Patna Regional Development Authority, AIR 1994 Patna page 128 to highlight the applicability of the doctrine of legitimate expectation in circumstances as in the present one.
20.
In the instant case, denial of the financial benefits to the writ petitioners by the respondent authority in accordance with their own circulars dated 24th October, 1974 and 11th April, 1980 and provisions of statutory rules as referred to above is arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable and in violation of statutory rules and principles, as also violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and the decisions cited on behalf of the petitioners, which are applicable to the instant case, I hold that the petitioners have made out their case.