AL Bahri, J - Baljit Singh Grewal-the petitioner retired as Executive Engineer from PWD (B & R), Patiala.
He has filed this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing charge-sheet dated December 7, 1984-Annexure P.3 initiating departmental proceedings against him and for quashing order dated September 27, 1991-Annexure P10, whereby Enquiry Officer was appointed to hold departmental enquiry.
He further prayed for release of retiremental benefits such as gratuity, leave encashment etc. which have been withheld on account of pendency of the aforesaid enquiry.
2.
The petitioner joined as Sectional Officer (Horticulture) Punjab P.W.D.
B & R, Capital Project, Chandigarh on February 2, 1961.
He was promoted as Sub-Divisional Engineer (Horticulture) on February 12, 1970.
He was further promoted as Executive Engineer (Horticulture) on September 27, 1978.
On May 3, 1983 he was placed under suspension on the ground of contemplation of enquiry with the allegation of misappropriation in committing official irregularities-copy of the order is Annexure P.1.
Since no action was taken for about a year he was reinstated vide order Annexure P2 dated May 24, 1984.
A charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner on the allegation that during the year 1978-79 to 1982-83, he failed to check the official irregularities committed by Ajmer Singh, Accounts Clerk, working under him, who had misappropriated/embezzled certain amounts, Annexure P.3 is the copy of the charge-sheet.
The petitioner filed a detailed reply thereto, copy Annexure P4, pointing out that it was the entire responsibility of Ajmer Singh, Sr. Accounts Clerk, who had prepared the bills and that he had lodged a report with the Senior Superintendent of Police against Ajmer Singh, copy of the letter/ report is January 25, 1985-Annexure P5.
On this letter FIR No. 314 of 1985 was registered at Police Station Sector 34, Chandigarh.
A detailed reply to the charge-sheet-Annexure P.6 was submitted, copy Annexure P.6.
On April 30, 1990, the petitioner superannuated and retired from service.
Copy of the letter is Annexure P.7.
Initially no pension was allowed to him, however, subsequently 100% provisional pension was allowed in July 1990-Annexure P.8.
The other retiral benefits, however, were not paid, such as leave encashment, gratuity etc.
He made representation on August 30, 1991-Annexure P.9.
It was suddenly on September 27, 1991 that the petitioner was informed that an Enquiry Officer has been appointed to enquire into the allegations covered by charge-sheet dated December 7, 1984.
Copy of this letter is Annexure P 10.
No action was taken by the Enquiry Officer for about a year.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner has approached this Court for the relief.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued, written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement broadly admitted the facts as briefly stated above.
However, it was asserted that adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated April 18, 1980-Annexure R 1 that he had not cleared the arrears of stocks returns and he was advised to improve his working in this respect in future.
It was thereafter, that the petitioner was placed under suspension.
Report of the Accountant General, Punjab, was to the effect of embezzlement/misappropriation to the tune of Rs. 450 lacs during the period the petitioner remained on duty as Executive Engineer.
The factum of provisional re-instatement of the petitioner was admitted.
The petitioner in connivance with Ajmer Singh, Accounts Clerk, committed financial irregularties.
The departmental proceedings against Ajmer Singh were withheld under directions of the Court.
Separate departmental proceedings were initiated against Ajmer Singh.
However, nothing was mentioned in written statement as to why no action was taken against the petitioner for such long years.
FIR was registered against Ajmer Singh under orders of the department.
Reference was made to a civil suit filed by Ajmer Singh and on that account departmental proceedings against him were not started.
The fact that the petitioner retired on April 30, 1990 was admitted.
The fact that professional pension was granted is also admitted.
The representation filed by the petitioner was pending for the grant of other reliefs.
The petitioner was subsequently charge-sheeted.
After considering his copy submitted to the charge-sheet an Enquiry Officer was appointed to hold enquiry.
Replication has been filed by the petitioner who reiterated his stand as taken in the writ petition that the department did not take nay action for a number of years against him and after his retirement enquiry cannot be held for his removal from service.
4.
The legal position has already been clarified by the Full Bench decision of this Court in Jagir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) SLR 1 : 1993(2) SCT 128(P&H).
In para 3 of the Judgment it was observed as under :  "It is no doubt correct and reasonable also, that departmental proceedings initiated against the employees should be finalised expeditiously.
Expeditious disposal helps the employer as well as the employees as it removes uncertainty about the future career of the employees and lessens the financial burden in most of the cases, where the employees are either placed under suspension or their promotions etc. are deferred during the pendency of the inquiry.
But, for how many months a particular departmental inquiry can be allowed to continue and after the expiry of how many months the approval of the head of the Department/the Secretar to the Government/the Chief Secretary/the Minister Incharge, or the Cabinet (Council of Ministers) has to be obtained or not, is purely for the employer to consider.
In that process the delinquent employee cannot be associated nor does he have any say in the matter.
If the State Government have issued certain guidelines for the guidance of the various departments or the disciplinary authorities to impress upon them the necessity of finalising the departmental proceedings expeditiously or even within a fixed period, it does not mean that after the expiry of that period, a right in law accrues to the employee to approach the Court of law for the enforcement of those guidelines.
The employee may, is a fit case, approach the Court for the quashing of the proceedings, if the pendency of the inquiry has otherwise been protracted and delayed to an unreasonable extent by the employer himself."
5.
In Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1993(4) SLR 655, again it was held that by mere lapse of time or the person having superannuated during pendency of the enquiry would not by itself result in lapse of proceedings.
However, it was observed that such enquiry proceedings could not be permitted to continue indefinitely.
In Amrik Singh v. The Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh, 1993(4) SCT 782 (P&H) : 1993(3) SLR 142 (P&H) : 1993(4) SC 782 (P&H), the Division Bench of this Court held, while interpreting High Court Establishment Rules that after retirement, order of dismissal from service could not be passed.
Applying the ratio of the decision aforesaid to the facts of this case, the enquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioner after lapse of about 10 years cannot be allowed to continue, more so when the petitioner has ctired in normal course.
No reason, whatsoever, has been given in the written statements filed by the official respondents as to why prompt action to initiate enquiry proceedings and for its completion could not be taken.
Although charge-sheet was served in December, 1984 and reply thereto was filed in January 1985-Annexure P4, the order appointing Enquiry Officer was made in September 1991-Annexure P.10 keeping in view the allegations made in the charge-sheet that there was irregularity on the part of the petitioner in not checking the actions of his subordinate Ajmer Singh who in fact had embezzled the amounts, after lapse of 10 years, it is not expected of the petitioner to lead any evidence in defence on such matters.
His defence in the circumstances of the present case stand prejudiced by delay on the part of the respondents in not promptly initiating departmental proceedings.
No doubt, mere ground of delay as held by the Full Bench in the cases referred to above may not be sufficient to quash the proceedings, however, such proceedings cannot be allowed to continue infinitely.
The petitioner having retired and his 100% pension having been released.
There is no ground made out to withhold his other retiral benefits.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed.
The enquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioner are quashed.
A direction is given to retiral benefits to the petitioner within a period of 3 months.
No costs.
Petition allowed.