Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioners, who are working as lecturers in CR College of Education, Rohtak, respondent No. 1, have jointly filed this writ petition seeking a direction to respondent No. 2 to observe minimum qualification prescribed for the post of Principal in the College, respondent No. 3.
They have further sought for quashing Annexure P-2, vide which respondent No. 4 was appointed as Principal, Annexure P-4, whereby the approval to his appointment was accorded by the University and Annexure P-5 vide which the academic qualification for the post of Principal was changed.
2.
The brief resume of the writ petition is that the Governing Body of the CR College Education, Rohtak, (hereinafter referred to as the 'College') issued an advertisement which appeared in the Tribune dated 3061986 inviting applications for the post of Principal.
In pursuance to the said advertisement, desirous persons submitted applications for consideration to the said post.
The .........candidates including petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 4 were asked to appear before the Selection Committee on 2271986 for the purpose of determining their suitability on the basis of their academic record.
The academic qualifications of all the candidates were scrutinised by the Selection Committee duly constituted as per Rules and Regulations framed by the Maharishi Dayanand University, which consisted of the following :-  a) Chairman or Vice Chairman, or Secretary, Governing Body of the College,  b) One member of the Governing Body.
c) Two nominees of the Vice Chancellor  d) One person to be appointed by the Chairman of the Governing Body out of a panel of 10 persons prepared by the Director of Higher Education of State Government.
e) Director of Higher Education or his nominee.
The Selection Committee took the interview on 2271986 and Dr. RK Nagi, Head of Chemistry Department, Maharishi Dayanand University was an expert on behalf of the University and Dr. Vishnu Bhagwan was the nominee of Director, Higher Education.
Finally, respondent No. 4 was selected for the post of Principal, and letter dated 2271986, copy Annexure P2 to the writ petition appointing respondent No. 4 as such was issued.
As per the University Regulations, the appointment was required to be approved by the Vice Chancellor.
The Vice Chancellor vide his letter No. CBA/87/6230 dated 2481987 declined to approve the appointment of respondent No. 4 on the ground that he was not fulfilling the requisite qualification for the post.
A copy of the said communication is Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The said communication declining approval to the appointment or respondent No. 4 as Principal was duly sent to the Managing Committee of the College.
3.
To great dismay of the petitioners and others, the Vide Chancellor subsequently approved the appointment of respondent No. 4 w.e.f.
16101987 vide order dated 13111987, a copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
4.
Feeling aggrieved against the order of appointment of respondent No. 4, the two petitioners filed the present writ petition.
The grouse of petitioner No. 2 is that he could not apply for the post of Principal at the time of advertisement as he was not possessing the requisite academic qualifications for the said post.
Though he being the senior most lecturer was working as Acting Principal w.e.f.
3111987 to 29121987 yet he was relieved of that post on the appointment of respondent No. 4.
The claim of petitioner No. 1 is that though he got better academic qualifications than respondent No. 4, despite that he was not selected.
5.
It was contended by the petitioners' Counsel that respondent No. 4 was not eligible for appointment to the post of Principal as he was not possessing the requisite academic qualification as mentioned in the advertisement.
As such on earlier occasion, the Vice Chancellor of Maharishi Dayanand University Rohtak, respondent No. 1 did not accord approval to his appointment.
However in order to facilitate him, the change in qualification was effected on 15101987 as per recommendations of the Vide Chancellor of University, respondent No. 1, vide Annexure P-5.
According to the Counsel, this change was introduced with the mala fide intention and in order to facilitate the appointment of respondent No. 4.
Subsequently by an order, dated 13111987, respondent No. 1 conveyed the approval of the Vide Chancellor to the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Principal on regular basis w.e.f.
16101987.
It was argued with vehemence that the action of respondent No. 1 in according approval to the appointment of respondent No. 4 as well as effecting change in the academic qualification and denial of affording opportunity for being considered not only to petitioner No. 2 but also to other similarly situated persons, suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
If the academic qualifications were to be changed, the post should have been re-advertised, fresh applications of eligible persons invited and the entire selection process should have been initiated.
Since the official respondents had gone contrary to the terms of appointment as contained in University Rules and Regulations, the appointment of respondent No. 4 is liable to be quashed.
6.
Mr. RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, appearing for respondent No. 4, contended that he fulfills the requisite qualifications for the post of Principal.
He has obtained the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D) in the subject of education on 7.5.88 and he had written so many books on the subject of Education.
The petitioners at the most had a right to be considered.
The claim of the petitioner No. 1 was considered, but he was not found suitable by the Selection Committee.
Since petitioner No. 2 did not apply for the post, he cannot question the appointment of respondent No. 4.
In the written statement filed by him, it is denied that petitioner No. 2 worked as acting Principal from 3111987 to 29121987.
The order dated 31187 appointing petitioner No. 2 as acting Principal was challenged by respondent No. 4 by means of Civil Suit No. 493 of 1987.
In that suit, an ad-interim injunction restraining the defendants from interfering with the working of respondent No. 4 as Principal was granted by the Court on 17111987.
The said suit was finally decreed on 22121987 in favour of respondent No. 4 declaring the aforesaid order dated 3111987 as illegal and ineffective.
It was brought to the notice of this Court that the petitioners were not arrayed as parties to that suit.
7.
Respondent No. 3 College also filed the written Statement controverting the averments contained in the writ petition and he has defended the amendment made in the academic qualifications prescribed for the post of Principal.
8.
I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned Counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
9.
On the consideration of the matter, I find that the writ petition deserves acceptance.
10.
It has not been disputed by the respondents that the applications for filling up the post of Principal in College-respondent No. 3 were invited through an advertisement appeared in the Tribune dated 3061986.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 who was recommended by the Selection Committee was not approved by the Vice Chancellor of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, respondent No. 1 being ineligible as he did not possess the requisite qualifications prescribed for the post of Principal.
Subsequently, the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Principal of the College-respondent No. 3 was approved by the Vide Chancellor after granting relaxation in academic qualifications.
The qualifications for the post of Principal in the recognised College of Education existed before and after the amendment have been mentioned in Annexure P-5, which read as under :-  Before Amendment.
After Amendment a) A consistently good academic record with first or high second class (55% marks/grade 'B' in the seven point scale) Master's degree in any subject and also a degree in Education of an Indian University or equivalent degree of foreign University (relaxable if a candidate has to his credit research work of very high standard) and a) A good academic record with at least first or high second class (B) in seven point scale) at Master's degree in Education, and not necessarily also Master's degree in the relevant subject relaxable if a candidate has to his credit research work of very high standard or University approved teacher before 2711976. b) An M Phil degree or a recognised degree beyond the Master's level or published work indicating the capacity of a candidate for independent research work.
b) No change Provided that if a candidate possessing the qualifications as at (b) is not available or not considered suitable, the college on the recommendation of the Selection Committee may appoint a person possessing the qualification as at 'A'.
11.
It is apparent from the above that respondent No. 4 was ineligible for appointment to the post of Principal before the amendment in academic qualification came into being and the Vice Chancellor had rightly declined his approval to his appointment as Principal on earlier occasion vide communication dated 24887, copy Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
In my view, the aforesaid amendment in the academic qualification, has been inserted with a mala fide intention and in order to accommodate respondent No. 4 who was otherwise ineligible for being appointed as such.
12.
A bare glance of the academic records of petitioner No. 1 and that of respondent No. 4 clearly reveals that the former had comparatively better academic record than that of the latter.
For the sake of clarity, the academic record of both petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 4 is reproduced below :-  Petitioner No. 1 Respondent No. 1 Consistently good 2nd class Matric 62% 438% (219/500) BA 42% 486 (243/550) B.Ed 53% Seond Division Less than 55% M.A.
58% 471% (377/400) M.Ed.
67% 60% (360/600) In view of the above comparison, I find considerable force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that petitioner No. 1 had better academic record as compared to that of respondent No. 4.
Had the University/College re-advertised the post of Principal after the change in the academic qualifications, in that situation, not only the petitioners, but also the other aspirants would have applied for the same and got an opportunity for being considered.
13.
Taking into consideration all this, it is concluded that the appointment of respondent No. 4, who was admittedly ineligible at the time of advertisement interview/selection, was approved by the Vice Chancellor by an order dated 13111987, Annexure P-4 after making him eligible by effecting change in academic qualification.
Since the change in criterion appears to have been made in order to facilitate the appointment of respondent No. 4, the impugned order dated 13111987 issued thereafter conveying approval to the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Principal w.e.f.
16101987 smacks of undue favour done to him.
I am of the view that the eligibility of a candidate is to be determined as per the prescribed qualifications as contained in the advertisement.
As held earlier, since respondent No. 4 was not having the requisite qualifications required for the post of Principal, the impugned orders dated 2271986 appointing him Principal and 13111987 conveying approval to the said appointment by the Vice Chancellor deserve to be quashed being bad in law and against the principles of natural justice.
If the prescribed qualifications were to be altered after issuance of advertisement, it was incumbent upon the University/College to have issued either corrigendum to the advertisement or post of Principal re-advertised which admittedly has not been done in the present case.
In case it was done, as observed above, the claim of other available persons like petitioner No. 1 who was admittedly having better academic record than that of respondent No. 4 would have been considered.
This view is fortified by a decision of this Court in Kuldip Singh Gill v. State of Punjab & others, 1972 SLR 706 wherein it was held as under :  "No relaxation can be granted when an advertisement has been issued inviting applications and person possessing the qualifications advertised are available and submit their applications.
If a relaxation has to be allowed, the advertisement should be issued again so that all eligible persons, in view of the relaxation to be allowed, should be able to apply for the job.
Once the qualifications have appeared in the advertisement inviting applications, those qualifications cannot be changed and the selection has to be made out of the candidates possessing those qualifications."
In Dr. JP Kulshreshtha & others v. Chancellor, Allahabad University & Others, AIR 1980 SC 2141, the appointments of candidates obtaining marks less than 54% as Readers, were held illegal by the Supreme Court.
It was observed therein by the Apex Court that there had been unequal treatment amongst the equals.
"It was further held that in the case before us, we find that the authorities were bound by the conditions laid down in the advertisement Annexure P-1 and the corrigendum and no deviation therefrom was permissible.
Every person who had applied in response to the advertisement was entitled to say that the selection should be made on that basis and that basis alone.
We are, therefore, of the view that the relaxation made in being the test to three items was unauthorised and not sustainable."
14.
A Division Bench of this Court in Parkash Vir and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SLR 167 : 1992(1) SCT 700, held as under :-  ".....that the qualifications once advertised cannot be relaxed until and unless it is clearly stated in the advertisement that the qualifications were relaxable.........".
The perusal of advertisement which appeared in the Tribune dated 3061986 nowhere indicates that the qualifications were relaxable.
The ratio of the decision in Parkash Vir's case (supra) squarely covers the present case.
15.
The rule of law prevails in our country and the rights of its citizens are to be protected by the constitutional guarantees as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
As and when there will be departure from the rules and regulations, the Court is bound to interfere in the matter in order to safeguard the interests and rights of the citizens.
16.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned orders dated 2271986, Annexure P-2, appointing respondent No. 4, as Principal and dated 13111987, Annexure P-4 conveying approval of the Vide Chairman to his appointment as such are quashed with a direction that respondents 1 to 3 shall issue advertisement afresh for the post of Principal.
Since the appointment of respondent No. 4 was illegal and against the statutory rules and regulations, the petitioners were forced to drag to the litigation.
As such, the costs of this writ petition are quantified at Rs. 5,000/- to be borne by the officer concerned at whose recommendations the change in academic qualifications has been effected to facilitate the appointment of respondent No. 4.
Petition allowed.