MR Agnihotri, J - The High Court Employees Cooperative Group Housing Society Ltd., Panchkula, has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court by filing this petition through its President for the issuance of a direction to the Haryana Urban Development Authority (H.U.D.A.)
to allot a plot measuring 1-1/2 acres to the petitioner Society in Panchkula (Haryana) on the basis of Group Housing Scheme 1990 published on 391990.
The petitioner-Society was registered with the Registrar of Cooperative Societies vide Registration No. 816 or 25.10.1990.
The Society consists of the employees working on the establishment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court which is common to the States of Punjab, Haryana and Union Territory of Chandigarh and is catering to their needs.
Obviously, the employees of this Court who are members of the petitioner-Society are working in connection with the affairs of the State of Haryana.
After obtaining a certificate to this effect under the orders of Hon'ble the Chief Justice of this Court on 31.10.1990, the petitioner-Society applied to the respondent-Haryana Urban Development Authority for allotment of a plot measuring 1-1/2 acres for the benefit of its members in response to the advertisement dated 391990.
Clause 2 of the Brochure prescribing the conditions of eligibility of Society and its members for the housing-scheme "Group Housing Scheme 1990" declared the Cooperative Societies of government employees registered with the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana as eligible for the allotment of the land.
Even though the petitioner-Society had already made the application yet the respondent-Haryana Urban Development Authority issued another advertisement on 16121990 for the benefit of certain other persons and that too after the expiry of the last date for the receipt of applications.
The principal grievance of the petitioner-Society is against the action of the respondent-Haryana Urban Development Authority inviting applications by way of fresh advertisement after the expiry of the last date, i.e. 31.10.1990 and aggrieved against this action, the present writ petition has been filed.
2.
In the written statement, the factual position has almost been admitted and it has further been admitted that "the last date was extended for the benefit of all those Societies who could not apply earlier".
During the pendency of the petitioner, it has been brought to my notice that various other Societies of government servants have already been allotted the land for the purposes of building residential flats/houses etc.
Probably, the petitioner-Society has not been considered for that purpose due to the pendency of the present writ petition.
Otherwise, no cogent reason has been disclosed either in the written statement or at the time of the hearing of the case as to why the allotment has not been made to the petitioner-Society.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the record, I find merit in this petition as the petitioner-Society is wholly eligible and entitled for the allotment of the land for its members.
Accordingly, I allow this petition and issue a direction to the respondents for the allotment of land measuring 1-1/2 acres plot in Panchkula to the petitioner-Society under the Group Housing Scheme 1990, within one month the date of receipt of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.