Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - These three writ petitions viz. CWP Nos. 5265 of 1983, 6758 of 1986 and 7829 of 1988 raise a dispute relating to inter se seniority between direct recruits and promotees.
The first of these writ petitions was filed by the direct recruits, while the remaining two writ petitions have been filed by the promotees to the service called the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Service (for short the P.S.E.
Class II).
In the circumstances of the case, it would be appropriate to notice the facts as stated in C.W.P.
No. 6758 of 1986.
2.
The dispute is with regard of seniority vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 3 to 8 who were directly recruited to the Class-II service in the year 1972.
The petitioner was appointed as a Junior Engineer in the year 1960.
He passed the B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil) Examination in April, 1973.
In November, 1973, the petitioner was given the current duty charge of the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer.
He was promoted as Sub-Divisional Engineer on ad hoc basis on January 1, 1974.
The petitioner was regularly promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer in the P.S.E.
Class-II service with effect from November 7, 1979.
The petitioner avers that he is a member of the Class II service.
3.
In the year 1979, the department prepared a roster indicating 293 posts in the Class-II service.
Since the Junior Engineers possessing the qualifications specified under the rules were not given their due share of posts, a C.W.P.
No. 185 of 1979 (Pritam Singh Ahuja v. The State of Punjab etc.) is stated to have been filed for a direction to the State to prepare the Select List for promotion to Class-II service and to give the due share to the members of the Class-III service possessing the qualifications specified in Appendix 'B' to the Rules.
Petitioner's claim was stated to have been considered.
The said writ petition was accordingly disposed of as having become infructuous.
A draft roster depicting the position as on March 31, 1979 was circulated by the Chief Engineer on May 2/5, 1979.
Copy of this roster has been appended as Annexure P-1 to this writ petition.
It has been averred that respondent Nos. 3 to 8 did not raise any objection to the position assigned to them in this roster.
Again, on October 19, 1979, a draft roster/seniority list of Class-II officers circulated by the Chief Engineer.
It is averred that none out of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 raised any objection.
The petitioner alleges that the final seniority list of the officers of P.S.E.
Class II was issued by the State Govt. on May 28, 1980 copy thereof has been appended as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
In this list, the petitioner was placed at serial No. 104.
This list had been issued subject to the decision in C.W.P.
No. 244 of 1980.
After the decision of the aforesaid writ petition, the seniority of Class-II officers was finalised and circulated on November 29, 1983.
In this list, the name of the petitioner appeared at serial No. 104 while those of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 appeared below his name.
4.
Some of the direct recruits have filed C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983 challenging the seniority list circulated on May 28, 1980 (Annexure P-3).
It is averred by the petitioner that in this writ petition, the State had justified the action in showing him senior to the various direct recruits including respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
A categorical stand had been taken that the posts falling to the share of candidates belonging to source No. 4 (Sectional Officers and Draftsmen possessing qualifications prescribed in Appendix 'B') were available and none of the petitioners had been appointed against their posts.
Furthermore, it had also been stated in the written statement that the petitioner had not represented at the time when the objections had been invited and his claim at this stage is highly belated.
In spite of this position, the Govt. issued an order promoting respondent Nos. 3 to 8 on March 3, 1986 as Executive Engineers.
The petitioner avers that his claim was not considered.
Thereafter, on October 9, 1986, the Chief Engineer circulated a provisional seniority list of Class-II officers in which the petitioner was relegated to serial No. 229 and the respondent Nos. 3 to 8 had been shown senior to him, A copy of this list has been appended as Annexure P-5.
The petitioner avers that he had submitted representation against this list, but to no avail.
Having failed to get any relief, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
5.
A written statement has been filed in this* petition.
The issue of a draft roster of PSE-Class II on May 2/5, 1979 is admitted.
It has also been admitted that none out of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 had filed any objections.
It has been further averred that the seniority list circulated on May 28, 1980 was not the final seniority list.
The averment of the petitioner that he was not considered for promotion has not been denied.
It has been further averred that the seniority list at Annexure P-5 is only provisional.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
Written statement has also been filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
6.
I have heard Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. HL Sibal, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 3 to 8 and Mr. TS Dhindsa, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a two-fold contention.
He submits that the action of the Chief Engineer in declaring the respondents senior to the petitioner is totally contrary to the provisions of the rules.
He has also submitted that the final seniority list had been issued in the year 1980.
Its validity had been challenged after the lapse of more than three years in C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983.
A categorical stand had been taken on behalf of the Govt. that the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983 who was a direct recruit had been appointed against a vacancy reserved for the category to which the petitioner belongs and that the post falling to the share of source No. 4 had in fact been kept reserved.
According to the learned counsel a complete somersault has been taken by the respondents now and the settled seniority has been challenged without any basis whatsoever.
The learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand have controverted the stand taken on behalf of the petitioner and claim that the Govt. had not issued any final seniority list in May, 1980 and that an error could always be corrected.
It is also submitted that the seniority which had been less provisionally fixed by the Govt. is in strict conformity with the rules.
8.
By the impugned order, the Govt. has provisionally determined the inter se seniority of the officers in the service.
Learned counsel for the parties stated that the matter may be settled by this Court.
Consequently, the case was heard on merits.
9.
For a proper appreciation of the contentions it is necessary to refer to some of the provisions of the rules.
These are contained in rules 2(12),6, 8, 9 and 12, which read as under :-  "2(12).
"Member of Service" means an officer appointed substantively to a cadre post, and includes :  (a) in the case of a direct appointment an officer on probation or an officer who, having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post : (b) in the case of an appointment by transfer, of an officer, who is on probation or who, having successfully completed his probation awaits appointment to a lien on a substantive post in any Government Department.
Explanation :- It is not necessary that a member of service shall at any given time be actually doing the work of a cadre post.
He may be working in an ex cadre post for reasons of administrative convenience.
Conversely, an officiating member against an ex-cadre post may in fact perform the duties of a cadre post.
6.
Recruitment to Service - (1) Recruitment to the service for cadre and ex-cadre post shall be made in the following manner only from the sources listed below in the proportions and the order indicated against a lot of every 40 vacancies :  Method of Recruitment Proportion Allocation to each source in a lot of 40 vacancies.
1.
Direct appointment 26 56555 2.
Promotion from the members 8 21212 of the Punjab P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service.
3.
Promotion from draftsmen members of the Draftsmen and tracer service.
2 1 - - 1 - 4.
Promotion from members of the Punjab P.W.D.
(B & R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and the Draftsmen member of the Draftsmen and Tracer Service possessing qualifications prescribed in Appendix "B".
4 - 1111 Total 40 88888 (2) In case suitable candidates are not available from source No. (4) the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment.
(3) In case, a candidate is not available from sources 1 and 3 and a person has, to be appointed, in public interest as a stop-gap arrangement from other than the allotted source such a person shall be liable to be reverted to his original cadre when a candidate from the allotted source is available and the period of service rendered by such person will not be reckoned for the purpose of seniority.
(4) The Government may fill a short term vacancy, in the exigencies of Public Service, after recording specific reasons, for a period not exceeding six months in each case by local arrangement from among the members of the Punjab, P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service, without resorting to the select list prepared under rule 9.
(5) No person, except to the extent provided under sub-rule (4) - (a) who is not substantive member of the P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch), Class II service or a member of P.S.E.
(B&R) Class I service in the JuniorScale on the date of enforcement of these rules, or (b) who is not considered suitable for appointment to the Service as provided in rule 7 read with Appendix 'G' shall hold the post of a Sub-Divisional Officer, even in an officiating capacity, unless he is declared, within a period of six months from the date of enforcement of these rules, as suitable for appointment to the service under the provisions of these rules.
8.
Direct Appointment - (1) A candidate for direct appointment shall not be less than twenty years and more than twenty-five years of age on or before the first day of August, next preceding the last date of submission of applications to the Commission :  Provided that -  (a) in the case of candidates who are displaced persons and in whose case the age limit for admission to Engineering College had been relaxed, and in the case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes the upper age limit shall be such as may be fixed by Government in consultation with Finance Department from time to time.
(b) In the event of no direct recruitment being made for some years the upper age limit of twenty-five years may be extended by the Government in consultation with Finance Department upto thirty years; in the case of eligible candidates to enable them to have two opportunities in all for appearing in the competitive examinations, and (c) in the case of candidates possessing the requisite qualification, who are already in the Service of the State Government, the upper age limit shall be thirty years.
(2) The selection of candidates, including those belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, shall be made by the Commission, after holding a competitive examination, the syllabus for which shall be such as may be prescribed by Government from time to time.
The syllabus for Competitive Examination as prescribed at present is given in Appendix 'D'.
The Commission shall recommend the required number of candidates after arranging their names in the order of merit and indicating which out of them belong to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes : Provided that a candidate shall not be considered qualified for interview by the Commission for appointment unless he obtains not less than forty per cent marks in each subject and also not less than fifty per cent marks in the aggregate and no candidate who does not obtain the qualifying marks shall be called for interview by the Commission :  Provided further that where a vacancy has been reserved for a person belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, the candidate belonging to a Scheduled Tribe or a Backward Class who secures among candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes, the highest marks in the aggregate and has qualified for an appointment shall be selected irrespective of his position with respect to the other candidates.
(3) Appointments to the Service shall be made, according to the number of vacancies to be filled by direct appointment, strictly in the order of merit indicated by the Commission.
Explanations - When so requested by Government the Commission may hold a combined competitive examination for selection to the Service as well as to any other Engineering services of the State and in such an event appointments shall be made in the order of merit indicated by the Commission, after allowing for personnel that are appointed to another Service.
9.
Appointment by promotion - (1) A committee consisting of Chairman of the Punjab Public Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend any other member of the Commission representing it.
Secretary, P.W.D.
Building and Road Branch, and Chief Engineers of P.W.D.
Buildings and Roads shall be constituted.
(2) The Chairman or the member of the Commission as the case may be, shall preside over the meeting of this Committee.
(3) The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year and consider the cases of all eligible officials for promotion to the service, as on the first day of January of that year.
(4) The Committee shall prepare a list of officials suitable for promotion to the Service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
(5) The names of the officers included in this list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Punjab P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and members of Draftsmen and Tracers Service.
Provided that any Junior Officer, who, in the opinion of the Committee, is of exceptional merit and suitability may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him in his own class.
(6) The list so prepared shall be revised every year.
(7) If in the process of preparing the list or its revision, it is proposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the Committee shall draw up a list of such officials.
and may record its reasons for proposed supersession.
(8) The list prepared or revised in accordance with sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by the Government along with (i) the records of officials included in the list; (ii) records of all officials proposed to be superseded as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee; (iii) the reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any officials; and  (iv) the observations, if any, of the State Government on the recommendations of the Committee.
(9) The Commission shall consider the list prepared by the Committee along with other documents received from the State Government and unless it considers any change necessary, approve the list.
(10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from Government, the Commission shall make the changes proposed and forward the list it considers suitable to the State Government.
(11) Appointment to the Service shall be made by Government from this list in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission.
(12) Appointment by the promotion may be made to an ex-cadre post, or to any post in the cadre in an officiating capacity from the list, prepared under this rule.
NOTE :- This rule will also apply for assessing the suitability of Temporary Assistant Engineer, for the Service, as provided in Appendix (C).
12.
Seniority - (1) Except as provided in sub-rule (5), of this rule relating to officers appointed by transfer, the seniority of the members of the Service shall be determined by the order of appointment in Service according to rules 6, 8 and 9 irrespective their date of joining :  Provided that where the period of probation of an officer has been extended the order of appointment shall be deemed to have issued on a date determined by adding to the original date the extended period of probation.
(2) The inter se seniority of the members of the Service shall be in the order of recruitment provided under rule 6 : Provided that in case an officer does not join his appointment within six months of the date of order of appointment his seniority shall be determined by Government on an ad hoc basis after taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case.
(3) The inter se seniority within the group of direct recruitment shall be as in the merit grading under rule 8.
(4) That inter se seniority within the group of promoted officers (from a particular source) shall be as in the list approved under rule 9.
(5) In the case of an officer appointed by transfer as an Assistant Engineer, while normally he would be placed junior to all the officers appointed directly or by promotion as Assistant Engineers in a particular year, the Government may, in the interest of the public service and taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case, fix his seniority on an ad hoc basis : Provided that the seniority thus fixed shall, in no case, be more favourable than the seniority determined after allowing him credit for the period of service rendered by him in previous appointment as Assistant Engineer or on a post the duties of which, in the opinion of Government are of equivalent or greater responsibility.
The decision of Government on this point shall be final.
Provided further that the provisions of proviso to sub-rule (1) "shall apply to such an officer if his period of probation is extended."
10.
The controversy between the parties hinges primarily on the interpretation of rule 6.
A perusal of clause (1) shows that the recruitment to the service has to be made only from four sources specified therein.
Specific quota has been assigned to each of the sources.
out of 40 posts, 26 have to be filled by direct recruitment, 8 by promotion from the members of the Punjab P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service etc. 2 posts have to be filled from amongst the members of the draftsmen and tracer Service and 4 posts have been allocated to the category of Sectional Officers and Draftsmen etc. who possess any of the qualifications specified in Appendix 'B'.
The rule further lays down that the recruitment has to be made in the 'order' indicated therein.
In order to put the matter beyond any shadow of doubt, it has been specified that out of the first 8 posts, 5 have to be filled by direct recruitment, the next 2 by promotion of Sectional Officers and one by the promotion of draftsman.
In other words, post Nos. 1 to 5 have to be filled up by Direct recruitment, those at Nos. 6 and 7 by promotion from amongst the Sectional Officers and the 8th post from amongst the Draftsmen.
Similarly, order for recruitment has been fixed for the remaining posts.
The rule, as such, clearly fixes that the appointment has to be made in the order specified therein.
Slots have been provided and the appointments have to be made accordingly.
The rule postulates the manner and the 'order' of recruitment to the service.
It does not merely lay down the sources and the manner in which the appointment has to be made but also fixed the "proportion and the order" of appointment.
It does not merely lay down quota but specifies the vacancies which have to be filled from each source.
'Manner' in the context of present rule means "the mode or method in which something is done or occurs, a mode of procedure----".
'Order' implies 'a sequential arrangement; the manner in which one thing succeeds another'.
Accordingly, I am of the view that rule 6(1) not only 'lays down the sources' and the quota for recruitment to the service but also prescribes the sequence in which the posts in the service have to be filled up.
It is a specific rule providing for rotation.
It not only lays down quota but also 'rota'.
11.
Clause (2) contemplates that if suitable persons are not available from source No. 4 for appointment to the service, the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment.
While the rule enables the State Govt. to divert the vacancies available for being filled up from source No. 4 to direct recruitment, the slot is not altered.
Clauses (3), (4) and (5) are not relevant for the decision of controversy in the present case.
Rules 8 and 9 lay down the procedure for direct recruitment and promotion respectively.
The next provision which is relevant for the decision is contained in rule 12.
Since the dispute is confined to the direct recruits and promotees, clause (5) is not relevant.
A perusal of clauses (3) and (4) shows that the inter se seniority within the group of persons selected for direct recruitment or for appointment by promotion from particular source to be in the order of merit determined in accordance with the provisions of rules 8 and 9.
According to clauses (1) and (2), the inter se seniority of the members of the service has to be determined" in the order of recruitment provided under rule 6".
In other words, the sequence of appointment contemplated under rule 6(1) has to be reflected in the seniority.
It is possible, as it normally happens, that direct recruitment and promotion are not made simultaneously.
Irrespective of the time of recruitment, the sequence in which the recruitment has to be made having been categorically provided for in rule 6, the seniority has to be necessarily determined in the same order.
To illustrate supposing 11 persons have been selected for direct recruitment in the year 1972 and are immediately less appointed to the service.
According to the roster provided in rule 6 positions at serial Nos. 1 to 5 shall be assigned to the first 5 persons in order of merit.
Posts at serial Nos. 6, 7 and 8 have to be kept vacant.
Thereafter, the remaining 6 persons out of the 11 would be appointed against the subsequent posts from serial Nos. 9 to 14.
Whenever, suitable persons from source Nos. 2 and 3 become available, the post/posts assigned to their category shall be filled up.
However, in spite of their joining after the direct recruits, they would rank senior to the persons appointed against subsequent roster points.
The rule making authority having specifically provided for not only the ratio but also the order of appointment, appears to have advisedly provided for the determination of the seniority also in the same 'order'.
The order of appointment, according to rules 6, 8 and 9 as mentioned in clause (1) of rule 12 does not mean the date of appointment or the date on which the letter of appointment was issued.
When read with clause (2) of the Rule 12 it clearly means "the order of recruitment provided under rule 6".
The proviso to clause (1) is only for specific purpose.
By the proviso to clause (1), on the date of appointment is deemed to be changed, but the seniority is not affected.
However, by the proviso to clause (2), a specific provision for change in seniority is contemplated.
In my view, the proviso means that if a person does not join his appointment within six months of the date of order of appointment, the Government can fix his seniority after considering the circumstances of the case.
Even under this proviso, the Govt. is not debarred from giving him the benefit of seniority in spite of the fact that the person concerned has failed to join his post within six months of the issue of the order of appointment.
If the circumstances of the case so justify, the Govt. can give him the seniority according to the order of appointment contemplated under rule 6(1).
To summarise, I am of the view that :-  (1) rule 6 provides the ratio and the order in which the appointments have to be made from various sources.
It lays down the slots for each source and the post at a particular number can be filled up by a person belonging to that source only.
(2) rule 6(2) enables the Government to fill up a vacancy belonging to the share of persons from source No. 4 by direct recruitment.
However, by this provision the order of appointment laid down under rule 6(1) is not affected.
(3) the inter se seniority of direct recruits has to be fixed in the order of merit under rule 8.
(4) the inter se seniority of the promotees is determined by the order of merit prepared under rule 9.
(5) the inter se seniority of the members of the service has to be determined in the order/sequence provided for under rule 6(1).
(6) in case a direct recruit or a promotee fails to join his appointment within 6 months of the date of the order of appointment, the Govt. has the power to fix the seniority after taking into consideration the various circumstances of the case.
12.
I Mr. Sibal, however, contends that the inter se seniority has to be determined by the date of continuous appointment.
He has cited judgments to contend that the date of continuous appointment determines seniority.
It is no doubt correct that their Lordships of the Supreme Court have, in a series of judgments starting from A Janardhana v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 769 to the Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, JT 1990(2) SC 264 have taken the view that the date of continuous appointment should determine seniority.
However, these are cases where no specific provisions regarding seniority being determined by following the specific Rule of Quota & Rota existed.
In cases where the rules prescribe quota, it has invariably been held that the benefit of officiation against a particular post held by a person when the vacancy was to be manned by a person from another source shall not be available to the person till a vacancy within his own quota became available to him.
This view was enunciated initially in SG Jaisinghani v. Union of India, 1967 SLR 482 and has been followed till the latest pronouncement in AN Sehgal v. Raje Ram Sheoran, JT 1991(2) SC 123.
Such being the position, I am of the view that rules 6 and 12 prescribe for not only quota but also rota.
The inter se seniority of the direct recruits and promotees has to be determined in the order prescribed under rule 6(1).
13.
Coming to the factual position, it appears that initially a roster/seniority list was issued by the Chief Engineer vide his letter dated May 2/5, 1979 (Annexure P-1).
In this list, the petitioner's name had appeared above that of respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
Another roster was issued depicting similar position vide letter of October 19, 1979.
On May 28, 1980, the Govt. of Punjab issued the order conveying that "that President of India is pleased to approve the following roster subject to the result of writ petitions filed by some of the AMIE/Degree holder Sectional Officers in the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
In this order, the name of the petitioner was at serial No. 104 while those of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 appeared below him.
A perusal of the note at the end of the document shows that the adjustment of "Shri M.S.
Kailey in this Roster will be made upon decision of his writ petition by the High Court."
In my view, this roster/list was final for all intents and purposes.
It could be changed only in pursuance to the decision of the High Court in the pending Civil Writ Petition.
No decision implying that the petitioner's position vis-a-vis, respondent Nos. 3 to 8 had to be altered has been brought to may notice.
In this situation, the claim made on behalf of the respondents that final seniority list had not been circulated by Govt. on May 28, 1980 does not appear to be factually correct.
The tentative roster/seniority list had been issued in pursuance of the approval of the Govt. vide Annexures P-1 and P-2.
It was finally approved vide orders dated May 28, 1980. after the 29 representations submitted by the affected persons had been considered.
Relief was granted to two officers.
The remaining representations were found to be without any substance.
That being the factual position, it is not understood as to how and on what basis it has been averred that the final seniority list had not been circulated by the Govt. on May 28, 1980.
Furthermore, even by the orders issued on November 19, 1983 the petitioner was shown senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
14.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Some of the direct recruits had filed C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983 challenging the order of May 28,1980.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been categorically averred that "the candidates from source No. 4 were available and were appointed as such against these posts."
It has also been averred in the written statement that "-------because of the fact that the posts meant for candidates belonging to source No. 4 were kept reserved for them and none of the petitioners was appointed against these posts.
Though in the year 1972, the private respondents except Shri SP Goyal and Shri MK Mittal were not eligible, but later on they became eligible and appointed initially on ad hoc basis and later on appointed to P.S.E.
Class-II against the posts meant for their quota which were kept vacant and reserved from them and as such the petitioner has no claim against the posts meant for the candidates belonging to source No. 4.
Moreover, the petitioners did not represent at that time against the posts kept vacant/reserved for the candidates belonging to source No. 4 and as such the claim of the petitioners at this stage is time barred."
It thus appears that the posts falling to the share of the source No. 4 had been kept reserved for the members of that source.
They were ultimately appointed.
There is nothing to indicate that the Govt. at any point of time formed the opinion that no suitable person from source No. 4 appear to have been kept reserved for them and on that basis position in the roster/seniority list was assigned to the persons from the said category.
The roster/seniority list issued vide letter dated May 28, 1980 was changed by the respondents vide Annexure P-5.
The petitioner who was senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 8 was relegated to the position far below them.
The petitioner's grievance in this behalf is two-fold.
Firstly, it is submitted that the order dated May 28, 1980 was under challenged in C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983 and the Govt. was contesting this petition.
There was no justification whatsoever for suo motu reviewing that order and not awaiting the decision by the Court.
Secondly, it has been contended that even when the order dated May 28, 1980 was actually in force, the Department did not consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to Class-I even though his juniors were actually promoted vide orders dated March 3, 1986 (Annexure P-4).
In paragraph 17, the petitioner has averred as under :-  "That surprisingly, the respondent No. 1 on 3rd March, 1986 issued an order promoting the respondents Nos. 3 to 8 who are junior to the petitioner as Executive Engineers without considering to promoting the petitioner.
As already mentioned above, in the final seniority list circulated vide Annexure P-3, the petitioner is senior to the respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
A copy of order dated 3rd May, 1986 is enclosed herewith as Annexure P-4".
In reply filed on behalf of the State, it has been stated as under :  "The contents of para No. 17 are admitted to the extent that respondent Nos. 3 to 8 have been promoted on purely ad hoc basis as Executive Engineers.
Rest of the para is denied being incorrect."
The specific averment of the petitioner that his claim not considered has not been denied.
He had been working as a Sub-Divisional Engineer on ad hoc basis since January, 1974.
He had thus completed the requisite period of experience as required for promotion to Class-I.
He was eligible since January, 1, 1982.
The promotion order was issued in March, 1986.
The petitioner had a right to be considered.
The action in not considering his claim was wholly illegal.
It was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is no doubt correct that the Govt. had made promotions only on ad hoc basis.
Whatever be the nature of appointment a senior person has a right to be considered before any one junior to him is considered or promoted.
The right of the petitioner was illegally denied to him.
15.
Even the other grievance made by the petitioner that the Govt. should not have tinkered with the list circulated on May 28, 1980, especially when the matter was pending in this Court deserves to be considered.
It is no doubt correct that there was no specific order debarring the Govt. from issuing a fresh seniority list.
Still it is undesirable that the list prepared and circulated in the year 1980 had been challenged in C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983 which had been filed more than three years after the passing of the order.
The Govt. had filed a written statement contesting the claim made on behalf of the direct recruits.
Without waiting for the decision of the case, the department chose to issue a tentative seniority list vide Annexure P-5.
This list is stated to have been issued by the Chief Engineer vide his letter dated October 9, 1986.
No reason or circumstances which compelled the department to issue the list without waiting for the decision by the Court has been brought to my notice.
In such a situation, it is not understood as to why the list was issued.
The settled position was unsettled.
The department, in my view, acted unfairly.
16.
I am accordingly of the view that the petitioner's seniority has to be fixed in the order prescribed under rule 6(1).
According to the seniority which was prevalent in March, 1986, he was senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
He had a right to be considered for promotion when his juniors were considered and promoted.
This was not done.
The action of the respondents in changing the petitioner's seniority and in not considering his claim for promotion was contrary to the Rules and violated Art. 16 of the Constitution of India.
C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983.
17.
In this writ petition, the primary claim made by the petitioners who are direct recruits is that roster-cum-seniority list dated May 28, 1980 is illegal and is to be quashed.
This claim is based on the premises that the petitioners were recruited against the vacancies reserved for persons from source No. 4 and accordingly respondent Nos. 3 to 17 cannot be senior to them.
This factual position has been denied.
It has been further averred in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that no objection was raised by any of the petitioners against the tentative roster/seniority list issued vide letter dated May 2/5.
1979 and October 19, 1979.
It has also been averred that the final list had been issued in May, 1980 and the writ petition had been filed after a lapse of more than 3 years on November 3, 1983.
The petitioners have not filed any rejoinder to controvert the stand taken on behalf of the respondents.
That being so, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the short ground of delay.
Admittedly, impugned list had been issued on May 28, 1980.
The writ petition was filed on November 3, 1983.
In order to overcome the difficulty of delay, the petitioners have made the following statement in paragraph 13 of the writ petition :  "That since respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are acting on the basis of the roster treating it to be the seniority list, the petitioners made a representation.
The latest representation dated 2461983 given by the General Secretary of the Haryana Construction Sub-Division, Hoshirapur is attached herewith as Annexure P-3 to this petition.
No reply has been given to the petitioners and the petitioners cannot wait any more as their rights are going to be prejudicially affected on the basis of the illegal roster-cum-seniority to further promotions."
No particulars regarding date etc. of the representations alleged to have been dismissed by the petitioners have been given.
Reference has been made only to a representation dated June 24, 1983.
Even this representation was not submitted by the petitioners but by the General Secretary of the Association.
This representation was apparently submitted more than 3 years after the impugned order had been circulated.
In any case, there was no provision of law under which the petitioners could have submitted a representation.
Even if it is assumed that one representation could have been submitted, it had to be done promptly and the writ petition should have been filed within a reasonable time thereafter.
In the absence of any averment or material to show that a representation was submitted promptly, I am of the view that this petition suffers from vice of laches and deserves to be dismissed on that ground alone.
Furthermore, the petitioners having not raised any objection in response to the circular dated May 2/5, 1979, I am of the view that they cannot be permitted to challenge the final order dated May 28, 1980.
This is especially so in view of the fact that in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents the averments made on behalf of the petitioners have been controverted and it has been specifically averred that the petitioners had not been appointed against the posts reserved for persons belonging to source No. 4.
Mr. Sibal, however, contends that the provisions of rule 6(2) are mandatory in nature.
Even if it is assumed to be so, the stand taken on behalf of the respondents is specially to the effect that the candidates from source No. 4 were available.
Consequently, the condition precedent for invoking the provisions of clause (2) of the rule 6 did not exist.
(Sic) it cannot be said that the petitioners have been appointed on vacancies reserved for candidates from source No. 4.
C.W.P.
No. 7829 of 1988  18.
The grievance made in this writ petition is similar to the one made in C.W.P.
No. 6758 of 1986.
No written statement has been filed in this case.
It is covered by the observations made above.
19.
I accordingly dismiss C.W.P.
No. 5265 of 1983, CWP Nos. 6758 of 1986 and 7829 of 1988 are allowed.
It is declared that the seniority of the persons mentioned in the order dated May 28, 1980 having been determined, their claim for promotion had to be considered whenever any person junior to them was considered for promotion.
In the circumstances of the case, it is directed that the respondents shall consider the claims for promotion to various posts in accordance with the seniority as reflected in the list dated May 28, 1980.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.