RB Misra, J - Heard Sri Shyam Narain, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri Raj Kumar along with Miss Enakshi Sharma, learned Standing Counsel for the State.
With the consent of the parties this writ petition is decided finally at this stage in view of Second proviso to Rule 2 of Chapter XXII of Allahabad High Court Rules, 1952.
1A.
In this petition prayer has been made to quash the order dated 28-7-1990 (Annexure-4 to the writ petition) whereby the petitioner's service as part- time tube-well operator has been terminated by order simpliciter.
2.
The brief facts necessary for adjudication of this petition are that the petitioner was appointed as a part-time tube-well operator on 5-6-1985 absolutely on temporary basis on terms and conditions that the services of the petitioner could be terminated at any time after serving notice of one month or on payment of one month salary in lieu of notice thereof.
However, on payment of one month salary the service of the petitioner was terminated by an order simpliciter dated 28-7-1990.
3.
Counter-affidavit reveals that the petitioner and other tube-well operators were appointed to run the tube-wells under the State till 1981.
The whole-time tube-well operators in regular establishment were being appointed, when public tube-wells constructions were being undertaken with the financial assistance of the World Bank.
For the operation and maintenance of tube-wells established with the assistance of the World Bank it was decided to appoint part-time tube-well operators out of those belonging to the same village where the tube-wells were located, or out of residents of that village within the command area of operation of proposed tube-wells, for the reasons that the appointing part-time tube-well operators in fact, they are required to work only 2-3 hours on a tube-well to record the daily irrigation done by it, whereas a ban was imposed on the other tube-wells of State for the recruitment of the regular tube-well operators.
Necessary guide-lines were issued regarding the selection, appointment and the conditions of service of the part-time tube-well operators.
They were required to work 2-3 hours only and for the rest of the time they were free to engage themselves in any business, trade or calling.
Their appointment was to be initially made for a period of three years, on the expiry of which if their work and conduct was found to be satisfactory, they could again be employed for another period of three years.
In the year 1981 the part-time tube-well operators were paid an honorarium of Rs. 150/- per month, since 8-12-82 to 1-2-85, they were paid Rs. 200/- per month.
Since 2-2-85 they were paid Rs. 299/- per month and now vide GO No. 1721/91-27-Irrig.-8-117/2 dated 20-2-1992 the honorarium was revised to Rs. 550/- per month plus a handsome allowance, related to their performance and they have now been re-designated as "Tube-well Assistants".
On an average, a State owned tube-well give at relevant time an annual revenue of Rs. 7000/- only, whereas apart from the honorarium paid to tube-well assistant, huge financial expenditure was incurred by the State on the operation and maintenance of the tube-wells.
So for earning a paltry revenue of merely Rs. 7000/- per annum it was not justified to pay Rs. 20,000/- per annum on wages alone from the public exchequer.
4.
The regular tube-well operators were whole-time Government servants posted on tube-wells, more than 25 Kms away from their home village and could be transferred to any place in the State, while the part-time tube-well operators were to be a local habitats (inhabitants ?)
and were not to be transferred to other tube-wells of State.
The working hours for regular tube-well operators were fixed as 6 hours per day while the duty hours of the petitioners were fixed for about 2-1/2 hours daily and for rest of the time they were free to undertake any private trade, business or calling, however, in the light of decision of High Court and Supreme Court the State Government acknowledged that part-time tube-well operators are also discharging duties like regular tube-well operators.
As contended on behalf of the respondent the petitioner did not acquire status of permanent employee by such decision of State Government as the cadre of part time tube-well operators was declared a dying cadre and emoluments payable to them only was brought at par to that of regular part-time tube-well operators and unless an individual was confirmed, his services could be terminated by an order simpliciter and the status of petitioner could be of temporary employee only.
Payment of salary to that of regular tube-well operators was not to strengthen the case of the petitioner however, as contended by the respondents since the impugned order is simplicitor, not stigmatic or discriminatory and action of the respondents is neither arbitrary or discriminatory.
5.
It was observed in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) : (1991)1 SCC 691 as below :-  "(1) The principle of 'last come first go' is applicable to a case where on account of reduction of work or shrinkage of cadre retrenchment takes place and the services of employees are terminated on account of retrenchment.
In the event of retrenchment the principle of 'last come first go' is applicable under which senior in service is retained while the junior's services are terminated.
But this principle is not applicable to a case where the services of a temporary employee are terminated on the assessment of his work and suitability in accordance with terms and conditions of his service.
If out of several temporary employees working in a department a senior is found unsuitable on account of his work and conduct, it is open to the competent authority to terminate his services and retain the services of juniors who may be found suitable for the service.
Such a procedure does not violate principle of equality, enshrined under Articles 14 and 16.
If a junior employee is hard-working, efficient and honest his services could not be terminated with a view to accommodate the senior employee even though he is found unsuitable for the service if this principle is not accepted there would be discrimination and the order of termination of a junior employee would be unreasonable and discriminatory.
On the admitted set of facts, the order of termination in the instant case, could not be rendered illegal or unjustified on the ground of juniors being retained in services.
The view taken by the High Court is not sustainable in law."
(Para 5) "(2) A temporary Government servant has no right to bold the post.
Whenever, the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary Government servant.
If the services of a temporary Government servant is terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of service, it will not visit him with any evil consequences.
If on the perusal of the character roll entries or on the basis of preliminary inquiry on the allegations made against an employee, the competent authority is satisfied that the employee is not suitable for the service whereupon the services of the temporary employee are terminated no exception can be taken to such an order of termination.
Before terminating the services of a temporary servant or reverting the person officiating in a higher post to his substantive post, the Government may hold a preliminary enquiry to form the requisite satisfaction for the continuance of the officiating Government servant.
Such an inquiry does not change the nature of the order of the termination or reversion.
If, however, it is decided to take punitive action the competent authority may hold a formal inquiry by framing charges and giving opportunity to the Government servant in accordance with Article 311(2) which is applicable to temporary Government servants also."
(Paras 7, 6 and 10) 6.
The Supreme Court in Radhey Shyam Gupta v. UP State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd, 1999(1) SCT 366 (SC) : (1999)2 SCC 21 : 1999 All LJ 315, has observed as below :-  "The termination of the services of a temporary servant or one on probation, on the basis of adverse entries or on the basis of an assessment that his work is not satisfactory will not be punitive inasmuch as the above facts are merely the motive and not the foundation.
The reason why they are the motive is that assessment is not done with the object of finding out any misconduct on the part of the officer.
It is done only with a view to decide whether he is to be retained or continued in service.
The position is not different even if a preliminary enquiry is held because the purpose of preliminary enquiry is to find out if there is prima facie evidence or material to initiate a regular departmental enquiry.
The purpose of the preliminary enquiry is not to find out misconduct on the part of the officer and if a termination follows without giving an opportunity, it will not be bad.
Even in a case where a regular departmental enquiry is started, charge- memo issued, reply obtained, and an enquiry officer is appointed.
If at that point of time, the enquiry is dropped and a simple notice of termination is passed, the same will not be punitive because the enquiry officer has not recorded evidence nor given any findings on the charges.
The departmental enquiry was stopped because the employer was not sure of establishing the guilt of the employee.
The employer was entitled to say that he would not continue an employee against whom allegations were made the truth of which the employer was not interested to ascertain.
In fact, the employer by opting to pass a simple order of termination as permitted by the terms of appointment or as permitted by the rules was conferring a benefit on the employee by passing a simple order of termination so that the employee would not suffer from any stigma which would attach to the rest of his career if a dismissal or other punitive order was passed.
The above are all examples where the allegations whose truth has not been found, and were merely the motive.
(Para 33) But in cases where the termination is preceded by an enquiry and evidence is received and findings as to misconduct of a definitive nature are arrived at behind the back of the officer and where on the basis of such a report, the termination order is issued, such an order will be violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as the purpose of the enquiry is to find out the truth of the allegations with a view to punish him and not merely to gather evidence for a future regular departmental enquiry.
In such cases, the termination is to be treated as based or founded upon misconduct and will be punitive.
These are obviously not cases where the employer feels that there is a mere cloud against the employee's conduct but are cases where the employer has virtually accepted the definitive and clear findings of the enquiry officer, which are all arrived at behind the back of the employee even though such acceptance of findings is not recorded in the order of termination.
That is why the misconduct is the foundation and not merely the motive in such cases."
(Para 34) 7.
The Supreme Court in Chandra Prakash Shahi v. State of UP, 2000(2) SCT 946 (SC) : (2000)5 SCC 152 : 2000 All LJ 1445, has occasion to test the applicability of 'motive' or 'foundation' behind termination classifying termination as simplicitor or punitive and the Supreme Court has indicated the real test when the termination of writ petitioners were preceded by preliminary enquiry and termination motivated by the writ petitioners to find out unsuitability was held to be valid.
However, if for allegations of serious misconduct for which preliminary enquiry was conducted behind his back to ascertain the truth and then termination is brought about, such termination, having regard to other circumstances of a case, has to be taken as founded on misconduct and, therefore, treated to be punitive.
On the other hand in regard to termination of a probationer, it has to be seen whether enquiry was for the purpose of determining his suitability for retention in service/confirmation or for the purpose of finding out the truth in allegations against the employee if the enquiry is to only finding out suitability, the order of termination shall be simpliciter and in case finding out the truth in allegations against the employee the termination shall be founded on misconduct.
8.
According to the respondents, even if the petitioner's appointment was made on temporary basis, his service could have been terminated in view of the provisions of UP Temporary Government Servants (Termination of Services) 'Rules, 1975' by an order simplicitor and even the petitioner could have been punished after disciplinary inquiry, however, the ad hoc or temporary employee shall have no right to the post and such employee cannot claim to set aside the termination order passed simplicitor.
9.
According to the respondents, since the petitioner was appointed absolutely temporarily on ad hoc basis, therefore, in terms of the appointment the dispensation of service of petitioner or not renewing his contractual employment without assigning any reason is not a retrenchment or illegal in view of Escorts Ltd v. Presiding Officer, (1997)11 SCC 521 decided by considering the verdict of M Venugopal v. Divisional Manager, LIC, 1994(1) SCT 858 (SC) : (1994)2 SCC 323 : AIR 1994 SC 1343.
The petitioner was having status of temporary employee, therefore, his service could be terminated by observance of 'Rules, 1975'.
10.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
I find force in the contentions of opposite parties.
The petitioner being a temporary employee has no right to the post and as such his service has rightly been dispensed with by an order simplicitor.
Recording of reason of any kind what to say of referring of restrictions on appointment of employee, on temporary basis is not necessary to be mentioned in the order simplicitor.
The principle of natural justice was not required to be given to the petitioner and termination is not violative of the provisions of Article 311(2).
I do not find any illegality and impropriety in the said impugned termination order dated 28-7- 1990.
In these circumstances, this Court is not inclined to invoke its extraordinary discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, therefore, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.