MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order dated 1881987 according Ex-Post facto sanction to the grant of extra ordinary leave to the petitioner for doing diploma course at Medical College, Rohtak from 331984 to 2821985.
The claim made by the petitioner in the writ petition is that he is entitled to avail leave of the kind due in lieu of the extra ordinary leave in pursuing the diploma course.
Reliance in this regard has been placed on the policy letter dated 851985 Ex.P3 which permits availing of leave of the kind due rather than taking extra ordinary leave for the duration of the diploma course.
2.
The stand of the respondent-State in the written statement is that policy letter dated 851985 permit availing of leave of the kind due is prospective but the petitioner was allowed to pursue the diploma course when the terms and conditions stipulated in the policy letter dated 231982 Annexe P-2 were in force.
Accordingly, the petitioner was issued `No Objection Certificate' on 20.7.1984 with a stipulation that he would complete the course after obtaining extra ordinary leave.
The afore-mentioned `No Objection Certificate' is also attached with the written statement as Annexe R-1.
3.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that a number of persons, who have qualified the diploma course along with the petitioner or earlier to 851985, have been granted the leave of the kind due rather than forcing them to take extra ordinary leave.
According to the learned counsel, extra ordinary leave causes permanent loss to an employee as no benefit including increments for the aforementioned leave period could be earned by him.
In case leave of the kind due is availed by an employee who wishes to proceed for study of a diploma course then he would be saved from the loss of service and other benefits.
Learned counsel have given the example of Dr. Prithvi Raj Paruthi and Dr. Telu Ram who had passed the diploma course in the year 1979-80.
Dr. RC Mittal who had passed the diploma course in the year 1975-76 and Dr. KL Sachdeva, who had passed the diploma course in the course in the year 1980-81 and argued that all of the above mentioned persons have been given leave of the kind due and none of them was permitted to avail extra-ordinary leave.
4.
Mr. Naresh K Joshi, learned State counsel has argued that the policy letter dated 231982 Annexure P-2 providing for extra-ordinary leave was in force at the time when the petitioner pursued diploma course and no argument can now be raised that he was entitled to avail leave of the kind due.
The learned counsel has also pointed out that stipulations in `No Objection Certificate' and policy letter Annexure P-2 dated 231982 are absolutely clear the petitioner would pursue the diploma course after obtaining exta ordinary leave.
He has further referred to para 5 of the written statement to argue that Dr. Prithvi Raj Paruthi has been issued a show cause notice for withdrawing the benefit of availing of the leave of the kind due.
Learned counsel has also pointed out that merely because some others have been given the benefits the petitioner would not for that reason become entitled to seek a mandamus from this court because no legal right would accrue to the petitioner to avail leave of the kind due instead of extra ordinary leave.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that in order to succeed in the issuance of a writ of mandamus, the petitioner is under obligation to prove his legal right.
When the petitioner was sent for diploma course he did not have any legal right to avail the leave of the kind due instead of extra ordinary leave.
At that stage, the policy contained in letter dated 231982 was in force and in pursuance of that policy, the petitioner was issued `No Objection Certificate' Annexure P-1 on 20.7.1984.
The petitioner has accepted that position and had then proceeded for pursuing his diploma.
6.
The question of discrimination raised by the petitioner that others have been granted leave of the kind due would not require detailed consideration for the reason that if some wrong has been committed by the respondent-State then that would not enure to the benefit of the petitioner because one illegal act would not constitute the basis for conferring a legal right on some one else.
The doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution is positive doctrine.
It requires that in order to successfully demonstrate the violation of equality clause, it must be shown that a right exists and others have been granted that right.
Merely conferring illegal benefits on others would not constitute the basis for claiming quality.
In this regard reliance can be placed on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Chandigarh Administration v. Jagjit Singh, 1995(2) R.R.R.
291 : (1995)1 SCC 705; Style (Dress Land) v. UT Chandigarh, (1999) 7 SCC 89; Gursharan Singh v. New Delhi Municipal Committee, 1996(1) R.R.R.
563 : 1996(2) SCC 459; Jaipur Development Authority v. Daulat Mal Jain, 1997(1) SCC 35 and State of Bihar and others v. Kameshwar Prasad Singh and another, 2000(2) SCT 889 (SC) : 2000(9) SCC 94.
The observations of their Lordships in Kameshwar Prasad's case (supra) read as under :  "The concept of equality as envisaged under Article 14 of the Constitution is a positive concept which cannot be enforced in a negative manner.
When any authority is shown to have committed any illegality or irregularity in favour of any individual or group of individuals, others cannot claim the same illegality or irregularity on the ground of denial thereof to them.
Similarly wrong judgment passed in favour of one individual does not entitled others to claim similar benefits.
In this regard this Court in Gursharan Singh v. New Delhi Municipal Committee held that citizens have assumed wrong notions regarding the scope of Article 14 of the Constitution which guarantees equality before law to all citizens.
Benefits extended to some persons in an irregular or illegal manner cannot be claimed by a citizen on the plea of equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution by way of writ petition, filed in the High Court.
The Court observed : (SCC p. 465 para 9) " Neither Article 14 of the Constitution conceives within the equality clause this concept nor Article 226 empowers the High Court to enforce such claim of equality before law.
If such claims are enforced, it shall amount to directing to continue and perpetuate an illegal procedure or an illegal order for extending similar benefits to others.
Before a claim based on equality clause is upheld, it must be established by the petitioner that his claim being just and legal, has been denied to him, while it has been extended to others and in this process there has been a discrimination."
7.
In the case of State of Haryana v. Ram Kumar Mann, 1997(3) SCT 135 (SC) : (1997) 3 SCC 321, their Lordships have observed that in order to succeed in the plea of discrimination there has to be an enforceable legal right.
The observations of their Lordships which are fully applicable to the instant case read as under :  "The doctrine of discrimination is founded upon existence of an enforceable right.
He was discriminated and denied equality as some similarly situated persons had been given the same relief.
Article 14 would apply only when invidious discrimination is meted out to equals and similarly circumstanced without any rational basis or relationship in that behalf.
The respondent has no right, whatsoever and cannot be given the relief wrongly given to them, i.e., benefit of withdrawal of resignation.
The High Court was wholly wrong in reaching he conclusion that there was invidious discrimination.
If we cannot allow a wrong to perpetrate, an employee, after committing misappropriation of money, is dismissed from service and subsequently that order is withdrawn and he is reinstated into the service.
Can a similarly circumstanced person claim equality under Section 14 for reinstatement ?
The answer is obviously `No'.
In a converse case, in the first instance, one may be wrong but the wrong order cannot be the foundation for claiming equality for enforcement of the same order.
As stated earlier, his right must be founded upon enforceable right to entitle him to the equality treatment for enforcement thereof.
A wrong decision by the Government does not give a right to enforce the wrong order and claim parity or equality.
Two wrongs can never make a right."
7.
When the principles laid down in the above cited judgments of the Supreme Court are applied to the facts of the present case, it becomes evident that the petitioner has no right before 851985 which could be enforced by issuing a writ of mandamus.
The petitioner has already passed the diploma course from 331983 to 2821985.
The mere fact that some other persons have been granted the benefit of leave of the kind due, would not result into infringement of right of equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
The concept of equality as envisaged in Article 14 of the Constitution is a positive concept which cannot be enforced to perpetuate any illegality or irregularity in favour of any individual or group of individuals and others cannot claim the same illegality or irregularity.
Moreover, the policy letter date 851985 is not retrospective in its effect.
Therefore, there is no merit in this writ petition.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.