Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - BSF Head Quarter at Gurdaspur Punjab received a complaint from one Balwinder Pal of M/s Jakria Furniture Gurdaspur alleging misconduct by the petitioner, a commandant on 115 Bn.
BSF, in as much as the petitioner is stated to have purchased furniture worth Rs. 70,000/- for his personal use/for marriage of his daughter as official purchase in the name of BSF and failing to make part/full payment of the amount.
The D.I.G.
BSF Gurdaspur detailed one SD Bimal Dy.
Commandant (adm.) to the Headquarter to conduct staff court of Enquiry (SCOI) with a view to find out the facts and truth of the complaint.
The one man SCOI issued the questionnaire and sought reply from the petitioner to which the petitioner has replied.
2.
Petitioner is challenging this order and initiation of proceedings by Staff Court of Enquiry Officer (SCOI).
3.
Admittedly the BSF authorities are within para-meters of law to find and collect basic facts and gather information with a view to determine the truth or otherwise of the complaint inter-alia for the purpose if further re-course to appropriate proceedings under law is merited.
The impugned action has been nothing but the proceedings wherein preliminary fact finding exercise is to be undertaken which does not impinge on or contravene any service or other rights of the petitioner.
4.
Jurisdiction of this court, cannot be invoked in the fact-situation of the case, to seek the relief, as prayed for.
Petitioner as admitted by his counsel is presently posted in West Bengal.
The cause of action has arisen at Gurdaspur.
The impugned action has been taken at Delhi.
Petitioner has wrongly and wilfully shown his residence at Karannagar Srinagar, whereas he belongs and is resident of Rajasthan State.
He has also equally made a wrong statement that he is commandant of 2115 Bn.
BSF at Karan-Nagar Srinagar, whereas petitioner is as admitted by counsel shifted from this Bn.
and is on duty to the BSF somewhere in West Bengal.
This High Court is not exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which cause of action has arisen.
The parties obviously are also located/domiciled beyond the jurisdiction of this court.
5.
In CWP No. 129/2000 M/s Torl Impex v. Union of India and others decided on 2972002, where the firm sought incentives under Duty Exemption Pass Book (DEPB) Scheme of Central Government in respect of goods (SIM Card LOC) exported to Dubai.
I have in the context of jurisdiction, observed :-  "The articles in question are shipped at Mumbai.
The shipping bill is provisional and assessed at Mumbai.
The final assessment with regard to the value of the goods exported for purposes of credit/incentive under BEPB Scheme is again a matter being dealt with by the competent authority at Mumbai.
All the respondents except respondent No. 1 who is posted at Delhi are based at Mumbai.
The matter is being investigated/inquired into for the purpose of credit/incentive/Scheme again at Mumbai.
The annexures enclosed with the writ petition are issued by the authorities at Mumbai.
In such circumstances, the jurisdiction of this court cannot be invoked in the matter."
6.
These observations on all fours are applicable to this case as well.
In result, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.