GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal against order dated 27.2.1992 by which learned Single Judge dismissed C.W.P.
No. 5532 of 1987 filed by the appellants for quashing order dated 14.8.1987 passed by the Chairman, Punjab School Education Board terminating their services.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the appeal are that the appellants were appointed as daily-wage employees in the services of the Punjab School Education Board, Mohali (for short, the Board) on various dated between June 1, 1983 and June 24, 1986.
Their services were terminated on 2481987 apparently because the examination of 5th and 8th classes were scrapped.
They challenged the action of the Chairman of the Board on the ground of arbitrariness and violation of their fundamental right to equality under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
They also claimed regularisation of their services in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide circulars dated 881985, 1541986 and 191986 (annexure as Annexures P4, P6 and P5 with the writ petition).
3.
The Board contested the claim of the appellants for regularisation of services by contending that the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab were meant for temporary class-III employees and not Class-IV employees engaged on daily-wage basis.
It also justified the termination of the services of the appellants on the ground that they had been engaged for doing work in relation to examinations of 5th and 8th classes and after scrapping of those examinations, they had become surplus.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, the learned Single judge upheld the plea of the Board and dismissed the writ petition.
5.
Shri DS Patwalia argued that even though the instructions contained in the circulars dated 881985 and 191986 do not strictly apply to daily-wage employees, the benefit of the policy framed by the State of Government for regularisation of the services of the employees should have been extended to the appellants and the learned Single Judge has erred in declining their prayer.
He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(4) S.C.C.
118 and argued that in view of the principles laid down in that case, the Board may be directed to regularise the services of the appellants.
Learned counsel further argued that the action of the Chairman of the Board to terminate the services of the appellants should be declared discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India because the persons junior to them had been retained in service.
6.
Shri H.S.
Riar, Senior Advocate appearing for the Board supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that the appellants cannot seek regularisation of services in terms of the instructions issued by the government because they had not been appointed on temporary and/or ad hoc basis.
He further argued that termination of the services of the appellants had been necessitated due to scrapping of the examinations of 5th and 8th classes and consequential reduction in the work-load.
Shri Riar submitted that none of the persons retained in services of the Board was junior to the appellants and the rule of last come first go had not been violated while terminating their services.
7.
We have given serious thought to the arguments of the learned counsel.
In our opinion, the order of the learned Single Judge does not suffer from any legal infirmity warranting interference in this appeal.
For the purpose of deciding the appellants' claim for regularisation of services, it will be useful to notice the nature of instructions issued by the government vide circulars dated 881985, 1541986 and 191986.
The same (as annexed with the appeal) read as under :-  Circular dated 881985.
No. 12/1/82-IGE/10933 GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB DEPARTMENT OF PERSONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS (General Estt.
Branch) To All Heads of Departments,  Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Commissioners of Divisions, Deputy Commissioners and Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil) in the State.
Dated, Chandigarh, the 8th August, 1985.
Sub :- Regulation of services of all adhoc/temporary appointed employees to class III Services or posts under the Punjab Government in various departments/officers.
Sir, I am directed to refer to the orders of the President of India, dated 28th March, 1985 circulated-vide this department endorsement No. 12/1/82-1GE/4438, dated the 29th March 1985 under which the services of all adhoc/temporarily appointed employees to class III services/posts under the Punjab Government in various departments/offices with two years services on Ist April, 1985, can be regularised, subject to the fulfilment of the conditions laid down therein.
2.
The matter has been reconsidered and Government have now decided that the services of all adhoc/temporarily employees appointed to class III services/posts, who have one year service to their credit on Ist April, 1985 many also be regularised.
The conditions for such regularisation as contained in this department's earlier communication dated 29th March, 1985 as referred to above, however, remain the same and should be meticulously observed.
3.
The receipt of this communication may kindly be acknowledged.
Yours faithfully,  PK Verma,  Joint Secretary, Personnel xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Circular dated 1541986 No. 12/60/85-IGE/5138 GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB DEPARTMENT OF PERSONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS (GENERAL ESTABLISHMENT BRANCH) To All Heads of Departments,  Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Commissioners of Divisions, Deputy Commissioners in the State of Punjab,  Managing Directors of Corporations and Boards in the Punjab State.
Dated.
Chandigarh, the 15th April, 1986.
Sub :- Lifting of ban on fresh recruitment.
Sir, Punjab Govt. vide instructions issued in circular letter No. 12/60/85- 1GE/14086 dated 18101985 had imposed a complete ban on fresh recruitment in all the Departments, Boards, Corporations and semi-Govt. institutions taking into account the needs for enlarging employment opportunities in the context of the prevailing unemployment, Govt. have after careful consideration, decided to revoke the ban imposed vide the aforementioned instructions in so far as posts in class III and class IV are concerned.
2.
As the Subordinate Services Selection Board has been dissolved with effect from October 1, 1985, and the new Board has not been constituted recruitment to class III posts will have to be done through Departmental Selection Committees.
Instructions for constitution of departmental selection committee for class III and class IV posts have been issued vide letter No. 12/30/86/1GE/5139 dated 1541986.
Separately instructions for taking recruitment in Boards, Corporations and other semi Govt.
Instructions will follow.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/- B.D.
Bahl  U/Secretary Admn.
Reforms."
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Circular dated 191986.
No. 12/60/85-4GE/12025 GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB DEPARTMENT OF PERSONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS (General Estt.
Branch) Dated, Chandigarh 1 Sept, 1986 To All Heads of Departments,  Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Commissioners of Divisions, Deputy Commissioners and Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil).
Sub :- Regulation of services of all the class three employees posted in the different departments/officers on adhoc basis.
Sir, xx xx xxxx Even then to give relief to the deserving employees it is decided that as per this department letter No. 12/30/86/1GE/5139 dated 1541986, the selection Departmental Committee will call the employees of class III who have been appointed after 141984, on ad hoc basis, for interview and they will be considered alongwith others.
these instructions will be effected immediately.
Yours faithfully,  AK Dube,  Joint Secretary Personnel" A reading of the instructions reproduced above shows that the Government of Punjab had taken a policy decision in March, 1985 to regularise the services of ad hoc/temporarily appointed employees to class III services/posts, who had completed two years services on 141985.
This period was reduced to one year vide circular dated 881985.
Later on, it was decided to interview all those class III employees, who had been appointed after 141984.
However, there is nothing in these circulars from which it can be inferred that the government had taken a policy decision to regularise the services of daily-wage employees.
Therefore, no direction can be issued to the respondents to regularise the services of the appellants simply because they had completed a particular length of service.
8.
We are further of the view that even if the policy underlying the instructions issued by the government was made applicable to the daily-wage employees, appellant Nos. 3 to 18 cannot get the benefit of the same because none of them had completed one year service as on 141985.
Therefore, we are in agreement with the learned Single Judge that the Board did not commit any illegality by declining their claim for regularisation of services.
9.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) is also of no avail to the appellants.
In that case, their Lordships of the Supreme Court referred to the instructions issued by the Governments of Punjab and Haryana from time to time for regularisation of the services of the employees and laid down the following propositions :-  "1.
The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation, effort should always be to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete along with others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the regularly selected candidate.
The appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee.
2.
Secondly, an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
3.
Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange, some appropriate method consistent with the requirement of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words, there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly.
4.
An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when qualified persons are not available through the above processes.
5.
If for any reasons, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the State."
None of the above mentioned propositions can be invoked for granting relief to the appellants because it is an admitted position that they had not been appointed through the agency of the Employment Exchange or by adopting the mechanism of short-term advertisement.
10.
The argument of Shri Patwalia that the action of the Chairman of the Board to terminate the services of the appellants should be declared as discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India because some of the employees appointed after them had been retained in service cannot be accepted because no evidence was produced before the learned Single Judge and none has been produced before us to prove that the services of similarly situated junior persons had been retained.
11.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
However, we make it clear that this order shall not prejudice or adversely affect the appellants or such of them who may have been subsequently engaged by the Board on daily- wage or ad hoc or temporary basis and may have continued in service under any other order passed by the Court.
Appeal dismissed.