Satya Brata Sinha, J - These two appeals arising out of a common judgment and involving similar questions of fact and law were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
Calcutta Municipal Corporation (hereinafter called and referred to for the sake of brevity as Corporation) notified vacancies for the post of Peon which is a Class IV post.
The writ petitioners amongst other applied therefor.
It now transpires that notified vacancies were stated to be 48, whereas unreserved vacancies were stated to be 75 and the vacancies for scheduled caste were 12 and for scheduled tribe 4.
A panel of 55 persons was prepared in the year 1992.
However, it appears that instead of offering appointment to the empanelled candidates, 22 persons were appointed who had filed applications for appointment on compassionate ground.
The writ petitioners, therefore, filed a writ application, inter alia, praying for issuance of a writ of or in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to appoint them as selected candidates in the vacant post of Peon in the Corporation.
From a perusal of the judgment of the learned trial Judge, it appears that the Corporation made out a new case before it that there existed 25 vacancies.
The learned trial Judge relying on or on the basis of the said statement made at the Bar held :  "Out of 25 vacancies only 3 vacancies are remained unfilled.
Considering the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties I direct that out of eight persons first three persons out of total eight persons in the panel, be given appointment against three vacancies within four weeks.
After 5 vacancies are filled the future vacancies cannot be filled up from the panel prepared in 1992.
However, as the benefit has been extended to other candidates in the panel till the date of this order, I deem it proper and direct that these five remaining candidates in the panel be considered against the future vacancies along with other candidates as and when the appointment against the future vacancies will be considered.
The age limit will not come in the way in case they appear against the future vacancies.
With the above observations the writ petition stand disposed of."
Both the parties have preferred these appeals against the said judgment.
An application for addition of party has also been filed on behalf of one Amar Kumar Sardar.
The said application, it appears, has been allowed by this Court.
3.
The short question which arises for consideration in these appeals is as to whether the Corporation could fill up the notified vacancies from amongst the candidates who had filed applications for their appointment on compassionate ground.
4.
It appears that the learned trial Judge did not address himself of the aforementioned question, nor did he address himself of the question with regard to the number of notified vacancies.
It further appears that although before the learned trial Judge as also before this Court the Corporation stated that the panel is still subsisting, before us, Mr. Bihani, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Corporation has relied upon a decision of the Apex Court in Sanjay Bhattacharjee v. Union of India & Ors, reported in 1997 West Bengal Law Reporter (SC) 261.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners/appellants on the other hand, inter alia, relied upon Purushottam v. Chairman, MSEB and Anr., 2001(10 SCT 1121 (SC) : reported in 1999(6) SCC 49, as also a decision of Gauhati High Court in Sm.
Raj Kumari Sanayaima Devi v. State of Manipur & Ors., reported in 1983(2) All India Services Law Journal 107.
The question as to whether a panel remains valid for a certain period of time, or not, depends upon the extant rules.
In Sanjay Bhattacharjee (supra), the Apex Court has held that an empanelled candidate has no right of appointment.
There cannot be any dispute with regard to that proposition.
It is also equally true that although empanelled candidate has no right, such a right would arise provided the panel has been given effect to.
The employer while giving effect to a part of the panel can neither act arbitrarily nor unreasonably, inasmuch as, the same would attract the wrath of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In Purushottam (supra) the Apex Court clearly held :  "We find sufficient force in the contention of Mr. Deshpande appearing for the appellant inasmuch as there is no dispute that the appellant was duly selected and was entitled to be appointed to the post but for the illegal decision of the screening committee which decision in the meantime has been reversed by the High Court and that decision of the High Court has reached its finality.
The right of the appellant to be appointed against the post to which he has been selected cannot be taken away on the pretext that the said panel has to be meantime expired and the post has already been filed up by somebody else.
Usurpation of the post by somebody else is not on account of any defect on the part of the appellant, but on the erroneous decision of the employer himself.
In that view of the matter, the appellant's right to be appointed to the post has been illegally taken away by the employer."
This aspect of the matter has recently been considered by a Division Bench in Steel Authority of India v. Santanu Kumar Ganguly & Ors., reported in 2000(4) SLR 423.
It is, therefore, clear that the panel prepared from amongst the candidates who had applied for being appointed against notified vacancies, could be filled up only from such candidates.
We are, therefore, prima facie of the opinion that the said panel could not have been filled up from amongst the candidates who had applied for appointment on compassionate ground.
As regards appointment on compassionate ground, it stands admitted that the Corporation has therefor made a separate scheme.
Panel of such candidates has to be prepared separately and the panel which has been prepared pursuant to the notified vacancies could not have been filled up from amongst the candidates who had applied for appointment on compassionate ground.
In Sm.
Raj Kumari Sanayaima Devi (supra), the decision was rendered in a different fact situation.
5.
Having regard to the fact that the questions raised in these appeals were not adverted to before the learned trial Judge, which were really in issue, we are of the opinion that the impugned judgment cannot stand.
It is set aside accordingly and the appropriate Bench is hereby directed to consider the matter afresh as expeditiously as possible and preferably within 6 weeks from the date of communication of this order.
As there appears to be some controversy with regard to the number of vacancies, we grant leave to the parties to file other or further affidavits before the appropriate Bench.
It would also be open to the Corporation to produce the entire records.
If any action has been taken pursuant to the order of the learned trial Judge, the same shall abide by the result of the writ application.
6.
Xerox certified copy of the order be supplied on priority basis.
Orders accordingly.