TS Doabia, J - The petitioner is seeking appointment to the post of Master.
She applied for the post in pursuance of an advertisement issued by the respondent/authorities on 1481991.
The cadre of Masters is a Divisional Cadre.
The qualifications academic and technical were indicated as B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
with B.Ed.
2.
The petitioner took part in the selection process.
She did not come high in the merit.
She was not selected.
She is challenging her non-selection.
3.
The petitioner submits that she obtained 74% marks in B.Ed.
Examination and stood second in the whole of Jammu Province.
She further submits that by applying wrong parameters, she was given only three marks in the interview.
In this manner, the allocation of 20 marks for the viva voce is being challenged.
4.
Another argument which has been raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that the Selection Committee which was constituted for the purpose of selection, was not constituted in terms of Section 14 of the Services Selection Board Act of 1991.
As per the learned Counsel for the petitioner the Selection Board has to consist of one person who should be member of the Board.
It is further submitted that there should have been two Government Servants (District Level Officers) in the Committee.
As the committee was not constituted as per the above statutory provisions, the entire selection process is said to be vitiated by a lacuna which would render the selection process void.
The respondents submit that the criteria adopted by them is valid and has been upheld by a Division Bench of this Court.
It is also stated that the petitioner took part in the selection process and therefore she cannot challenge the constitution of the selection committee.
It is also said that even the criteria cannot be challenged by the petitioner.
5.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that once the petitioner takes part in the process of selection, then she is estopped from challenging the criteria adopted for selection.
This aspect was noticed by this Court in Unemployed Union of Kalkote v. State of J&K, 1998(2) SCT 682.
In para 19 it was observed :  "All the petitioners took part in the selection process.
They competed along with others; they were not high up in the merit list.
If this be the position they cannot turn around and contend that the process of selection is bad.
Where a candidate takes part in the process of selection i.e. takes a chance of favourable decision in his favour, he cannot turn around and challenge the process of selection (See G Sarana v. Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428).
Justice MM Punchi (Now Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India) in Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983(1) SLR 109, observed that competing candidates who remain unsuccessful are estopped from challenging the process of selection.
Another Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Rajeshwar Singh v. State, 1991(1) SLR 680 reached the same conclusion.
For this reason also the petitioners must fail."
The view expressed in a recent decision reported as Union of India and another v. N Chandrasekharan and others, 1998(3) SCC 694 : 1998(1) S.C.T.
631, in this regard is categoric and is being noticed.
In para 13, it was said :  "It is not in dispute that all the candidates were made aware of the procedure for promotion before they sat for the written test and before they appeared before the Departmental Promotion Committee.
Therefore, they cannot turn around and contend later when they found they were not selected by challenging that procedure and contending that the marks proscribed for interview and confidential reports are disproportionately high and the authorities cannot fix a minimum to be secured either at interview or in the assessment on confidential report."
Similar view was expressed in case reported as University of Cochine by its Registrar v. NS Kanjoon Jamma and others, AIR 1977 SC 2083.
Thus the petitioner who had taken part in the process of selection is estopped from challenging the criteria adopted by the respondent Bank.
6.
It be seen that so far as prescription of 20 marks is concerned, this was upheld by a Division Bench of this Court in case reported in 1991 KLJ page 161 titled : Vijay Kumar v. State of J&K., 1999(2) S.C.T.
34 Therefore, it cannot be said that the prescription of 20 marks for viva voce was in any manner contrary to law.
7.
So far as the marks given for other qualifications are concerned, the clear stand taken by the respondent/Board is that maximum 70 marks were meant for the basic qualification i.e. Graduation and for B.Ed.
The petitioner's claim against this was considered.
She had obtained 4626 marks.
This according to the respondents has been done by taking note of the formula by which percentage of marks were ascertained.
It was further stated that these parameters was applied uniformly to all the candidates.
The challenge made to selection committee be noticed.
The Selection Committee consisted of four persons, namely, Shri Ganshyam Sharma IAS, Shri JL Razdan, (both these are members of the Selection Board) also Mrs. Rita Jitender Secretary J&K Academy of Art, Culture and Languages and Shri MK Rishi IAS.
Principal, District Institute of Education, Jammu was other member.
So far as persons mentioned at S Nos. 1 and 2 are concerned they were members of the Board; so far as persons at serial Nos. 3 and 4 are concerned, they were experts.
8.
I am of the opinion that this Ganshyam Sharma and MK Rishi appearing at Serial Nos. 1 and 2 are Government Servants also.
The said officers could be present in the Selection Committee in dual capacity also.
In this view of the matter, and in view of the fact that the petitioner had taken part in the process of selection, she cannot now turn around and challenge the criteria of selection.
This petition as such is found to be without any merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.