Jaspal Singh, J - The Memorandum dated February 6, 1996 appointing Dr Anoop Saraya (Respondent No. 4) as Assistant Professor in the Department of Gastroenterology in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, has left the petitioner an unhappy man.
He feels that it has deprived him of being considered for the said post.
Hence this writ petition for quashing of the said Memorandum.
2.
The material facts providing the background run as under:  In the year 1992, consequent upon an advertisement for recruitment to two temporary posts of Assistant Professor in the Department of Gastroenterology, the Selection Committee of the Institute recommended two names besides recommending two more by placing them in the waiting list.
The first in the waiting list was Dr. Deepak Lahotia.
While Respondent No. 4 was placed at No. 2.
The matter then went to the Governing Body which on August 13, 1993 approved the recommendations with regard to No. 1 in the list namely Dr. S Dasarathy.
However, it did not approve the recommendation with regard to Dr. Gagan Sood who figured at serial No. 2.
None was picked up from the waiting list.
It is alleged by Respondent No. 4 that this was so on account of the fact that the Waiting List was not brought to the notice of the said Body, while, during arguments, petitioner's case was that it was because the Waiting List stood "cancelled" on August 8, 1993 by the Selection Committee.
The alleged decision of the Selection Committee runs as under:  "SPECIAL SUGGESTIONS OF THE SELECTION COMMITTEE" 1.
In Gastroenterology due to Government of India order No. A 11013/4/92-ME (PG) Part dated 14-12-92 the resultant post is abolished after upgradation of post to that of a Professor.
As such the waiting list stands cancelled and only two Assistant Professors S.No.
1 and 2 may be appointed.
2..... 3..... 4..... Sd/- 8/8/93" These `Special Suggestions' admittedly bear the signatures of the then Chairman of the Committee Dr Balwant Singh Tung and the then Member Secretary Dr. SK Kacker.
3.
It appears that towards the close of the year 1994. a proposal was mooted by the office for appointment, on ad-hoc basis, of one Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology on which the Selection Committee made certain recommendations.
The record of the AIIMS requisitioned by this court and referred to extensively by partie's counsel during arguments shows that before any appointment could be made on the basis of the recommendations so made, the President of the AIIMS called for the record for perusal on which an office note was forwarded to him in following terms:  "The PS to President, AIIMS had desired to see the file relating to the ad-hoc appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology in connection with the appointment of Dr. Anoop Saraya.
Accordingly, the file relating to ad-hoc appointment of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology is being sent to the PS to President, AIIMS for perusal.
In this regard, it may be mentioned that the Selection Committee meeting held on 20th July, 1993 recommended as under, for 2 posts of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology to be filled in on regular basis :-  1.
Dr. Dasarathy Srinivasan (4 increments recommended) 2.
Dr. Gagan Kumar Sood.
Wait List 3.
Dr. Deepak Lahotia 4.
Dr. Anoop Saraya The recommendations of the Selection Committee meetings were placed before the Governing Body for consideration and approval at their meeting held on 13-8- 1993 but in the preamble note giving the gist of recommendations of the selection committee for various faculty posts, the position of wait listed candidates as recommended by the Selection Committee for the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology was not given, the reasons for which are not known.
The recommendations of the Selection Committee may be seen at Slip-"X" and gist of the recommendations placed before the Governing Body are at Slip- "Y".
4.
However, the Governing Body only approved the appointment of Dr. S Dasarathy to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology.
5.
In view of the position explained above, it is submitted for consideration and orders whether Dr. Anoop Saraya may be considered for Ad-hoc appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology in view of the fact that his name was recommended by the Selection Committee for wait list for this post.
It may, however, be mentioned that the recommendations of the Ad-hoc Selection Committee for ad-hoc appointment of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology have been put up separately to the President, AIIMS.
Before the file is sent to the PS to President, AIIMS, DDA/Director may kindly see.
Sd/ -9/1/ (emphasis supplied) 6.
On that note Dr. Lalit Nath appended a note of his own.
It is dated 10/1/96 and is as follows:  "It is difficult to explain how the fact that Dr. Anoop Saraya was put on a waiting list by the Selection Committee - recorded in his own hand by the then - Member Secretary Dr. SK Kacker, could have been overlooked and omitted from the record put up to the Governing Body.
In the original selection record Dr. Saraya is the only person in the WL, then in Dr. Kacker's hand there are 2, then none for the GB This omission continued even to the Selection Committee chaired by Professor S.K.Kacker on 11/10/94 (ad-hoc) when the fact that Dr. Anoop Saraya was wait listed on 20-7-1993 for the same post was not brought to the attention of the committee.
(sic) In view of the fact that Dr. Anoop Saraya was put on the waiting list, and that the facts have been consistently misrepresented leads me to believe that there is merit in the appeal of Dr. Saraya that his case may be treated along the same lines as CWP No. 3873 of 93 (Dr. Ajay Sood) and therefore he may be considered for appointment.
Sd/- 10/1/96" (emphasis supplied) 7.
The President of the AIIMS agreed with Dr. Lalit Nath.
This was on 12/2/96.
However, it was followed by yet another office note of 15/1/96 in the following terms:  "Ref.
President, AIIMS, orders on pre-page It may be stated that office note at P-5/ante was submitted to consider the position regarding ad-hoc appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology.
So far, the case of Dr. Ajay Sood for appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Endocrinology & Metab, is concerned, it may be stated that the matter has been taken up with the Academic Committee for creation of an additional post of Asstt.
Professor of Endo.
& Metab to accommodate the appointment of Dr. Ajay Sood.
It may be mentioned that in the wait list for the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology, Dr. Deepak Lahotia has been shown above Dr. Anoop Saraya.
In view of above, it is submitted for consideration and orders whether Dr. Anoop Saraya may be considered for appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology on ad-hoc basis at this stage and the recommendations of the Ad hoc Selection Committee submitted to the President, AIIMS in respect of Dr. Pradeep Garg may be treated as withdrawn under the above circumstances.
Submitted for orders please."
8.
On this the then Director of the AIIMS Dr. Nath recorded the following comments:-  "Is Dr. Deepak Lahotia available and has any application been received from him ?
If not, then the position must be given to Dr. Anoop Saraya.
The Institute is on the wrong footing here as the wait list has submerged without any valid reasons.
As only Dr. Saraya has only applied as far as our record shows.
Relief may be offered to him.
There seem to be 2 posts available in the department.
If so there is no need to cancel the ad-hoc appointment of Dr. Promod Garg.
The latter may be given Ad-hoc, the former an appointment against selection held in 1993.
Ad-hoc appointments after President approval."
(sic)  9.
To cut it short, as Dr. Lahotia had neither made any representation for his appointment unlike Dr. Saraya nor was he available, a letter was issued to Dr. Saraya with regard to his "temporary appointment to a temporary post of Assistant Professor of Gastroenterology."
This, as per the letter of appointment, was done "on the recommendations of the Selection Committee."
Soon thereafter this writ petition was filed challenging the appointment and on February 16, 1996 while issuing notice the following order was passed by a learned single Judge:  "Present: Mr. Vijay Gupta with Mr. Anil Sharma for the petitioner.
C.W.
No. 699/1996 and CM 1257/1996 Put up on 19-2-1996.
In view of the urgency explained by the learned counsel for the petitioner status quo as of today with regard to joining of respondent No. 4 to the post of Assistant Professor in the Department of Gastroenterology of respondent No. 1 shall be maintained, Dasti."
The narrative, however, is still not complete.
After service of notice, the Faculty Cell of the AIIMS prepared a lengthy note.
That note, followed by the comments of the DDA and the order of the Director of the AIIMS make interesting reading and since they too have influenced me to some extent in forming my judgment, let me reproduce them as well.
The office note of 11-4-96 runs as under:  "FACULTY CELL Subject: Writ petition filed by Dr. Promod Kumar Garg against AIIMS & Others regarding recruitment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology at the AIIMS, New Delhi.
After going through the records regarding selection of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology conducted in 1993, the factual position in this regard is as under:-  1) Two posts of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology were advertised.
The Selection Committee met from 16th July to 23rd July and again from 3rd August to 8th August, 1993 for the selection of various faculty posts at the AIIMS.
The interview for the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology was held on 20th July, 1993.
The Selection Committee recommended 2 candidates viz. Dr. S Dasarathy (with 2 increments) and Dr. Gagan Kumar Sood and kept two candidates on Waiting List including Dr. Anoop Saraya.
But, on the last date of Selection Committee meeting, the Selection Committee made special suggestions regarding 4-5 posts and the suggestion made in respect of the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology is as under:- "In Gastroenterology due to Government of India order No. A.11013/4/92-ME (PG) Part dated 14-12-92 the resultant post is abolished after upgradation of post to that of a Professor.
As such the waiting list stands cancelled and only two Assistant Professors S.No.
1 and 2 may be appointed."
2) The above facts were also brought to the notice of the Standing Legal Counsel of the Institute on 10th April, 1996 as the matter was heard in the Hon.
High Court of Delhi on 10th April 1996 itself.
The above recommendations of the Selection Committee may kindly be perused at ANNEXURE- I.
3) In view of the above recommendations of the Selection Committee the Selection Committee made a gist; only for 2 candidates for the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology viz. Dr. S Dasarathy and Dr. Gagan Kumar Sood and the recommendations of the Selection Committee clearly indicate that the Wait List of two candidates for the post in question which the Selection Committee made on 20th July, 1993 stood cancelled.
The approval of the Governing Body in respect of the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology may kindly be perused at ANNEXURE-II.
4) Here it is pointed out that Dr. Promod Kumar Garg was a candidate for ad-hoc appointment and he was also recommended by the Ad-hoc Selection Committee as suitable candidate, against the vacant post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology which was also advertised in 1994 for making regular appointment.
The letter of appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology on regular basis has been issued to Dr. Anoop Saraya with the approval of the President, AIIMS.
According to the Item No. 21(ii) of the AIIMS Regulations, 1981 (as amended), the Governing Body is the competent authority for making regular appointments.
The letter of appointment to the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology was issued to Dr. Anoop Saraya on the basis that his name figures on the Waiting List and the same was not brought to the notice of the Governing Body while the factual position is that the Selection Committee itself cancelled the Wait List in respect of the post of Gastroenterology and no facts were hidden from the Governing Body.
Now, the Hon.
Court has desired all original minutes pertaining to this case.
In view of the position explained above, it is submitted for orders whether we may inform to our Standing Legal Counsel that the factual position i.e. the Selection Committee itself cancelled the Wait List in respect of the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology and no fact was concealed from the Governing Body which met on 13-8-1993, may be informed to the Hon.
High Court of Delhi.
It may also be informed to the Hon.
Court that regular appointment made in respect of Dr. Anoop Saraya is against the vacant post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology against which Dr. Promod Kumar Garg was recommended by the Ad-hoc Selection Committee on ad-hoc basis.
Submitted for consideration and orders please."
12.
The comments of the DDA read as under:-  "I take strong exception to the note above.
It will be seen from the note sheets in the file, the fact that the Selection Committee made a special suggestion to delete the waitlisted candidates for the post of Asstt.
Prof. of Gastroenterology was never brought out in the notes.
It is such selective noting which withhold vital information and do not present a complete picture of the case brings forth the charge of manipulation and gives a bad name to the institute particularly before the courts.
I think, in this case, responsibility needs to be fixed for this lapse.
In any case, as the matter is in the court, it has to be ensured that complete, correct and true orders are placed before the court."
The order passed by the Director on 15-4-96 reads:  "I am inclined to agree with the DDA's comments.
I do think the note brings out a complete and vital picture in respect of the case.
The DDA may kindly get a factually correct note prepared and sent to the Standing Legal Counsel.
In view of the urgency of the situation we may look into the administrative matters later."
It may also be noticed that during arguments my attention was also drawn to the admitted comments recorded by Dr. Nath on one of the representations of Dr. Saraya.
Those comments are as follows:-  "I have since examined the records again.
While it is true that the Governing Body did not put Dr. Anoop Saraya on the waiting list, nevertheless a scrutiny of the records shows that Dr. Anoop Saraya was in fact put on a waiting list by the Selection Committee.
Hence his claim for consideration for appointment against an existing vacancy is not without merit.
It is not clear from the records why the fact that he was put on the waiting list by the Selection Committee was not put.
(emphasis supplied)  13.
I have purposely reproduced above in extenso some of the office notes/Memorandums so that a clearer picture emerges out on the canvass and for proper appreciation of the arguments advanced.
14.
Time now to examine the arguments advanced and the points raised.
15.
The entire attack directed by the learned counsel for the petitioner may be summarised as follows: The letter of appointment claims that the appointment, which relates to Group `A' posts, was being made on the recommendations of the Selection Committee although, in fact, the Selection Committee after admittedly having placed respondent No. 4 in the waitlist, had cancelled the waitlist with the result that at the time of the impugned appointment, there was no waitlist in existence and as such there were and could be no recommendations, and, therefore, the President AIIMS could not issue the letter of appointment.
16.
In support of the submission noticed above, my attention was drawn to Rule 17(b) of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Recruitment Rules, 1981 which is as follows:  "17(b).
Selection to Group `A' posts shall be made on the recommendations of the Standing Selection Committee constituted by the institute under section 10 of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
No appointment to a post shall be made unless the post has been created in accordance with Rule 17 of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rules, 1958 and the approval of the competent authority has been obtained for the particular appointment."
17.
On the other hand, it was strenuously contended on behalf of Respondent No. 4 (Dr. Saraya) that the then Member Secretary of the Selection Committee namely Dr. Kacker, being opposed to his appointment fabricated or got fabricated the so-called Special Suggestions of August 8, 1993 at a much later date and managed to get the same placed on the file and that for that reason it was of no consequence.
18.
It is difficult for me, at this stage and in these proceedings, to give a definite finding on the correctness of the assertions made by Mr. Prashant Bhushan on behalf of Dr. Saraya but a few facts do come to the fore lending support to the assertion.
19.
Admittedly, in the notes prepared by the office on the eve of Selection Committee meeting in the year 1994 no reference was made to either the existence or cancellation of the wait list.
Even the committee makes no reference to it.
Significantly, even the office note prepared on the President having called for the file makes no mention of the alleged Special Suggestions of August 8, 1993 and about the Wait List having been cancelled though (and this is most important) it does speak of the recommendations made by the Selection Committee on July 20, 1993 and about the Committee having placed Dr. Saraya in the Waitlist.
The fact that the office note submits "for consideration and orders whether Dr. Saraya be considered" for appointment "in view of the fact that his name was recommended by the Selection Committee for wait list for this post."
would clearly go to show that till the date that office note was prepared on January 9, 1996 the office was not aware of the alleged Special Suggestions of August 8, 1993 and further that till that date the alleged Special Suggestions of August 8, 1993 were not on the file because had they been there, the office would not have missed to notice them.
20.
The office note of January 9, 1996 is significant for yet another reason also.
As would be noticed from the said note, it refers to the Selection Committee meeting of August 13, 1993 and while referring to it, it says:  "But in the preamble note giving the gist of recommendations of the Selection Committee for various faculty posts, the position of wait listed candidates as recommended by the Selection Committee for various faculty posts, the position of wait listed candidate as recommended by the Selection Committee for the post of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology was not given, the reasons for which are not known."
The presence of present plural "are" cannot be lost sight of.
It shows that till the date of writing of the note, that is, January 9, 1996, the reason for not putting the waiting list before the Selection Committee on August 8, 1993 was not known to the office.
Does the note of January 9, 1996 not lend support to the assertion of Mr. Prashant Bhushan that till at least January 9, 1996 the office was not aware of the alleged Special Suggestions and that this was so most probably because the said suggestions were no where on the file ?
21.
The note dated January 10, 1996 appended by Dr. Lalit Nath, the then Director of AIIMS and who admittedly was associated with the selections made on August 8, 1993 and which has been reproduced by me in preceding paragraph, further lends support to the contention that the wait list was never "cancelled" or that, at least, such "cancellation" was neither known or made known to the Selection Committee, of August 13, 1993 nor to the office till January 9, 1996, nor, significantly, to the Director of AIIMS till January 10, 1996.
22.
This, however, is not the end of the matter.
The office note of January 15, 1996 also no where speaks of the alleged Special Suggestions of August 8, 1993 or about their existence.
Rather if it shows anything it is that the wait list was still there and needed to be acted upon.
23.
It is pertinent to note that it was only on April 11, 1996 and much after the filing of the present writ petition that, for the first time, the office mentioned about the "cancellation" of the selection list on August 8, 1993 prompting the DDA of AIIMS taking "strong exception" and the Director agreeing with it.
24.
As already pointed out, it is difficult for me to return a definite finding with regard to manipulation of the record but what has been noticed by me above seems enough to persuade me to entertain strong suspicion that the so-called "Special Suggestions" were brought on the record at a much later stage.
25.
Before I conclude a few more factors need to be noticed for they too in my view are of no less importance.
26.
If we peruse the minutes of the Selection Committee meeting held on August 8, 1993 it would be apparent even to the naked eye that those minutes are recorded on paper sheets which appear to have weathered many seasons while the paper containing the "Special Suggestions" appears to be much younger of age.
In any case the paper sheets containing the minutes appear to be yellowish while the paper which has on its breast the typed "Special Suggestion" is virgin white.
Even the size of the said white paper is much smaller in comparison.
Not only this, the ""Special Suggestions" contain only the signatures of the member-Secretary and the Chairman whereas it was conceded even by the learned counsel appearing for the AIIMS that all resolutions ought to bear the signatures of all the members present.
27.
This, however, is still not the end of the matter.
28.
During arguments my attention was also drawn to some of the press releases of Dr. Kackar.
During arguments no objection was raised to reference being made them or about their authenticity.
29.
I feel tempted to reproduce his letter of March 25, 1996 addressed to the Editor, Hindustan Times, New Delhi.
This is how it goes:  "The Editor, Hindustan Times, New Delhi.
Subject: Printing of a false allegation on me in your newspaper of March 23, 1996.
Sir, A news item appeared in your newspaper on 23-3-96 under the heading "Doctor charges ex-Director AIIMS with forgery."
The news report referred to a complaint lodged by one Dr. Anoop Saraya in the defence colony police station alleging tampering of selection procedure records by myself, the former Director of AIIMS Dr. SK Kacker.
It has been alleged that I had allegedly tampered with the records pertaining to a selection to the post of Assistant Professor of Gastroenterology.
These allegations against me are totally false and mala fide.
I object to publishing such biased and misleading reports.
Your correspondents should have verified the facts before printing such serious allegations against an individual.
Moreover, this case is subjudiced in the honourable High Court Delhi.
Although I cannot recall the details of this particular case without going through the files, I would like you and your correspondent to know the following facts:-  1.
All original papers from the Selection Committee are placed before the Governing Body and they bear the signatures of all the Selection Committee members.
2.
The same was done in this case and I remember that a detailed discussion took place in the Governing Body.
The final discussion was that only one of the two candidates recommended for selection be taken as the other candidate had not appeared in person for the interview.
The name of Dr. Anoop Saraya was fourth on the merit list and second on the waiting list.
No waiting list was approved by the governing body.
Thus, there was no way Dr Saraya could have got the post of Assistant Professor and there is no question of arranging the records.
3.
The decision of the Governing Body is final and no one, not even the President of the institute, can overrule that.
4.
I request you therefore to bring out immediately in your newspaper in corrigendum stating that the news report published on 23-3-96 did not bring forth all the facts pertaining to the case and were therefore misleading.
Thanking you in anticipation of a prompt corrective action."
30.
Significantly, it is nowhere claimed in the letter that the wait list had been cancelled and for that reason the appointment of Dr. Saraya is bad.
Rather it makes no mention of any such "cancellation".
This assumes importance in conjunction with the facts already mentioned.
What is, however, more important is that if the wait list really stood "cancelled" on August 8, 1993 as alleged, where was the occasion for the Governing Body to have a "detailed discussion" and not to approve the "waiting list" ?
The very assertion that "no waiting list was approved" leads me to the conclusion, and I hope correctly, that though there was a "waiting list," the same was not approved.
If I am right in my assumption, does it not lead to the conclusion that till the meeting of the Governing Body the waiting list had not been cancelled ?
If so, does it not lend support to the contention and so also to the other allied circumstances as enumerated above, that this so-called cancellation was given birth to at later date ?
31.
One thing more.
The Circular which forms the basis of the "cancellation" of the waiting list in fact had no effect on the existing two vacancies of Asstt.
Professor of Gastroenterology.
There was thus no occasion to invite cancellation of the waiting list.
32.
Last but not the least, I do not think it was within the province of the Selection Committee to "Cancel" the selection list.
Its job is merely to select and make recommendations and not to `cancel' the recommendations already made.
This power, to my mind, is foreign to it.
In any case, the resolution having not been put before the Governing Body or before the President, it remained a piece of waste paper.
33.
In all fairness to the learned counsel appearing for the AIIMS I may mention that it was contended that "all the papers had been placed before the Governing Body.
If by "all the papers", it is sought to be conveyed that the cancellation resolution was put before the Governing Body, I am sorry I am not inclined to agree and the reasons for this conclusion already stand delineated above.
34.
The appointment of Dr. Saraya is temporary and to a temporary post.
The letter of appointment clearly mentions so.
His name was already in the waiting list prepared by the Selection Committee.
The appointment by the President is thus without fault.
35.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.