RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of this petition as well as C.W.Ps.
No. 18954 of 1996, 18674 of 1996, 18736 of 1996 and 491 of 1997 as common question of law and facts is involved in all these cases.
Facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 17739 of 1996.
2.
The respondent-Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (in short `the Board') issued an advertisement on June 18, 1995, whereby 40 posts of Junior Engineers (Civil) in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 were advertised.
A copy of the advertisement has been annexed as Annexure P-1.
Out of the 40 posts, 15 were reserved for Scheduled Caste and two for the Backward Classes and rest of the posts were meant for general category candidates.
All the petitioners applied in response to the advertisement.
They appeared in the written examination which was held on October 1, 1995.
3.
A Selection Committee had been constituted to interview those candidates who had been declared successful in the written examination.
The Interview Committee consisted of the following members :  "1.
Shri B Sarkar, IAS, Addl.
Secretary, Local Govt. Punjab.
2.
Shri AS Dhami, Managing Director, Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Chandigarh.
3.
Shri BS Gill, Superintending Engineer, Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board.
4.
Shri RD Kansal, Manager, Personnel and  General Administration, Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Chandigarh," All the petitioners were called for interview.
One of the letters calling petitioner Rakesh Singla for interview to be held on June 26, 1996, has been appended as Annexure P-3.
The interviews were held from June 24, 1996 to June 26, 1996.
The Interview Committee recommended 70 candidates though only 40 posts were advertised.
The merit list of 70 candidates has been appended as Annexure P-4.
The Board approved the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
The names of all the petitioners were in the list recommended by the Selection Committee and according to the petitioners, they were amongst the first 40 candidates in the General Category/Scheduled Caste/Backward Classes.
The Board sent the case to the Government for its approval for making appointments on the assumption that the approval was required under Section 11 of the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Services) Act, 1976 (in short `the Act') under which the Board has been constituted.
The service conditions of the officers and employees of the Board are governed by the Regulations known as Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Services) Regulations, 1982 (in short `the Regulations').
Section 11 of the Act deals with the appointment of officers and employees of the Board, which is in the following terms:  "11.
The Board may appoint a Secretary, A Chief Engineer, An Accounts Officer and such other officers and employees as it may consider necessary officers and employees of Board for the efficient performance of its functions: Provided that the Board shall not, without the previous approval of the Government, sanction the creation of a post carrying a monthly salary exceeding one thousand and six hundred rupees or appoint any person to any post the maximum monthly salary of which exceeds five hundred rupees and shall in all such matters abide by the general instructions issued by the Government from time to time : Provided further that in case of emergency - (a) the (Managing Director) may appoint temporarily, for a period not exceeding three months, such officers and employees as may in his opinion, be required for the purposes of this Act, and the employment of whom for any particular work had not been prohibited by any resolution of the Board; and (b) every appointment made under clause (a) shall be reported by the 1 (Managing Director) to the Board at its next meeting."
Appointment letters were not issued to the petitioners and it has been alleged in the writ petition that on enquiries made by the petitioners they were told that the matter was pending with the State Government for approval.
However, on November 15, 1996, another advertisement was issued by the Board which appeared in the Daily Tribune for 70 vacancies of Junior Engineers.
A copy of the advertisement has been appended as Annexure P5.
It has further been mentioned that on further enquiries, it was revealed that the State Government had not approved the appointment of any of the candidates who were recommended for appointment by the Selection Committee and whose selection had been approved by the Board.
A letter to that effect by the State Government issued to the Managing Director of the Board dated November 5, 1996, has been appended as Annexure P6.
It is the action of the State Government in not approving the selection and giving appointment to the petitioners, which has been made the subject matter of challenge in these writ petitions.
4.
Notice of motion was issued.
Separate replies have been filed by the State Government as well as by the Board.
5.
In the reply filed on behalf of the State Government, it has been averred that the Board is the appointing authority for the officers like the Junior Engineers but under Section 11 of the Act prior approval of the State Government in the Local Government Department is required before making appointments.
About 2200 candidates had applied in response to the advertisement for 40 posts, out of which 1844 candidates were called for written test who fulfilled the prescribed qualifications as per the Regulations.
On the basis of the written test, 167 candidates were called for interview between the period June 24, 1996, to June 26, 1996.
However, the Selection Committee selected 70 candidates for appointment to the posts against 40 posts which had been advertised.
Against the selection, some irregularities had been reported to the authority.
On examination of the case, following irregularities were found out on the basis of material available on record;  "(i) As against 40 vacancies which were advertised on 18.6.1995 selection was made against 70 vacancies which were not existing at the time of advertisement and the selection made over and above posts advertised is in violation of the statutory provisions of the Board and is also beyond jurisdiction of the Selection Committee.
In other words it amounts to depriving right of the other aspirants of the JE's who have become liable (eligible ?)
for the post of JE after the date of advertisement of the posts.
Thus the selection made by the Selection Committee of 70 candidates against the 40 advertised posts is illegal and is void abi nitio and is thus in violation of principle of justice and is not sustainable in the eyes of law which is an established principle laid down by the Hon'ble Court.
Thus the decision taken by the department to cancel the selection is perfectly legal and in accordance with the statutory provisions of the Act as well as the rules.
As such it deserves to be upheld.
Mere selection does not confer any right for appointment, which is an established principle of law.
There is, therefore, no force in the writ petition which is liable to be dismissed.
(ii) That the advertisement to fill up the 40 posts of JE's by the Sewerage Board and making selection thereof in excess of the posts advertised is in violation of Punjab Government Instructions dated 1281994 issued by the Personnel and Administrative Department because no objection certificate from the Personnel Department was not obtained, which was a statutory requirement.
Thus the selection made by the Selection Committee and the Sewerage Board is in violation of the Government instructions and not legally valid and was rightly cancelled for which the State Government was competent to do so.
The writ petition is, therefore, not valid and liable to be dismissed.
(iii) As many as 40 marks were earmarked for interview which is on higher side and have been given much scope for manupulation.
This is borne out from the fact that some of the candidates mentioned at serial No. 6, 7, 13, 20, 25 and 49 of the candidates called for interview have been given 35 marks each and all of them figure in the final selection list even though some of them had got comparatively lesser marks in the written test.
This puts a question marks on the fairness of the entire selection process.
(iv) That the selection was not fair in view of the note dated 1101996 recorded by the Finance and Local Govt. Minister in which he has stated that several deputationists and individuals have met him and complained that serious irregularities have been committed in the test regarding marking of papers, etc., and during interview also.
If this selection is allowed to be made, it was considered in his view, that it will not be in public interest."
The stand of the Board is also to the effect that under Section 11 of the Act, approval of the State Government was necessary before the appointments could be made, and since approval was declined, fresh advertisement was issued.
Regarding recommending 70 names against 40 posts which were advertised, it was pleaded as under in para No. 4 of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-Board:  "That the contents of para No. 4 are admitted.
It is, however, mentioned that at Serial No. 5 of the Advertisement, it was clearly mentioned that the "No. of posts may vary" as the Respondent No. 2 had already mooted a proposal for the creation of one new circle and 4 new Divisions in connection with work relating to Satluj cleaning Project as sanctioned by the Government of India, for which the Govt. of Punjab accorded its approval vide memo No. 20893 dated 8121995, copy enclosed as annexure R-1.
With the creation of new circle and 2 new divisions immediate requirement of 30 more Junior Engineers was created which was proposed to be met from the vacancies already advertised and for which Written Test and Interview was already conducted to save unnecessary Govt. expenditure which is a public money and to save time and effort of re-exercising the entire recruitment process."
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the Selection Committee was a high -powered Committee of which Additional Secretary, Local Government, Punjab, was one of the members.
167 candidates were interviewed.
The merit lists had been prepared on the basis of merit determined on the basis of marks obtained in written test and interview.
It was further the case that prior approval of the Government for appointment under Section 11 of the Act is only required in case a new post is created or where the Board was to make appointments and for some reasons, the general instructions of the Government could not be followed.
According to the learned counsel, Section 11 does not contemplate approval of the Government in cases where the appointments are made against existing vacancies in the Board.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to Section 12 of the Act to contend that no approval of the State Government is required for appointment to the existing posts/vacancies.
Section 12, inter alia, provides that "subject to the provisions of the Act, the recruitment and conditions of service of officers and employees of the Board shall be regulated by the Board in accordance with the Regulations to be made by the Board."
Even if it was the requirement of the Act that approval of the State Government is to be obtained before making appointments, then the same cannot be declined arbitrarily and on whimsical grounds or on non-existing grounds.
There must be some justifiable grounds for non-grant of approval/declining to appoint.
Learned counsel cited Apex Court judgment reported as RS Mittal v. Union of India, Judgments Today 1995(3) Supreme Court 417 : 1995(3) SCT 284.
Learned counsel also argued that since the candidates whom the Minister wanted to be appointed were not selected, the approval was declined by the State Government.
6.
We had sent for the original files of the State Government where the case regarding the approval of the selection made by the Board had been dealt with.
From the files we find that the then Finance Minister who was also the Minister for the Local Self Government vide his order dated October 1, 1996, on the file cancelled the selection made by the Board.
He observed as under :  "An advertisement was given in the newspaper on 18.6.1995 for filling up 40 posts of JEs.
in the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board.
Later on, procedure for selection of candidates was started which has not yet been finalised.
Several deputations and individuals have met me and complained that serious irregularities have been committed in the test regarding marking of papers etc., and during interviews also.
If this selection is allowed to be made, I think, it will not be in public interest.
2.
Considering all these aspects I feel that the process of selection already in progress be set aside and new process for selection of JEs.
may be started immediately."
Learned counsel for the respondent-State argued that under Section 11 of the Act, prior approval of the State Government was necessary before making appointments, which has been validly declined for the reasons mentioned in the written-statement, which have already been reproduced above.
The petitioners on just being selected, had no vested right to be appointed.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the original files, we are of the view that the case of the petitioner deserves to succeed.
For purpose of this case, we assume that the State Government's approval is necessary for making appointments.
However, the question is whether the approval can be declined on arbitrary, whimsical and non-existing grounds.
Reasons (i) and (ii) mentioned in the written-statement are to the effect that against 40 posts advertised, recommendation of 70 had been made which was against the law laid down by the High Court.
So far as these reasons are concerned, we are assuming that the Board should not have recommended, under the circumstances of this case, more number of candidates for appointments than what was advertised.
But the respondent-State could not on this ground decline approval to the appointments to at least first 40 candidates in order of merit in the respective categories.
There was nothing wrong so far as these reasons are concerned in the selection of first 40 candidates.
On this ground the entire selection could not be said to be vitiated.
So far as reason (iii) supra taken by the State Government to the effect that the marks allocated for interview were on the higher side is concerned it may be observed that in the files pertaining to the grant of approval, this was not the reason given in the notings by any officer.
The Minister concerned in his order dated October 1, 1996, had only observed that deputations and individuals had met him and had complained that serious irregularities had been committed in the test regarding marking of papers etc. and during interviews.
There is no suggestion at all anywhere that the interview marks were on the higher side.
It may be observed here that the written-test was of 150 marks whereas 40 marks were allocated for interview.
Therefore, out of 190, it comes to about 21%.
For the post of Junior Engineer, we do not consider under the circumstances of the case that the interview marks were on the higher side.
Otherwise also, there is nothing on the record to show that the interview committee knew about the marks obtained by the candidates in the written examination.
The Additional Secretary, Local Government, Punjab, an IAS Officer, was the member of the Selection Committee.
In other words, representative of the State Government was there on the Selection Committee.
Without any tangible basis, the proceedings of the Selection Committee should not be dubbed as unfair or it should be alleged that it favoured certain individuals.
The authority concerned should have a very strong material before it for not approving the selection of the high - powered Selection Committee to indicate that some favouritism was shown to a particular candidate or candidates.
Simply because some candidates were given a particular number of marks in the interview which were more as compared to the marks of another candidate who might have got more marks in the written test, is no ground to come to the conclusion that the interviews were not fair.
It is not necessary that a person who has got more marks in the written test must get more marks in the interview, or a person with lesser marks in written test cannot get more marks in interview as compared to a candidate who might have got more marks in the written test.
Ground (iv) mentioned in the written statement is to the effect that the Minister concerned had recorded a note that several deputations and individuals had met him and complained that serious irregularities had been committed in the test regarding the marking of papers and during interviews also.
On oral complaints if at all the Minister was to take any action, he should have got the matter probed before passing any order, but from the order of the Minister quoted above, it transpires that he had ordered the selection to be quashed; meaning thereby that he was satisfied on the oral complaints.
There was no material before him.
The disgruntled persons who are not selected do make complaints.
Before any action is taken on a written or oral complaint, the matter should be got probed.
None of the reasons, according to us, was individually or collectively sufficient to set aside the entire selection.
8.
To be fair to the respondents, we may observe that in the noting file, it was observed that before advertising the posts, the approval of the BPE cell of the Finance Department was not taken and that the Board took interviews of the candidates who had passed in the written test after about nine months of the result of the written test.
Apart from the fact that these are not the grounds for setting aside the selection as per the written- statement we are of the view that the Finance Department's approval for filling the existing post is not required by any law.
It is only when new posts are created and finance is involved that approval of the Finance Department is required.
However, as observed above, we are assuming in this case that before actual appointments are made after the interview, the Board is to get approval from the Government under Section 11 of the Act.
If the interviews were held after nine months of the written test, the whole process of interview cannot be looked upon with a suspicious eye.
Lot of efforts, energy and time is taken for selecting candidates.
The candidates also waste their energy on written tests and interviews, and selection should not be set aside lightly.
As observed above, there have to be very strong grounds for setting aside the selection, especially when the selection is by a Committee consisting of high ranking officers.
On the noting file, it has been observed on August 26, 1996, that it may be written to the Managing Director of the Board that "we may allow MD, P.W.S.S.B.
to fill only 40 vacancies of JEs.
after getting no objection certificate from FD/BPE cell and that too after getting approval from this office (i.e., Local Government Department).
The balance 30 vacancies would be allowed to be filled after they are actually required by the Board and also after completing the whole process of recruitment in respect of these vacancies afresh."
The Minister had also written on the same as `Seen' on September 3, 1996.
It is not the case of the State Government that the posts were not required to be filled as the Minister himself had written on October 1, 1996, that new process of selection of Junior Engineers be started immediately.
Subsequently, even 70 posts were advertised.
So the need of filling the posts is not being disputed.
So the question of having got any approval from FD or BPE cell does not arise.
The recommendation of the Board of 70 candidates against 40 posts which were advertised cannot be justified as 30 posts were not anticipated posts that may have arisen because of the promotions of the persons or on retirement.
There was no clear cut order of the State Government for additional thirty posts.
We are of the view that the Board was not competent to recommend more than the number of posts which were advertised.
To that extent the approval by the State Government regarding appointment could be withheld but on that ground the entire selection could not be held to be bad by the State Government.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and set aside the order of the State Government dated November 5, 1996, copy Annexure P-6, to the extent it does not grant approval upto 40 candidates for appointment as Junior Engineers in the different categories i.e. General category, Scheduled caste and Backward classes.
40 candidates would be deemed to be duly selected and since we find that the non-grant of approval is on no justifiable grounds and the posts are required to be filled as fresh advertisement for 70 posts has been issued, the respondents would give appointment to the 40 candidates in order of merit in the respective categories.
The posts of Junior Engineers over and above 40, if required to be filled, may be filled in accordance with law.