RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was granted Short Service Commission in the Indian Army on September 3, 1977, and was released on October 31, 1982, after the completion of service period.
At the time of release, a Release Medical Board was held, which found the petitioner in the lower medical category H3 permanent with 20% disability.
The disability was Sensory Neural Deafness (Bilateral).
The Release Medical Board proceedings were signed by the president of the Medical Board and approved by the approving authority and also confirmed by the Deputy Director, Medical Services, on October 30, 1982.
The duration of this disability was for a period of two years, meaning thereby that the petitioner was to be medically re-examined by the Resurvey Medical Board after two years.
It may be observed here that the petitioner was also found suffering from "PULMONARY EOSINOPHILIA" at the time of his release.
A letter dated December 5, 1983 was addressed by the Under Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Defence, to the Chief of Army Staff (copy Annexure P4), in which it was mentioned that Sensory Neural Deafness, from which the petitioner was found suffering at the time on his release from service, should be regarded as attributable to Military service, and the degree of disablement was assessed at less than 20% for the period from October 31, 1982 (the date of release from service) to October 1, 1984 (two years from the date on which the Release Medical Board was held).
The other disease i.e.
Pulmonary Eosinophilia was held neither attributable to nor aggravated by Military service.
It was further mentioned that as the degree of disablement was less than 20% the petitioner was not entitled to any disability pension.
Though the Resurvey Medical Board was to be held immediately after October 1, 1984, i.e. two years of the initial Release Medical Board, yet the Resurvey Medical Board was not held and it was only vide letter dated February 24, 1986, that the respondent-authorities wrote to Military Authorities at Jalandhar Cantt., for convening a Resurvey Medical Board in the Hospital.
It was further mentioned that the proceedings of the Resurvey Medical Board be sent to the Headquarters.
The Classified Specialist E & T Department of Military Hospital, Jalandhar Cantt., after examining the petitioner, opined that the deterioration was due to natural progression of the disease and thereafter petitioner was brought before the Resurvey Medical Board.
Thereafter the petitioner addressed many letters to the concerned authorities that it should be made known to him as to when the proceedings of the Resurvey Medical Board were sent to the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions Allahabad, (in short 'C.C.D.A.
(P)') and other concerned quarters so that he may be released his disability pension.
The Military Hospital, Jalandhar Cantt.
informed the petitioner on February 13, 1987, that the Resurvey Medical Board proceedings were submitted to the HQ HP&PH Area (Medical) for their approval and further disposal on March 20, 1986, and the Medical Board papers were further submitted to C.C.D.A.
(P) by HQ HP&PH Area (Medical) vide letter dated April 3, 1986.
Since no action was taken on the basis of the opinion of Resurvey Medical Board despite repeated reminders by the petitioner on the subject till the filing of the writ petition, he filed the present writ petition.
2.
In reply filed on behalf of the respondents it has been admitted that the Release Medical Board had assessed disability of the petitioner at 20% for two years but the Director General, Armed Forces (Medical Services) had assessed the disablement at less than 20% for two years.
To the averments of the petitioner regarding no action having been taken on the Resurvey Medical Board opinion, it has been averred in para 10 of the written-statement as under :  "10.
That contents of para 10 of the writ petition are admitted.
The delay in taking a decision by CCDA (P), Allahabad for grant of disability pension on the basis of RSMB held on 15 March 1986 was due to Administrative reasons.
It is, however, submitted that CCDA (P) in consultation with Medical Adviser Pension has again found petitioner's disability at less than 20% for the interim period and for next 10 years that is upto 14 March 96.
Petitioner's next Medical Board will be held on 14 March 96 for review of disability."
Regarding the assessment by the Resurvey Medical Board, it has been averred in para 3 of the written-statement as under :  "It is admitted that as per the Specialist, the disability was due to exposure to blast of field firing.
The petitioner's disability on release was also held attributable to Military Service vide Govt. of India letter No. 2(20/83/Pen-C dated 51283.
However, the percentage of disability was assessed at less than 20% w.e.f.
31 October 82 to 1 October 84.
Thereafter RSM.B.
was held on 15 March 86 at MH Jullundur which assessed disablement at 20%."
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the Release Medical Board, which had examined the petitioner, had opined that the disability was 20% and there was no material before the Director General, Armed Forces (Medical Services) to assess the disablement at less than 20%.
The petitioner was not re-examined by the Director General, Armed Forces (Medical Services) before he could opine that the disability was less than 20%.
He further submitted that the petitioner should have been re-examined after two years of the first Release Medical Board as that opinion was to last for two years.
However, the petitioner was brought before the Resurvey Medical Board only in 1986, which, according to the respondents' own showing in para 3 of the written- statement, had opined the disablement of the petitioner at 20%.
There was no material before the C.C.D.A.(P.)
to reduce the disability of the petitioner to less than 20% as assessed by the Resurvey Medical Board.
In support of his contention, learned counsel relied upon Wing Commander RL Sharma (Retd.)
v. Union of India through Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India, New Delhi and others, 1994(4) SCT 268(P&H) : 1994(4) RSJ.
107, and Munshi Ram v. Union of India and others, 1996(2) RSJ 705 a Division Bench judgment of Himachal Pradesh High Court as also a judgment of the Apex Court in Ex Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993, rendered on January 14, 1993.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that even if the CCDA (P.) had reduced the disability to less than 20% by disagreeing with the opinion of the Resurvey Medical Board, which had opined 20% disability, the same could not be kept in vogue for a period of 10 years.
The petitioner should have been brought again before the Resurvey Medical Board after another period of two years as was required to be done initially after the initial Release Medical Board.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the report by the Release Medical Board is only recommendatory and the Director General of the Armed Forces is the final authority regarding the disability etc. and in this case, he had initially opined that the disability was less than 20% for a period of two years from the date of release.
He further submitted that under Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations, 1961, the disability pension can only be granted to an individual if the disability is assessed at 20% or more and further if the disability is attributable to Military service.
Since in the present case, the disability has been assessed as less than 20%, the petitioner was not entitled to disability pension.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petition is liable to succeed.
Before the Apex Court in Ex. Sapper Mohinder Singh's case (supra), the appellant was initially granted disability pension at the rate of 100% which was later on reduced from time to time.
Ultimately in 1989, the Medical Board after re-examining him made recommendation for the amount to be calculated on the basis of 40% disability.
The matter was placed before the CCDA (P.) who assessed the disability at less than 20% on account of which the appellant ceased under the Rules to be entitled to disability pension at all.
He approached the High Court but his writ petition was dismissed.
In appeal, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in view of the Expert opinion of the Medical Board, which examined the appellant, he should have been allowed disability pension on the basis of 40% disability and the C.C.D.A.(P.)
should not have disallowed the disability pension altogether.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondent-authorities was that the C.C.D.A.(P.)
had consulted a higher medical authority before interfering with the assessment of the disability by the Medical Board and therefore, his decision could not be treated as arbitrary.
The Apex Court observed that no details of the consultation by the higher medical authority had been discussed nor it was claimed that the appellant had been re-examined by the higher medical authority.
It was held that the opinion of the Medical Board would prevail.
It was directed that the appellant would be entitled to disability pension on the basis of 40% disability.
6.
The Himachal Pradesh High Court in Munshi Ram's case (supra) observed in para 10 of the judgment as under :  "From the reply-affidavit and the annexures, we do not find on what ground the percentage of disability of the petitioner recommended by the Medical Board was reduced by CCDA (Pension).
Even if we accept that the Joint Director, Armed Forces Medical Services, attached as Medical Advisor (Pension) in the office of CCDA (Pension) is competent to review or revise the assessment of disablement, no affidavit is forthcoming from the said Medical Officer stating that the recommendations of the Medical Boards were not accepted by him nor any reason has been assigned as stated above.
Therefore, we hold that the percentage of disablement, recommended by the Medical Board under item (q) of paragraph 4 of the reply-affidavit at 30% for the whole life, was arbitrarily reduced to less than 20%.
and it cannot stand."
In Wing Commander RL Sharma's case (supra) it was argued on behalf of the respondents before this Court that CCDA (P) is competent to sanction the disability pension and, therefore, he has a right to accept or not to accept the opinion of the Medical Board regarding the disability of the employee who has been released from military service.
In that case, the argument further was that the opinion of the CCDA (P.) was based on the opinion of the Medical Expert who had assessed the disability to be less than 20%.
In that case, the petitioner's argument was that when the Medical Board/Resurvey Medical Board had opined that the disability of the petitioner was to the tune of 20%, there was no justification for the respondents to deny the benefit of disability pension as the Medical Board consists of specialists in the subject in the field of medical science and their opinion could not have been over-ruled by those who had no occasion to make real assessment of the disability of the petitioner.
The learned Judge held as under in para 6 of the judgment :  ".......... ......... .........
It is interesting to note that this Medical Board was headed by an officer of the rank of Colonel.
There were two other doctors.
The approving authority namely the DDM approved the assessment made by the Medical Board.
Thereafter when the case was sent to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, Assistant Accounts Officer of the said office conveyed that degree of disablement of the petitioner is less than 20%.
This letter of the Assistant Accounts Officer was based on the assessment made by the Lieutenant Colonel AMA Medical Advisor (Pension) and the same was accepted by the authorities of the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad.
Interestingly, none of the documents placed by the respondents gives any reason or rationality or basis on which the authorities of the office of the Controller of the Defence Accounts (Pension) recorded their conclusion that the degree of disablement of the petitioner was less that 20 per cent.
They have also not recorded as to why the expert opinion of the Medical Board at Chandigarh was being treated as erroneous or was not being agreed upon.
A look at Annexure R-6 further shows that where the approving authority does not concur with the findings of the Medical Board, it has to direct the holding of a fresh Medical Board or to direct further treatment of the individual concerned or to dispose of the matter after due consideration thereof.
The respondents have not shown that after the receipt of the opinion of the Re-survey Medical Board, they have taken a decision to refer the case of the petitioner for examination by a fresh Medical Board or for his treatment in terms of Annexure R-6.
Instead of adopting this procedure, the respondents arbitrarily and casually rejected and overruled the opinion of the Medical Board with regard to the degree of disablement of the petitioner.
I am not suggesting that the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) is, under all circumstances, bound to accept the opinion of the Medical Board, but there can be no manner of doubt that if the opinion expressed by the Medical Board is overruled, there must be cogent reasons and this can be done only after following the proper procedure.
In the case in hand, neither any reason has been assigned nor the procedure prescribed in Annexure R-6 has been followed by the respondents before holding that the petitioner's degree of disablement was less than 20 per cent.
Thus, the denial of disability pension to the petitioner and rejection of his claim for grant of disability pension is based on arbitrary and irrational decision.
........... ........" In the present case, the facts are quite similar to the one in Wing Commander RL Sharma's case (supra).
No reasons are forthcoming as to why C.C.D.A.(P.)
did not accept the recommendation of the Medical Board/Resurvey Medical Board.
If CCDA (P) was not to concur with the findinbgs of Medical Board/Resurvey Medical Board why the case was not sent for re-examination ?
I further find that ten years is too long a period for holding Resurvey Medical Board as it may not be congenial for both the sides.
The disability can increase or decrease and in case of increase the person would naturally get more disability pension and in case of reduction of disability, the disability pension has to be reduced proportionately and if Resurvey Medical Board is not held for ten years, the person may keep on getting the same disability pension though the disability might be reduced.
7.
For the foregoing reasons I allow this writ petition and quash the decision of the respondents whereby the disability of the petitioner was reduced from 20%.
He is held entitled to disability pension from the date of his release on the basis of 20% disability.
The respondents shall make the payment of the arrears of pension to the petitioner within a period of four months from the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner, whichever is earlier.
If the payment is not made as aforesaid, the petitioner would be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum on the arrears from the date they became due till the date of payment.
The current pension be paid to the petitioner as per Disability Pension Rules.
8.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that it would be open to the respondents to ask the petitioner to appear before the Resurvey Medical Board to assess his disability and after the submission of the report by the Resurvey Medical Board, the petitioner's case regarding future disability pension would be dealt with in accordance with law and keeping in view the observations made above.
There will be no order as to costs.