TS Doabia, J - Non-promotion of the petitioner by UCO Bank, (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) from Middle Management Grade Scale II (hereinafter refer as scale II) to Middle Management Grade Scale III (hereinafter refer to as scale III) is the subject-matter of challenge in this petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
It is not necessary to go into details with regard to the early service tenure of the petitioner.
This is because the present petition, as noticed above, deals with a limited aspect that is non-promotion from Scale II to Scale III.
The petitioner is otherwise eligible for promotion but after having been duly considered, he has failed to come high up in the merit and he has not been promoted.
3.
The policy decision or the instructions issued by the bank which are relevant for the purposes of promotion are contained in annexure R/1.
This is the same as Annexure P/64.
This is dated 18th of August 1987.
Promotions are to be made by considering the aggregate marks secured by the eligible officers on the basis of four factors indicated in para 3 of annexure-I.
There are as under.
"Promotion to fill up the vacancies declared shall be made by the aggregate marks secured by the eligible officers on the following four factors, namely : (a) Seniority; (b) Qualifications; (c) Performance; (d) Interview.
4.
The maximum marks for the above four factors in different scales has been indicated in para 4.
This reads as under :  4.
The maximum marks for the above four factors for promotion in different scales is indicated in the following chart : Movement Seniority for service in the scale Qualification Performance Appraisal Interview From Middle Management Cr.
Scale-II to Middle Management Cr.
Scale-III.
40 10 30 20 5.
The petitioner submits that had due regard been given to the marking system envisaged in para 3 of annexure R-1, then, the petitioner would definitely have come high in merit list meant for promotion to Scale III.
Accordingly, it would be apt to note that criteria which has been further elaborated.
6.
So far as seniority is concerned, ten marks are to be awarded for each completed year of service in scale II.
The only rider is that these marks are not to exceed 40.
The petitioner was given 30 marks under this head.
For qualifications, the marks which a particular candidate is to get are indicated in para 6 of the aforementioned annexures and 3 marks have been given to the petitioner as he possessed graduation as the only qualification.
So far as the performance is concerned, relevant para 7 deals with this aspect of the matter.
For facility of reference, this para be also noticed.
It reads as under :  7.
Performance marks will be awarded through performance appraisal system in force from time to time which would be average of marks obtained in the last 3 annual assessments.
For promotion process to be initiated during 1987, performance appraisal reports raised upto 31.12.1986 will be considered.
7.
So far as question of awarding of marks of interview is concerned, the marks which a candidate can get is 20.
8.
The marks which have been given to the petitioner and also to other candidates have been disclosed.
The chart indicating the marks which have been given to the petitioner and other candidates is as under :  Name of Officer Seniority (40) Qualifications (10) Performance(30) Interview (20) NC Makhijani 30 3 18 18 SK Burman 30 8 19.6 14 LP Pathak 30 3 19 18 PR Sugani 30 10 17 14 MK Bhatnagar 30 10 18.5 14 NC Goyal 30 8 19 14 HK Joshi 30 10 21 18 9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that he is not disputing the marks and assessment made so far as these pertain to qualifications and interview.
The arena of dispute is with regard to the marks which have been given for seniority and also for performance.
10.
As these are the two disputed areas, these be examined.
11.
So far as the ground of grant of 30 marks for seniority is concerned, it be seen that the petitioner has been granted 30 marks.
According to the petitioner, he was entitled to get 40 marks.
This is being disputed by the bank.
According to the bank, the cut off date was fixed as 31st of December, 1986.
It is accordingly, argued that only three years are required to be seen.
It has also been argued by the learned counsel appearing for the bank that so far as this aspect is concerned the petitioner has not raised a challenge to the marks given for the purpose of seniority.
12.
The petitioner has placed reliance on a decision of the Division Bench in M.P. No. 980 of 1991 (Indore Bench).
This was decided on 11th of December 1992.
It is not in dispute that the same category of officers who are involved in this petition, were involved in the petition before the Indore Bench.
It is also not in dispute that the same criteria which is the subject-matter of this petition was the subject-matter of consideration before the Bench.
A perusal of the above judgment indicates that the eligibility criteria for promotion was shifted from 31st from December 1986, to 31st of December 1987.
The assessment of marks was ordered to be done accordingly.
It be further seen that a Special Leave Petition has been preferred by the bank against the aforementioned judgment.
Special Leave was granted.
The operation of the judgment was stayed with the observation that the direction given by this Court to recalculate the marks obtained by other candidates shall remain stayed.
The order passed in this regard reads as under :  "Pending notice, there shall be interim stay of the operation of that part of the impugned order where the High Court has not only directed to calculate the marks obtained by the petitioner-respondent herein, but has also directed fresh calculations in respect of "other candidates" on the same basis.
The direction regarding fresh calculation in respect of other candidates who did not approach the High Court shall remain stayed;" 13.
I am of the view that the judgment given by the Indore Bench of this Court would be no assistance to the petitioner.
Even if it be presumed that cut-off date is 31st October 1987, even then the petitioner cannot secure an edge over other officers.
All the officers whose names are given in the letter dated 4th of July, 1989 and whose comparative data is noticed were given thirty marks.
Thus, the result would not tilt in favour of the petitioner by giving additional marks.
Accordingly, even if the judgment given by the Indore Bench of this Court is taken note of and even if 10 marks are given to the petitioner, then there would be no material advantage to the petitioner as these marks would also have to be given to others also as they are similarly placed.
14.
With regard to giving of 18 marks for performance purposes, the argument advanced is that correct criteria has not been adopted.
It is the case of the petitioner that the performance of the petitioner has been appreciated by all concerned and reference is being made to several certificates issued to the petitioner in this regard.
Paragraph 7 of the petition deals with this aspect of the matter.
It is argued that on that basis of the appreciation letters given by the bank authorities, the petitioner should have been given 99% marks and the giving of 18 marks out of 30 is something which the petitioner has not been able to comprehend.
15.
The case of the bank is that deposit mobilisation is not the only criteria indicated in the form.
According to the bank, petitioner is not the only candidate who has been given 18 marks.
There are others who have got less than 18 marks and none has got more than 21.
It is accordingly submitted that the criteria adopted by the bank cannot be faulted.
It is also suggested that if the intention of the bank was not to promote the petitioner, then, for interview 18 marks out of 30 would not have been given.
It has again been indicated that the performance appraisal has to be done for the preceding three years and that under this head also marks have been properly awarded and there is no room for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
16.
I have considered this aspect of the matter.
The bank has to see not only the deposit mobilisation but also the amount of advances made.
Performance on recoveries of overdues etc. is also required to be seen.
It is on the basis of the assessment made by the appraising officer, marking is done.
The self-assessment of the petitioner is that he would have, on the basis of the performance, got 99% marks under this category cannot be accepted.
As indicated above, the petitioner is banking upon deposit mobilisation and other factors which were required to be taken note of and which were infact taken note of and which are indicated in Annexure-I of Annexure R/1, have not been adverted to.
The marking on this count cannot be again faulted.
17.
Thus, I am of the view that :  (i) even if the contention of the petitioner that he was entitled to 40 marks on the basis of service, is accepted even then there would be no material change in the ultimate to aggregate as other officers would get the same benefit.
(ii) So far as marking on the basis of performance appraisal is be concerned, several factors are to be taken note of.
The stand of the bank is that these were to be taken note of.
Benefit is not to be given for deposit mobilisation alone.
(iii) There were two criteria regarding which grievance was made.
This has not be substantiated.
(iv) No fault can be found with the plea taken by the bank.
The petitioner was considered in accordance with law and he failed to come high in the next list and was not promoted to Scale III.
(v) At the time of hearing, a plea was sought to be taken that the bank was acting mala fide.
It be seen that allegations of mala fide can be looked into if these have directed against some individual.
This has not been done.
Had there been any mala fide intention on the part of the bank to not to promote the petitioner then the bank would not have awarded 18 marks in interview.
The bank was fair enough with the petitioner.
(vi) It be seen that appraisal record of all concerned officers including petitioner was sent for.
This was received.
Its perusal indicates that all the officers were assessed under various heads by different heads of departments.
This seems to be fair exercise.
As such, there is no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.