RP Sethi, J - The petitioner who is admittedly senior than respondent No. 3 has prayed for the issuance of appropriate directions for quashing the order (Annexure P/2) dated 2971994 by which the said respondent was promoted as Chief Stamp Auditor in supersession of his claim.
He has further prayed for the issuance of direction to the respondents to promote him as Chief Stamp Auditor w.e.f.
the date when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
The petitioner is stated to have joined the service as Clerk on 1411970 under official respondents and was promoted as Assistant on 381976.
He was posted as Stamp Auditor on 11.2.1988 in the office of Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Haryana, Chandigarh.
The post of Assistant is stated to be equivalent to the post of Stamp Auditor.
The next higher promotion from the post of Stamp Auditor is that of Chief Stamp Auditor.
The parties are stated to be governed by the statutory rules known was Haryana Financial Commissioner's Office (Group B) Service Rules, 1986 (for short the Rules).
It is contended that respondent No. 3 was promoted in violation of the service rules applicable in the case.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents the seniority of the petitioner was not disputed but it was submitted that after examining the record of three senior-most Stamp Auditors order of promotion of respondent No. 3 was passed who was stated to have possessed better service record than the petitioner.
Feeling that the record of respondent No. 3 was higher in merit than the petitioner, he was promoted by ignoring the claim of the petitioner.
The order is claimed to be legal, valid and according to law.
3.
Rule 9 of the Rules deals with the method of recruitment and provides:-  "Rule 9.
Method of Recruitment.
(1) Recruitment to the service shall be made:- xx xx xx xx xx (c) In the case of Chief Stamp Auditor, by promotion from amongst Stamp Auditors.
(2) When any vacancy occurs or is about to occur in the service the appointing authority shall determine in what manner such vacancy shall be filled in.
(3) Appointment by promotion to any posts in the Service shall be made strictly on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim on the basis of seniority alone".
4.
The petitioner is admittedly senior than respondent No. 3.
It is now well settled principle of service law that while making promotions the Government is guided by the consideration of improving the efficiency, integrity and stability of the service for which merit and ability should be given preference unless otherwise provided.
Even in a case where merit and ability tempered with seniority is a rule of promotion, the employer is under an obligation to assign reason for ignoring the claim of a senior in preference to the junior.
Rule 9 Sub Rule (3) specifically provides that promotion shall be made strictly on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the bass of seniority alone.
The Rule clearly envisages that under the normal circumstances, a senior person shall be promoted unless adverse circumstances or service record exist against him.
If his claim for promotion is ignored, specific reasons are required to be assigned.
In the absence of adverse service record, the claim of the senior cannot be ignored on the bass of comparative merit with his junior.
The question of comparison would arise only if a senior is found ineligible for promotion.
To hold a person ineligible for promotion, the promoting authority is to look into his record and cannot deny promotion in the absence of adverse service record.
5.
While deciding the service matters the court cannot ignore the service rules applicable in the case which in some cases have been found to be the result of long process of trade-union struggle.
The question regarding ascendancy between seniority and merit has been the subject-metter of controversy in the service for which specific rules were made keeping in view the nature of the duties and the concept of the service to which such rules were applicable.
6.
The Supreme Court in Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 SC 1910, considered the question of promotion on the basis of seniority alone or merit and ability and held:  "The question of a proper promotion policy depends on various conflicting factors.
it is obvious that the only method in which absolute objectivity can be ensured is for all promotions to be made entirely on grounds of seniority.
That means that if a post fall vacant it is filled by the person who has served longest in the post immediately below.
But the trouble with the seniority system is that it is so objective that it fails to take any account of personal merit.
As a system it is fair to every official except the best ones; and the official has nothing to win or lose provided he does not actually become so inefficient that disciplinary action has to be taken against him.
But, though the system is fair to the official concerned, it is a heavy burden on the public and a great strain on the efficient handling of public business.
The problem, therefore, is how to ensure reasonable prospect of advancement to all officials and at the same time to protect the public interest in having posts filled by the most able men ?
In other words, the question is how to find a correct balance between seniority and merit in a proper promotion policy.
In this connection Leonard D White has stated as follows:- "The principal object of a promotion system is to secure the best possible incumbents for the higher positions, while maintaining the morale of the whole organization.
The main interest to be served is the public interest, not the personal interest of members of the official group concerned.
The public interest is best secured when reasonable opportunities for promotion exist for all qualified employees, when really superior civil servants are enabled to move as rapidly up the promotion ladder as their merit deserve and as vacancies occur, and when selection for promotion is made on the sole basis of merit.
For the merit system ought to apply as specifically in making promotions as in original recruitment...... Employees often prefer the rule of seniority, by which the eligible longest in service is automatically awarded the promotion.
Within limits, seniority is entitled to consideration as one criterion of selection.
It tends to eliminate favouritism or the suspicion thereof; and experience is certainly a factor in the making of a successful employee.
Seniority a given most weight in promotions from the lowest to other subordinate positions.
As employees move up the ladder of responsibility, it is entitled to less and less weight.
When seniority is made the sole determining factor, at any level, it is a dangerous guide.
It does not follow that the employee longest in service in a particular grade is best suited for promotion to a higher grade; the very opposite may be true."
7.
A Full Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court in Hari Datt v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 1974(1) SLR 208, held:-  "It has been said that a milder form of the principle of seniority is that seniority should determine the order in which an officer of a particular grade should be considered for promotion, but those considered unfit may be passed over, and officers below them may be considered.
This means the seniority-cum-fitness principle, and what it implies is that the senior person unless unfit should get the promotion.
In that case, it was, however, observed that this, principle has not been found satisfactory because it implies essentially that seniority should be given preponderating weight.
Even though the merit has be found to be most acceptable criterion for promotion yet it is for the employer to substitute it for seniority.
Once the merit alone has been made the basis of promotion, no one can be permitted to have any grievance on the basis of seniority alone.
8.
Even in a case where the promotion was to be made on the ground of merit and ability alone, a Full Bench of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in Lal Chand v. Director NES and others, AIR 1970 J&K 57, held:  "....
The order of the appointing authority must show ex facie that the considerations mentioned in the rule were present in the mind of the appointing authority at the time of making promotions and the word `ground' implies that these considerations should be stated in the order so that anybody reading the order may know that action has been taken under Rule 25(2) of the Rules.
The question of promotion depends largely on the subjective satisfaction of the appointing authority and the assessment of the appointing authority regarding the work and the performance of the Government servant cannot be questioned, unless it is shown to be trained by a mala fide or colourable intention; yet the statutory rules do require that the considerations which had weighed with the appointing authority must find place in the order of promotion and then alone it would be a compliance with the provisions of Rule 25(2).
9.
The principle of seniority-cum-merit for the purposes of promotion is well defined and is clearly distinguishable from the principle of merit-cum- seniority.
The Supreme Court in State of Mysore v. Syed Mahmood, 1968(2) S.L.R.
333, considered the relevant service rules which provided promotion to a higher grade on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and held, "once the promotion is based on seniority-cum-merit, an officer cannot claim promotion as a matter of right by virtue of seniority alone.
It is found unfit to discharge the duties of the post, he may be passed over and an officer junior to him may be promoted."
In that case, the petitioners who upon re-organisation of the State were allotted to the State of Mysore and employed as Junior Statistical Engineers were not promoted despite their seniority.
The Government did not consider their fitness for promotion.
Aggrieved by the action of the State, the writ petitioners therein moved the High Court of Mysore asking for the issuance of an appropriate direction quashing the seniority list and directing the State Government to consider their case for promotion as Senior Statistical Engineers with retrospective effect.
The promotion to the posts of Senior Statistical Assistants was found to be made from the cadre of Junior Statistical Assistant and progress Assistants.
Rule 4(3) (b) of the Mysore State Civil Services General Recruitment Rules, 1957 required such promotions to be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit i.e. by seniority subject to the fitness of the candidate to discharge the duties of the post from amongst persons eligible for promotion.
While making the selection for promotion to the Senior Statistical Assistant from the cadre of Junior Statistical Assistants, the State Government was held to be under a duty to consider whether having regard to their seniority and fitness, the petitioners should have been promoted or not.
But without considering their cases, the State Government promoted Junior Statistical Assistants ranking below them in seniority.
The Supreme Court held:  ``We are of the opinion that the State Government should be directed at this stage to consider the fitness of Syed Mahmood and Bhao Rao for promotion in 1959.
If on such examination the State Government arbitrarily refused to promote them, different considerations would arise.
The State Government would upon such consideration be under a duty to promote them as from 1959 if they were then fit to discharge the duties of the higher post and if it fails to perform the duty, the Court may direct it to promote them as from 1959.
10.
In the instant case, it has been found that seniority-cum-merit was the principle governing promotions and the claim of the senior for promotion could not be ignored unless he was found unfit or ineligible for promotion on the basis of his service record.
Merely on the basis of a comparatively better merit, respondent No. 3 could not be promoted.
The question of promotion of respondent No. 3 would have arisen only if the petitioner who was admittedly senior was found to be unfit for promotion on account of his adverse service record.
Admittedly, this was not done by the respondents while passing the order impugned in his writ petition.
The respondents have, therefore, failed to justify their action by which respondent No. 3 who is admittedly junior was promoted to the post of Chief Stamp Auditor despite the existence of the rule of seniority-cum-merit which governed the promotions to the said post.
11.
Under the circumstances the impugned order dated 271994 (Annexure P/2) by which respondent No. 3 was promoted as Chief Stamp Auditor is quashed and direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion on the post of Chief Stamp Auditor with effect from the date of the impugned order under the service rules applicable in the case by keeping in view the observations made hereinabove.
Petition allowed.