VK Bali, J - In this appeal preferred under Clause X of the Letters Patent Act by the Managing Council, Guru Nanak Khalsa College, Dharoli Kalan, as also its Principal the prayer is to set aside the judgment of the single Judge of this Court dated 1851989, vide which the writ preferred by Ranjit Singh, respondent herein, was allowed, thus, setting aside the order dated 20.2.1986 and further directing the appellants to reinstate him with continuity of service with full back wages.
Brief facts of the case reveal that Ranjit Singh was employed as Librarian in the Guru Nanak Khalsa College, Dharoli Kalan, on 30121980.
This was a temporary appointment as the regular incumbent of the post went on deputation.
One Amarjit Kaur, a confirmed Librarian, in fact, went on leave keeping intact her lien on the post, which was temporarily created leading to advertisement dated 24111980 to fill up the same.
Respondent Ranjit Singh in consequence of the advertisement applied for the said temporary post and was successful in obtaining the same and as such was appointed on 30121980.
Smt. Amarjit Kaur resigned on 14101982 and her resignation was admittedly accepted.
The respondent, Ranjit Singh, who was holding a temporary post, was thereafter given a regular appointment and was placed on probation for one year, vide order dated 15.10.1982.
His probation period, which was to expire on 14101983 was, however, extended by another year, vide order dated 12101983.
During the currency of the last probation period, which was to expire on 14101984, his services were terminated, vide order dated 29.2.1984 and he was relieved from duty on 3031984.
Aggrieved, Ranjit Singh challenged the order of his termination under the provision of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974, before the Director, who vide order dated 2971985 accepted his petition and held the petitioner entitled to all benefits.
On appeal, however, preferred by the appellants before the Tribunal, the orders passed by the Director were set aside, thus, constraining the respondent to file a writ in this Court which, as indicated in earlier part of the judgment, was allowed.
2.
While granting relief to Ranjit Singh, the learned single Judge mainly placed reliance upon Rules 3 and 7 of the University Calendar which reads thus :-  "3.
The employee will ordinarily be appointed on one years's probation after which he will normally be confirmed if his work is found satisfactory.
It would be obligatory on the part of a Managing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period, whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended and in the absence of such a notice the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period in no case, shall be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment.
xx xxx xx  7.
An employee whether permanent or on probation or appointed temporarily shall be entitled to summer vacation salary as under :-  (a)(i) those who complete nine months' service, full salary  (ii) those who complete service for three months or more but less than nine months, proportionate salary on the basis of full salary for nine months.
Provided that no employee who has served for less than three months will be entitled to any summer vacation salary.
(b) If a temporary or on probation appointment of a teacher is made against a substantive post, it shall be on whole-time basis and if the same teacher is appointed in the following year also, he shall be entitled to full salary for the summer vacation, irrespective of the period of his service upto the date of commencement of the summer vacation and the period of temporary service of the person so appointed shall count towards his confirmation.
Provided that no one shall draw salary for the period of summer vacation from two sources.
Provided further that if an employee leaves service of his own accord, he shall not be entitled to summer vacation salary or any portion thereof."
3.
The petitioner who was already in the service of the College on temporary post was appointed on probation on occurring of permanent vacancy and thus, the entire period spent by him was counted towards the period spent on probation and inasmuch as the said period could not extend for more than two years, the order of his termination which was admittedly after two years of his service including the period that he had spent on the post on temporary basis, was set aside.
4.
Mr. Mohinderjit Singh Sethi, learned senior Advocate appearing for the appellant vehemently contends that as per pleadings of the parties and the findings recorded by the College - Tribunal which was final Court to determine the controversy on facts, it was established that the petitioner was not appointed temporarily against a substantive vacancy and in fact the case of the petitioner himself was that it was a leave vacancy against which he was appointed, although on regular basis.
The learned counsel for his aforesaid contention relies upon paragraphs 21 and 22 of the petition and paras 5 and 17 of the written statement.
He also relies upon order of Director and the College Tribunal.
In paragraph 21, it is pleaded that even otherwise the finding of the learned Tribunal that a permanent vacancy occurred from 15th of October, 1982 is erroneous and is based on non-existent facts.
Mrs. Amarjeet Kaur never applied for any leave beyond November, 1981.
In any case, neither she nor the respondent-College was contributing towards her Provident Fund and as such for all legal purposes the vacancy arose on permanent basis in the year 1980 or at the most in the year 1981.
Paragraph 22 of the petition only recites the contention of the petitioner that it was obvious from the various documents annexed and relied upon by the authorities that respondents 3 and 4 never considered the post on which the petitioner was to be appointed as leave vacancy and the post has throughout been considered a regular post.
The portion of the written statement, referred to by the learned counsel, of course, supports his contention that as per the stand of the appellant, the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis against temporary post on December 22, 1980 and that the initial appointment of petitioner was only a temporary appointment against a temporary post which was only for one year.
Insofar as reliance of learned counsel with regard to pleadings as extracted in the order passed by the Director is concerned, reference has been made to the following paragraphs :-  "I have heard both the parties at length and also one through the relevant documents.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner was appointed in response to advertisement dated 24111980 in the Daily Tribune, a photostat copy of which is placed on record at page 56, in which it is clearly stated that "Post temporary but likely to continue".
5.
The one line referred to from the order passed by the Tribunal is that it was admitted on both sides that the respondent was appointed on purely temporary basis with effect from 22121980.
Insofar as the judgment of learned single Judge is concerned, the learned counsel relies upon following paragraph to advance the case of appellant that the petitioner was appointed temporarily but not against a substantive post :-  "The question for determination is as to whether on being appointed against a permanent post, on termination of the lien of the previous incumbent, the period of service on temporary basis be included in the probationary period.
Rule 7(b) as reproduced above contemplates for counting such period towards confirmation."
6.
In the present case, the petitioner was already in service in the College on a temporary post and on occurring of a vacancy in the permanent post was appointed against such post.
His work and conduct throughout was being judged and finding him fit for appointment, was so appointed against permanent post.
There is no reasons as to why he could not be appointed permanently if he had been found to be fit for confirmation, keeping in view the period spent on temporary post.
7.
From the pleadings and discussion as the caseb may be from various orders, referred to above, it cannot be concluded that the case of the petitioner himself was that he was appointed against leave vacancy on temporary basis.
Quite to the contrary, his basic plea which was pressed in all the proceedings was that as per Guru Nanak Dev University Ordinances which were statutory and binding, the period of temporary service of an employee shall count towards his confirmation in terms of Clause 7(b) of the Statute reproduced above.
It is clause 7(b) of the Statute that was the main stake of the petitioner to claim the relief that the period spent by a person in temporary capacity against the substantive post would be counted towards probation.
Nothing as relied upon by the learned counsel can lead us to draw an inference that the petitioner himself claimed that he was appointed against a leave vacancy against a temporary post.
8.
The next contention of Mr. Sethi is that the very advertisement and the initial letter of appointment in no uncertain terms describes the post to be a temporary one and as long as Amarjit Kaur had a lien on the post held by her substantively there could not be any question for giving appointment to the petitioner against the substantive vacancy and that being so neither Rule 3 nor Rule 7 could come to the rescue of petitioner.
The learned counsel relies upon Webster's Dictionary IIIrd Edition Volume III page 2280 for the meaning of words "substantive post" as "existing on its own right, not derivative or dependent, self-contained" as also definition of permanent post as spelled out from Rule 246 of the Punjab Civil Services Volume I, Chapter II which means sanction without limit of time to further contend that the temporary appointment of the petitioner could not be against a substantive post as Amarjit Kaur continued to be appointed substantively to the post under contention till such time she resigned.
With a view to advance his case further, the learned counsel relies upon the decision of Apex Court in "State of Haryana v. Rajindra Sareen", 1972 SLR 112 and "Shri T Subha Rao v. The Union of India", 1978(2) SLR 52, a Division Bench Judgment of Delhi High Court.
9.
We, however, find no substance in the points raised by the learned counsel.
With a view to adjudicate the controversy as is involved in the present case, it is the Rules that admittedly govern the service conditions of the petitioner which are of prime importance.
Whereas Rule 3 deals with the case of a permanent employee who has been initially appointed on probation, Rule 7(a) deals with the salary of the persons who are appointed on probation or temporarily and Rule 7(b) deals with the case of temporary employee who has been either appointed on temporary basis or on probation.
In either case, the period spent by them on temporary basis would count towards their confirmation.
The Rule in question, thus, vividly provides protection to a person who has been appointed on temporary basis against a substantive post.
There is a provision to appoint temporarily against a substantive post and such a situation can arise only when the person holding substantive vacancy goes on leave or on deputation or like.
If the contention of the learned counsel as is pressed by him based upon the Dictionary meaning of word substantive post or the definition thereof, as made out from the Punjab Civil Services Rules is accepted, Rule 7(b) would be rendered nugatory.
It is true that if Rule 7(b) was not there in the Statute, the contention of Mr. Sethi that there could not be any temporary appointment against a substantive post till such time the person holding the said post and having lien on the same had not left the same by ether of the accepted modes like resignation, abandonment or like but in the teeth of the Rule, the plea raised by the learned counsel pales into insignificance.
10.
Coming now to the case law relied upon by the learned counsel, it would be seen that the ratio of the same is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
The facts of case Rajindra Sareen (supra) show that respondent Rajindra Sareen joined the service of the composite State of Punjab on June 22, 1957 in the Public Relations Department of the State, vide order dated June 28, 1957 the Governor of Punjab created a post of State Press Liaison Officer at Delhi in the grade of Rs. 500-800 with effect from June 22, 1957 till February 28, 1958 and also approved his appointment to the post.
Vide order dated August 1, 1957 dealing with appointment, posting and transfer, the Governor of Punjab appointed him as State Press Liaison Officer at Delhi in the Public Relations Department.
The creation of the post of the said State Press Liaison Officer as well as his appointment to the said post were done simultaneously by one and the same order dated June 28, 1957.
In July, 1962 the Governor of Punjab created the Punjab Public Relations Service and the post of State Press Liaison Officer in Delhi was included in the said service as a cadre post.
Mr. Sareen went on leave for about six months from November 21, 1959 to May 18, 1960.
On return from leave, he was posted in the same service on the post of Deputy Director (Field) from July 19, 1960 to September 19, 1960.
Later on, he was again posted as Officer on Special Duty, which was an equivalent post from September 20, 1960 to June 26, 1962.
He was appointed as a Deputy Director (Press), which post was held by him from June 27, 1962 to June 14, 1966.
By order dated June 24, 1966, he was appointed State Press Liaison Officer with effect from June 14, 1966 and was posted at Delhi.
The post of State Press Liaison Officer had been held in abeyance during the period when he was Deputy Director (Press).
On the re-organisation of the composite State of Punjab and its bifurcation into the States of Punjab and Haryana, the post of State Press Liaison Officer Delhi held by him was allocated to the State of Haryana with effect from November 1, 1966.
He was also allocated to the State of Haryana.
He remained on deputation with the Punjab Government with effect from December 1, 1966 to March 24, 1967 and he again resume his duty as State Press Liaison Officer, New Delhi from March 25, 1967 under the Government of Haryana.
He continued to work the said post till October 31, 1968 on which date the order terminating his services was passed by the State Government.
11.
In the facts aforesaid, the case of Mr. Sareen was that even though Rajendra Nath had a lien on the post of Deputy Director (Press), he had become permanent Government servant when he held the said post continuously for a period of three years as Rule 10(3) of the Gazetted Service Rules would make him a permanent Government employee on the expiry of three years of service as Deputy Director (Press) especially when there was another permanent post of Deputy Director (Publicity Material).
There was no controversy that the post of State Press Liaison Officer, New Delhi, was kept in abeyance from June 27, 1962 to June 14, 1966, corresponding to the period when Rajindra Sareen was Deputy Director (Press).
The post of Joint Director, created temporarily by order dated June 21, 1962 was made permanent only in September 1968.
On August 8, 1962 the Governor again passed an order that three posts of Deputy Director (Press), Deputy Director (Field) and Deputy Director (Publicity Material) and certain other posts mentioned therein, were interchangeable.
However, the post of Deputy Director (Publicity Material) was only a temporary post when Rajindra Sareen was appointed as Deputy Director (Press) and it was made permanent only on April 1, 1964.
But Mr. Rajendra Nath continued to have his lien on the post of Deputy Director (Press) till September, 1968 when the post of Joint Director was made permanent.
There was no order passed by the competent authority suspending the lien of Mr. Rajendra Nath under Rule 3.14 of the Civil Services Rules.
Under Rule 311(c) of the Civil Services Rules, a Government servant could not be appointed substantively to a post on which another Government servant held a lien.
It is in these circumstances that it was held that on the date when Rajindra Sareen was appointed as Deputy Director (Press), he could not have been appointed to that post substantively as Mr. Rajendra Nath was having a lien on the said post.
Some other circumstances were also taken to hold that the contention of Mr. Sareen that he was appointed against a permanent vacancy was not correct.
The facts of the aforesaid case would, thus, reveal that the same was decided in the light of Rules that governed the service conditions of Mr. Rajindra Sareen and in particular Rule 311(c) which in no uncertain terms provided that no one can be appointed substantively to a post on which someone holds a lien.
This case has, thus, no parity with either the facts or the Service Rules that were available in the case relied upon by the learned counsel.
On the other hand, whereas relevant Rule 311(c) specifically bars anyone from being appointed against the post on which somebody had a lien, Rule 7(b) makes it possible for a person to be appointed temporarily against a substantive post and as opined earlier, the temporary appointment against a substantive post could be possible only if the person having a lien goes on deputation or on leave or is otherwise on account of some other cogent grounds unable to do his duties.
12.
In Shri T Subha Rao and others's case (supra), the Delhi High Court held as follows :-  "Confirmation can obviously be only against permanent vacancies in permanent posts.
There can be temporary vacancies in permanent posts and a person can be appointed temporarily in a temporary vacancy in a permanent post.
Rule 8(1) deals with probation and provides that every person appointed to the service after the commencement of the rules except by deputation or transfer shall be on probation for a period of two years.
The words "person appointed" are wide enough to include "person appointed temporarily" in temporary vacancies in permanent posts.
Therefore, such a person would also be on probation under Rule 8 provided the duration of the temporary vacancy is more than two years.
Rule 9(1) seems to contemplate such an appointee in temporary vacancies, and it states that on successful completion of his probation he can be regarded as being eligible to be considered in his turn for confirmation provided a permanent vacancy becomes available.
This was obviously intended to make a provision for temporary appointments in temporary vacancies of long duration in permanent posts so that the experience and service of a person, who works satisfactorily for two years or more, may not go waste.
In our opinion, the words "Subject to the availability of permanent vacancies" in Rule 9(1) are in no way inconsistent with the posts in the service being only permanent posts."
The observations of the Division Bench of Delhi high Court, in our view do not advance the case of the appellant.
13.
The next argument of Mr. Sethi is that the petitioner is estopped by his act and conduct to claim his appointment against a substantive vacancy as he unequivocally accepted the offer of temporary appointment and also raised no objection when the period of his probation was extended by one year.
Reliance for the aforestated plea is placed upon "Kartar Singh Lecturer v. Director Public Instruction, Punjab, Chandigarh," 1980(2) S.L.R.
843, "Karam Chand v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others," 1984(1) S.L.R.
442, "Priti Pal Gupta and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others."
1982(2) S.L.R.
377 and JC Kapoor v. International Airport Authority of India and others", 1988(3) S.L.R.
775.
There cannot be any estoppel against law as is well established maxim of law and the contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the petitioner by merely accepting the temporary appointment and later extension of probation is estopped by the rule of estoppel has to be repelled.
14.
The contention of learned counsel that the Regulations which alone have come to the rescue of the petitioner in setting aside of his termination are of non-statutory nature and, thus, cannot be enforced and also that the concept of judicial review should detract us from upsetting an order passed by the College Tribunal which was the final Court to record findings of fact need to be summarily rejected as none of these points were ever raised at any stage and it would be inequitous and unjust to the petition if these points are permitted to be agitated in appeal before us.
There had to be proper pleadings giving adequate opportunity to the petitioner to rebut the same at appropriate stage and that as well is an impediment in the way of the appellant to raise these points for the first time.
15.
The last contention of Mr. Sethi that to burden the appellant with back wages which are of almost nine years would almost wreck and ruin the financial viability of the Institution, which may even result into closing down of the educational Institution, appears to be bordering on apprehensions.
We have no doubt in our mind that reinstatement of the petitioner would result in his deeming continuation of service and that being so, the educational Institution would be certainly entitled to 95% of the back salary of the petitioner as is permissible to the College being affiliated and financially aided Institution by the Government.
Finding no merit in the appeal, we dismiss the same.
In peculiar facts of the case, however, parties are left to bear their own costs.