RS Madan, J - Challenge herein in this writ petition is quashing of the impugned communication dated 1.12.2006 Annexure P-10 whereby the claim of the petitioners for the promotion to the post of Head Master ( High School) from the post of Head Master (Middle School) was rejected in the 20% quota of reservation meant for Scheduled Castes category.
2.
It is the case of the petitioners that they are working as Head Master/Headmistress (Middle School) in the Education Department of Haryana and they were promoted as such in the year 1996.
Petitioner Nos. 5 and 9 were appointed in the year 1997 as Head Masters (Middle School) whereas petitioner No. 10 was appointed as Head Master (Middle School) on 111991.
The service record of the petitioners throughout has been very good and no adverse entry was ever conveyed to them.
It is the case of the petitioner that for the purpose of promotion to the post of Head Master the promotions are made :-  (1) from Masters; (2) from Head Masters; (3) from Lecturers and (4) from C&V Teachers.
Petitioners belonged to category No. 2 i.e. Head Masters of Middle School.
3.
It is further the case of the petitioner that the Rules applicable to the post of Head Master ( High School) were notified by the State of Haryana on 15122998 and are called `the Haryana State Education (School and Inspection Cadre) (Group B) Service Rules, 1998' (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The Relevant Rules governing the post of Head Master ( High School) is reproduced here :-  Qualifications : 7.
No person shall be appointed to any post in Service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 4 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of persons appointed other than by direct recruitment.
Appendix B  (See Rule 7)  Sr. No.
Designation of post  Academic Qualifications and experience if any,, for appointment by direct recruitment  Academic qualifications if any,, for appointment other than by direct recruitment 1 to 3  xxx  xxx  xxx Head Master of High School/Junior Specialist/Programme Assistant  (i) BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
or equivalent qualification recognised by Haryana Education Department.
By Promotion; (i) Eight years experience as Head Master of Middle School or  Preference will be given to MA/MSc/MCom.
or equivalent,, Post Graduate qualifications recognised by the Department.
(ii) BT/BEd.
and eight years experience as Sanskrit Teacher/Hindi Teacher or Punjabi Teacher.
(ii)  BT/BEd./SSTC/SAV/LT/Diploma in Basic Education or one year's Teacher Training for graduate at University or Postgraduate Training College  By Transfer or deputation.
(i) Two years experience as Headmaster of High School.
(ii) Knowledge of Hindu upto Matric Standard.
(iii) Eight years teaching experience as Master in Govt. recognized Senior Secondary/ High /Middle School/Teachers Training Institution relaxable to four years for the Emergency Commissioned Officer but the total teaching experience and service in the Army should be Eight years.
(iv) Hindi upto Matric Standard  4  As per the above reproduced Rule, there is a channel of promotion for the petitioners to the post of Head Master/Head Mistress ( High School).
The criteria for promotion from the post of Head Master (Middle School) to the post of Head Master ( High School) is seniority-cum-merit.
4.
Vide Annexure P-1 a letter No. 30/20/78-2 GSI was issued from the office of the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana to :-  1.
All Heads of Departments, Commissioner, Ambala & Hissar Divisions, All Deputy Commissioners and Sub-Divisional Officers (Civil) in Haryana.
2.
The Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh.
The letters reads as under :-  "In supersession of Haryana Government instructions issued vide letter No. 2812-2GS-1-76/11578 dated the 5th May, 1976; letter No. 5074-2-GSI-76/21898, dated the 17th August, 1976 and subsequent letter No. 38/48/78-GSI dated the 14th September, 1978 on the subject noted above, I am directed to say that the State Government has further reviewed on the existing policy of reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and Ex-Servicemen in the services of Haryana and have decided as follows :- (1) (i) The quantum of reservaties will be as under :-  By direct recruitment :  (a) For Scheduled Caste  20% (in Class I,, II,, III and IV posts : (b) For Backward Classes:  50% ( -do- )  (c) For Ex-Servicemen  (i) 5% (in Class I & II posts) (ii) 25% (in Class III and IV posts)  By Promotion  (a) For Scheduled Castes :  20% (in Class III and IV posts on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
There will be no reservation in Class I and II posts.
(b) For Backward Classes :  5% ( - do - ) (c) For Ex-Servicemen  Nil (ii) Henceforth, in a block of 100 posts in each cadre, the following posts should be reserved for persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and for Ex-servicemen :- (a) For persons belonging to Scheduled Castes (for direct recruitment to all classes of posts i.e. class I, II, III and IV and for promotion to Class III and class IV posts on the basis of selection from a slab of 3 officials).
4-8-14-18-24-28-34-38-42-50-54-58-64-68-74-78-84-88 and 100.
(b) For persons belonging to Backward Classes (for direct recruitment to all classes of posts and for promotion to Class III and IV posts on the basis of selection from a slab of 3 officials).
16-32-46-70 and 94.
(c) For Ex-servicemen : (for direct recruitment to Class III and IV posts).
2-6-10-12-20-22-26-30-36-40-44-48-52-56-60-62-66-72-76-80-82-86-90-94 and 98.
It is clarified that a single roster of 100 posts both for direct recruitment and promotion will be prepared as referred to above.
This roster will continue from year to year till it is exhausted and thereafter a new roster will be prepared.
The aforesaid benefit of reservation will be given till such time as the number of employees belonging to reserved categories in each cadre/grade does not come upto the prescribed percentage.
(2) When a requisition for the reserved posts, in accordance with the sub- paras (i) and (ii) above, is sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission/Subordinate Services Selection Board, it shall advertise the same.
If as a result of this advertisement, suitable candidates for the reserved posts are not available, then these posts shall be re-advertised immediately by the Haryana Public Service Commission/Subordinate Services Selection Board, as the case may be, without awaiting a further reference from the concerned Department.
If suitable candidates are not available even on the basis of the second advertisement then the Commission/Board shall immediately re-advertise the posts for the third time indicating therein that if candidates, belonging to the reserved categories are not available, the posts shall be filled by candidates belonging to the general category.
This process shall be completed by the Commission/Board within the shortest possible time so that the reserved posts may not remain vacant for an unnecessarily long period.
In respect of the posts on which candidates having technical and specialised qualifications are to be appointed, if suitable candidates are not available on the basis of the first advertisement, the Commission/Board shall re-advertise the posts immediately for the second time indicating therein that, if candidates belonging to reserved categories are not available the posts shall be filled by the candidates belonging to the general category.
The Commission/Board shall keep the concerned Department informed of these advertisements.
2.
Reserved posts not filled by the candidates belongings to reserved categories should be carried forward for two recruitment years.
The recruitment year shall mean a calendar year and the two years limit for carry forward of reserved posts shall start from the year in which recruitment is actually made.
The carry forward would mean that if a sufficient number of suitable candidates eligible for reserved posts are not available from the appropriate classes in any year of recruitment, such posts should be treated as unreserved posts but should be carried forward to subsequent years of recruitment so that posts then occurring may be filled in by the persons belonging to reserved categories.
For example, if a requisition for filling up of five posts of Clerks, is sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board in the month of January, 1977 and the recommendations of the Board are received in March, 1978, but the Board could not recommend any candidate against the reserved post, then the reserved posts would be carried forward for a period of two years viz. 1979 and 1980.
In this connection, it is further clarified that in future, the carried forward reserved posts would be available together with the current posts for utilization even when the total number of such reserved posts exceeds 50% of the posts filled in that year provided that the overall representation of Scheduled Casts/Backward Classes in the total strength of the concerned cadre does not exceed the prescribed percentage of reservaties.
(d) In case a single post arises in the initial recruitment year and it falls at a reserved point in the roster, it has to be treated as unreserved and filled accordingly in that year but the reservation would be carried forward to subsequent years.
In the first subsequent year if again a single post occurs then it should be treated as reserved against the reservation carried forward from the initial recruitment year and a candidate from the reserved category should be appointed against that post in spite of the fact that the post happens to be the only post in that recruitment year.
In the event of a candidate belonging to reserved categories not being available to fill the reserved post in the subsequent year also, the reservation should be carried forward further to the subsequent year.
When also a single post, if any, arises in that, it should be treated as reserved against the carried forward reservation whereafter the reservation will lapse e.g. a single vacancy occurs in any cadre of a particular department of the State which falls at a reserved point, that single post shall not be treated as reserved.
But the single subsequent vacancy shall be treated as reserved and in case a candidate belonging to Scheduled Castes for the reserved seat is not available the post shall be treated as reserved for the next two years under the carry forward formula.
The year in which no post arises is to be ignored for the purpose of counting the effective year towards a period of carry forward.
(5) At present the reservation is given against posts and not against vacancies.
It has been decided that the reservation should be given both against the new posts whether permanent or temporary, as well as vacancies which may occur as a result of death, retirement, resignation, removal or dismissal.
(6) In the case of posts to be filled up by way of promotees; the benefit of reservation should be given where the basis of promotion is seniority-cum- merit and the benefit of reservation should not be made available where promotion is to be given on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
2.
These instructions should be brought to the notice of all concerned working under you for strict compliance.
3.
Receipt of this communication may kindly be acknowledged.
Sd/- Deputy Secretary General Admn.
For Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana" 5.
Vide Annexure P-2, Rulda Ram and vide Annexure P-3, Gurdial Singh, addressed a letter to Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, that they be promoted to the post of Head Master ( High School) in posts lying vacant under 20% quota reserved for SC category for the post of Head Master in the High School.
6.
The petitioners' claim, however, was not considered so they filed a Civil Writ No. 15138 of 2006 before this Court wherein they claimed that keeping in view the reservation policy of the State Government, 20% quota for promotion from the Head Master of Middle School to Head Master of High School may kindly be considered.
The said writ was disposed of n 21.9.2006 with the following observations :-  "Without going into the merits of the case, we deem it just and appropriate to direct the respondents to take cognizance of the legal notice, dated 382006 (P-6) sent by the petitioners and decide the same expeditiously preferably within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is presented to them.
It shall be appreciated if a speaking order is passed.
Petition stands disposed of in the above terms."
In pursuant to the above directions the matter was examined by Director, School Education, Haryana, Chandigarh vide Annexure P-10 (now under challenge) who rejected the claim of the petitioner on the ground as under :-  "That as per the provisions made in the Service Rules, 1998, the promotion to the post of Head Master High School is made from the cadre of Masters and from Language Teachers on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
It has been observed that the Department has considered for promotion to the post of Head Master High School incumbents from the cadre of Masters who have been included in Master Cadre in regular capacity in the year 1979-80.
Whereas the petitioners have been placed in the Master Cadre in the year 1986 onwards by virtue of their promotion from the post of JBT Teachers against the promotion quota posts of Scheduled Castes Category.
The post of Master/Head Masters, Govt. Middle School is non-Gazetted Class III post and they were promoted as Master/Middle Head Master on the promotion quota posts under reservation policy provided from Class III posts in promotion.
Whereas the post of Head Master Govt. High School against which Sh. Rulda Ram and other petitioners are claiming promotion is Gazetted Class II post since 1992 and no reservation in Gazetted Class II and Class I posts has been provided by the Govt. in promotion.
The petitioners are junior to those persons who have been promoted as Head Master High School till date and no junior in Master cadre to the petitioners has been promoted to the post of Head Master High School.
Hence the claim of the petitioners for their promotion to the post of Head Master High School on the basis of reservation as claimed by them in the legal notice dated 382006 is not maintainable and the same is liable to be rejected being devoid of merit and the same is hereby rejected accordingly."
Thus keeping in view the rules pertaining to the promotion of the SS teacher and the Language teachers who were posted in the Master Cadre in regular capacity for the year 1979-80 was considered, whereas the petitioners were appointed as SS Master and the Maths Master during the period 1986 to 1988 except petitioner Nos. 1, 5 and 7 who were appointed as SS Master in the year 1991.
The petitioners were promoted as Head Master/Headmistress (Middle School) in the year 1996-1997.
They all belonged to the Scheduled Caste category.
The petitioners were appointed in the Master Cadre in the year 1996 onwards by virtue of the promotion from the post of JBT teachers against the quota of reservation category.
The impugned order passed by the Director, School Education, Haryana, Chandigarh on 30.11.2006 (Annexure P-10) is well reasoned order and has been passed keeping in view the rules relating to the promotion of Headmaster/Headmistress of the Middle School for the post of Headmaster/Headmistress of High School.
It has been categorically stated in the rules that the Headmaster of a High School is a Class II post and in which the reservation policy is not applicable.
Reservation policy is applicable only in Class III and Class IV posts and not in Class I and Class II posts.
In the light of our aforesaid discussion, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.