Sreedharan, J - Same issues arise for consideration in these appeals.
Writ Appeal 309/1993 is filed by Sri TP Rajendran, petitioner in OP 6182/1989.
Manager of HMYS High School, Kottuvallikkad, Moothakunnam, who was the petitioner in OP 6178/1989, is the appellant in Writ Appeal 333/1993.
One Smt. PN Sathy, who was working as a part-time Menial in the school, filed OP 3727/1990 for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Manager of the school to implement the orders passed by the educational authorities and the Government directing her appointment as Lower Division Clerk in the School.
These Original Petitions were disposed of by a learned Single Judge by a common judgment dated 1121993.
Sri Rajendran and the Manager of the school challenge the said decision.
2.
Short facts necessary for the disposal of these appeals are as follows :- Smt. PN Sathy was appointed as part-time Menial in the aided school on 811985.
At that time, the school was not a complete High School.
Her appointment was approved by District Educational Officer by order dated 131985.
She took the SSLC examination conducted in March, 1986.
Result of that examination was published on 2751986.
She came out successful in that examination.
According to her, this fact, namely her success in the SSLC examination, was immediately intimated to the Manager of the School.
The school became a complete High School during the academic year 1986-87.
Consequently, one post each in the category of Clerk, Peon and full-time Menial were sanctioned with effect from 261986.
The post of part-time Menial, which was in existence, was abolished.
Anticipating the vacancy of Lower Division Clerk and Peon, Manager of the School invited applications for filling up these posts by a notice dated 1351986.
Last date for receipt of applications was fixed as 17.5.1986.
It appears that management took a decision on 1851986 to appoint Sri Rajendran as Clerk and one Sri KR Babu as Peon in the additionally sanctioned posts.
Smt. Sathy was appointed to the post of full-time Menial.
Aggrieved by the denial of appointment in the higher post, Sathy filed appeal before the District Educational Officer on 10.6.1986.
Since the appeal was not taken up for consideration by the District Educational Officer even after the lapse of a reasonable time, she moved this Court by filing OP 8330/1986.
By judgment dated 5111986, this Court directed the District Educational Officer to dispose of the appeal before granting approval to the appointment of Sri Rajendran as Clerk.
3.
District Educational Officer by his order dated 611987 held that denial of promotion to Sathy to the post of Lower Division Clerk was illegal and violative of the Rules contained in the Kerala Education Rules.
It was also held that Sathy was the legitimate claimant to the post of Clerk.
Consequently, he refused to approve the appointment of Rajendran as Clerk.
The issue was then taken up in appeal by the Manager of the school as well as Rajendran before the Deputy Director of Education, Ernakulam.
Deputy Director of Education heard all the parties in detail.
By order dated 1091987, he confirmed the order passed by the District Educational Officer and dismissed the appeal.
Against this order passed by the Deputy Director, Manager of the School and Rajendran preferred appeals before the Director of Public Instruction.
That appeal was rejected on 18.6.1988 and affirmed the orders passed by the subordinate authorities.
Thereupon, Manager of the School and Rejendran filed revision petitions before the Government.
Government dismissed those revision petitions by GO (Rt) No. 1884/89/G.Edn.
dated 1261989.
Manager of the School and Rajendran filed Original Petitions 6178/1989 and 6182/1989 respectively questioning the orders passed by the educational authorities and the Government, referred to earlier.
This Court did not grant stay of operation of the orders passed by the educational authorities and the Government.
Even so, Manager of the School did not implement those orders.
Consequently, Smt. Sathy moved this Court by filing OP 3727/1990 for compelling the Manager to implement the orders passed by the educational authorities and the Government in her favour.
4.
The main arguments advanced by the learned counsel representing the appellants were that the manager of the school was not informed of the qualification acquired by Sathy before he filled up the posts on 261986; that Sathy had not put in any application claiming the post of Lower Division Clerk; and that post of part-time Menial held by Sathy was not a feeder category for filling up the post of Lower Division Clerk.
We shall proceed to deal with these arguments in detail.
5.
The fact that Sathy was holding the post of a part-time Menial in the school with effect from 811985 is not in dispute.
It has come out in evidence that she took the SSLC examination conducted in March, 1986.
The result of that examination was published on 2751986.
Sathy came out successful in that examination.
This fact is also not in challenge.
The contention raised by the appellants is that the Manager of the school was not informed of her success in the SSLC examination on any day prior to 261986.
So, on 261986 the Manager of the school appointed Rajendran in the post of Lower Division Clerk, which was sanctioned to the school with effect from 261986.
In the order issued by the educational authorities, it is specifically stated that Manager was aware of Sathy's success in the SSLC examination prior to 261986.
District Educational Officer in the order dated 611987 stated :-  "Manager does not deny about her (Sathy's) passing of SSLC Examination and of her request for promotion."
Before the Deputy Director of Education, Ernakulam, the Manager advanced an argument that he was not aware of the possession of SSLC qualification by Smt. PN Sathy while issuing the appointment order on 261986.
This argument was not accepted by the Deputy Director.
The identical contention of the Manager of the school raised before the Director of Public Instruction was dealt with in his order dated 18.6.1988 by observing :-  "The argument of the Manager that he was unaware of the fact that Smt. PN Sathy was qualified for promotion as Clerk cannot be accepted since she had informed him of this before appointing Sri TP Rajendran as Clerk in the school on 261986."
While disposing of the revision petitions, wherein the identical contention was raised by the Manager of the school, Government in its order dated 1261989 accepted the contention of Smt. Sathy that she had given intimation by registered post to the Manager on 2851986 regarding her success in the SSLC examination.
The above finding of fact arrived at by the educational authorities and the Government is not to be interfered with by this Court in exercise of the powers under Art. 226 of the Constitution.
Further, Smt. Sathy in her counter-affidavit in OP 6182/1989 produced a copy of her representation dated 2851986 sent to the Manager as Ext.
R6(a).
In that representation, she had averred :-  "I have passed SSLC Examination conducted in March, 1986.
My register Number is 496930 and the result has been published on 2751986."
She further stated that she is the only qualified person eligible for promotion to the higher post.
She, therefore, requested the Manager of the school to make necessary arrangements to promote her as Clerk with effect from the re-opening of the school during 1986-87.
That representation dated 2851986 was sent by registered post.
The Manager of the school, as per Exhibit R6(b), accepted the registered letter on 2951986.
Thus, over and above the finding arrived at by the educational authorities and the Government, Exhibits R6(a) and R6(b) produced along with counter-affidavit filed by Sathy in OP 6182/1989 prove beyond even a shadow of doubt that the Manager of the school was informed by her of her success in the SSLC examination and also prayed for promotion to the post of Clerk.
In these circumstances we do not find any merit in the first contention raised by the appellants in these appeals.
6.
Chapter XXIV-A of the Kerala Education Rules deals with non-teaching staff of aided schools.
As per Rule 1 of that Chapter, in schools with Standard VIII as the highest, one Peon and one part-time Sweeper/Watcher etc. can alone be appointed.
Prior to 261986, the school, with which we are concerned in these Writ Appeals, was an incomplete High School with Standard VIII as the highest class.
In such a school, there could be one Peon and a part-time Sweeper/Watcher etc. Sathy was the part-time Menial working in the school.
As per Explanation (I) to Rule 1 of Chapter XXIV-A, the posts of Sweepers and other staff mentioned in the rule shall be the feeder category for appointment to the post of Peon.
Explanation (II) states that the post of Lower Division Clerk shall be filled up by promotion of Peons, Sweepers and other staff, if they possess the required qualification.
From this provision, it is clear that Sweepers, Watchers, etc., whether full-time or part-time, are in the feeder category for filling up the post of Lower Division Clerk.
But, if there are more than one claimant for appointment as Clerk under these categories, preference should be given in the order of Peons, Sweepers and other staff.
It means that part-time Menial will come after Peons and full- time Menial.
In the absence of qualified Peons and full-time Menial, the part-time Menial should be considered for the post of Lower Division Clerk, provided such person possesses the required qualification for the post of Lower Division Clerk.
It is common case that the person who held the post of Peon in the school is not qualified to hold the post of Lower Division Clerk.
Sathy, the part-time Menial, is fully qualified to hold the post of Lower Division Clerk, she having passed the SSLC examination on 2751986.
7.
Rule 7 of Chap.
XXIV-B of the Kerala Education Rules provides that Rules regarding appointment, promotion, seniority, etc. contained in Chapter XIV-A which are applicable to teacher of aided schools shall mutatis mutandis apply to the non-teaching staff in the aided schools.
Therefore, one has to refer to the provisions contained in Chapter XIV-A of the Kerala Education Rules to note the provision regarding promotion to the higher category.
Note (1) to R.1 of Chapter XIV-A provides that a member of the non-teaching staff under the category of Clerks, Peons, Sweepers and other staff shall also be eligible for appointment as teacher, provided he has the prescribed qualification.
R.43 of Chapter XIV-A further states that vacancies in the higher grade of pay shall be filled up by promotion of qualified hands in the lower grade, according to seniority.
A combined effect of the above provisions is that a qualified Peon, Sweeper, or a member of the other staff shall be eligible for appointment as Clerk.
So also, a Clerk, Peon, Sweeper or other staff shall also be eligible for appointment as teacher.
The only condition to be satisfied by them is that they must have the prescribed qualification for the post.
An identical view was taken by one of us (Sreedharan, J) in Stella v. State of Kerala, (1992 (2) KLT 533).
The above-mentioned statutory provisions cast a legal duty on the Managers of the aided schools to promote the qualified member of the staff in the above-mentioned categories to the higher cadres.
For giving promotion to those qualified members of the staff, they need not put in any application to the Manager.
It is the Managers' duty to give them the promotion.
Viewed in this light, we find it difficult to accept the contention raised by the appellants that Sathy was not entitled to be promoted to the post of Clerk, which post was sanctioned with effect from 261986, without an application having been filed by her.
Manager of the school was legally bound to promote Sathy to the post of Lower Division Clerk.
Therefore, we overrule the second and third contentions raised by the appellants.
8.
In paragraph 18 of the judgment, the learned single Judge took note of the hostile attitude taken by the Manager against Sathy.
It appears that the Manager of the school has initiated disciplinary proceedings against Sathy on the allegation that she had not taken leave for writing the SSLC examination for six days in March, 1986 and that she had tampered with the Attendance Register.
It was further noted that even though memo of charges were issued way back in 1988, no enquiry as such had been conducted against her till date.
Be that as it may, the so-called disciplinary proceedings initiated against her by the Manager can be no ground for denying her promotion to the post of Clerk with effect from 261986.
We are in entire agreement with the declaration given by the learned Single Judge that Sathy will be entitled to salary, other emoluments and all service benefits as Lower Division Clerk with effect from 261986.
9.
In the instant case, educational authorities and the Government issued valid orders directing the Manager of the school to give Smt. Sathy promotion to the post of Lower Division Clerk.
Those lawful orders issued by the authorities and the government have been violated by the Manager even after his attempt to get those orders stayed failed before this Court.
It is seen that Director of Public Instruction and the Deputy Director of Education, Ernakulam have initiated proceedings against the Manager under R.7 of Chapter III of Kerala Education Rules.
Learned Single Judge while disposing of the Original Petition directed respondents 2 and 3 to proceed with that action in accordance with law.
We are in respectful agreement with that direction.
In view of what has been stated above, we find no merit in these appeals.
They are accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.