Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 16873 and 17158 of 1991.
The petitioners in both these petitions seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to enroll them as Constables in the Haryana Police.
A few facts as given in CWP 16873 of 1991 may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that the Haryana Govt. had advertised to fill up 100 posts of Constables in district Sirsa.
He further avers that in September 1991, the Superintendent of Police subjected the applicants to a physical test.
Out of 2000 candidates, a list of about 130 candidates was prepared.
This list was forwarded to " a so-called Selection Board at Madhuban" which was headed by respondent No. 3 (Inspector General of Police, HAP Complex, Madhuban).
According to the petitioner, his name was placed at No. 77 in the list.
At Madhuban, the petitioner participated in the 5 physical tests.
He avers that he stood second in 1500 metres race as well as in 100 metres race.
He also passed the other three tests with good position " among the first four in his batch from Sirsa District".
According to the petitioner he was selected and his name was placed at serial No. 26 in the final list prepared by respondent No. 3 which was forwarded to the Superintendent of Police, District Sirsa vide letter dated October 14, 1991.
However, his name was "struck off by some one and in his place Mr. Parveen Sharma son of Hari Kishan was written".
The petitioner having not been appointed in spite of his father (who is a retired police officer) having met the Director General of Police etc. he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It was inter alia averred that a similar writ petition No. 1178 of 1990 had been dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court.
It has also been stated that the SLP filed against this order was also dismissed.
On merits, it has been stated that the Director General of Police, Haryana vide letter dated September 11, 1991 had given directions for recruitment and constituted a Recruitment Board in exercise of powers under Punjab Police Rule 1.2.
Due publicity was given at all District Headquarters.
The recruitment was conducted in two stages viz. the eligibility tests and the physical tests.
The eligibility tests included consideration of educational qualifications, age, measurement of both height and chest, authentication of title relating to reservation and the prospective candidates were also made to run 1500 metres in 6 minutes for general category and 75 minutes in case of Scheduled Caste/Backward Class candidates.
The candidates fulfilling the qualification and the eligibility tests were directed to report to the Board at Madhuban "which was specially constituted for finalising the recruitment by conducting physical tests."
At that time, many candidates appeared before the Board and complained that though they were physically fit and had qualified all the tests but they were ignored by the concerned District Superintendent of Police either inadvertently or because there were several thousand candidates.
As a result of discussion by the Board, it was decided to give a chance to the candidates who were physically fit.
Inspector General of Police respondent No. 3 wrote to respondent No. 2 in this behalf.
After carrying out the measurements regarding height & chest, those who were found eligible were allowed to anticipate in the physical tests.
It has been further averred that "the physical tests included 800 metres run, broad jumps, high jump, shot-put and 100 meter run.
The merit list was prepared on the basis of the performance of the prospective candidates in the physical tests."
It has been further averred that the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa had sent a list of 238 candidates who had qualified the eligibility test to the Recruitment Board.
It has been admitted that the name of the petitioner was at serial No. 77 in the list of general category candidates which contained names of 103 candidates and not 140 candidates as alleged by the petitioner.
It has been averred that the petitioner did not qualify the physical test conducted by the board at Madhuban so was not selected."
It has been further pointed out that the name of Vinod Kumar was wrongly typed when the list was prepared with the help of the computer and on comparison with the rough work prepared and maintained by the board, the inadvertent mistake was corrected.
4.
The facts stated in the written statement were controverted by the petitioner by filing a replication.
5.
The case had initially come up for hearing on July 15, 1992.
Certain points cropped up which neither the counsel for the respondents nor the official who had come from the department to assist him, was able to answer.
Accordingly, the Inspector General of Police was directed to appear in Court.
He appeared on July 16, 1992 and was heard.
He was directed to file an affidavit giving the "factual position as stated by him in court."
This affidavit was filed.
Along with this affidavit a copy of the letter dated September 11, 1991 sent by the Director General of Police, Haryana to all the District Superintendents of Police was attached.
The proviso regarding the constitution of the Board and the physical tests which the candidates had to pass, was stated to be as under :-  "2.
Physical Test.
A Board consisting of one IG, 2 D Is.
G and 3 SSP.
will be constituted for conducting the physical tests which will be carried out at Madhuban from October 3 onwards.
The process of physical test of all candidates forwarded from the districts may be completed by October 8, 1991.
The physical tests that will be undergone by the candidates are:- Sr. No.
Event One Star For SC/BC candidates 1.
100 meters run 150 second 170 seconds 2.
Broad Jump 380 meters 3.40 meters 3.
Shot put 560 meters 500 meters 4.
High Jump 105 meters 90 meters 5.
800 meter run 3 minutes 35. minutes.
The merit list will be determined by the performance of the prospective candidates in the physical tests.
The candidates who are finally selected by the board will be duly informed through the district SPs to report for medical examination."
It is the case of respondents that the petitioner had failed to qualify the above-mentioned physical tests.
6.
The case had then come up for hearing before me on August 10, 1992.
Learned counsel for the petitioner stated that in fact the petitioners had qualified all the physical tests and were still willing to take those tests before any impartial authority.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, an order was passed asking the Registry of the court to send a request to the Director, National Institute of Sports, Patiala for getting the petitioners in these two cases tested in the events mentioned in the letter dated September 11, 1991(supra).
A copy of the letter dated September 11, 1991 in which the standards had been prescribed by the department was also directed to be forwarded to the Director, National Institute of Sports, Patiala.
It appears that in pursuance to these direction, the petitioners actually appeared before the Director on September 24, 1992.
The Director, National Institute of Sports has conveyed the following information to this court :-  Sir,  I am directed to invite a reference to your letter No. 414/63/A/ dated 3rd September, 1992 on the above subject and to say that physical fitness of 1.
Shri Vinod Kumar S/o Sh. Jai Dayal Singh Rathee.
2.
Shri Chaman Lal S/o Sh. Gian Chand were conducted by the experts of GT.M.T.
Department of this Institute on 24th September, 1992.
The tests were conducted on Synthetic track and the petitioners were wearing canvas shoes.
No specifications were mentioned regarding the weight of the shot- put.
As such tests for shot-put was conducted with 16 lbs.
and 12 lbs weight.
Results of the physical fitness tests of the above petitioners are as under :- Events Sh. Vinod Kumar s/o Sh. Jai Dyal Singh Rathee Sh. Chaman Lal s/o Sh. Gian Chand 1.
100 Meter Run 144.
Seconds 131 Seconds 2.
Broad Jump 433 meter 491 meter 3.
(a) Shot put with 16 lbs.
weight 637 meter 798 meter 3.
(b) Shot put with 12 lbs.
weight 812 meter 962 meter 4.
High Jump 120 meter 130 meter 5.
800 Meter Run 2:26:81 (min.Sec) 2:26:78 (Min:sec) Left thumb impression, finger impression of the petitioners along with photographs are also attached herewith."
7.
A perusal of the above report shows that the petitioners have qualified all the prescribed tests.
Their performance has been well above the standards laid down by the respondents.
In view of this report learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the action of the respondents in disqualifying the petitioners has been proved to be arbitrary and as such the petitioners are entitled to be appointed.
As against this, Mr. Deepak Sibal learned counsel for the respondents contends that the test was held almost a year after the date of the original selection and the petitioners cannot be appointed on the basis hereof.
8.
On a perusal of the record I find that the action of the respondents in rejecting the petitioners cannot be sustained.
Petitioner Chaman Lal who belongs to the category of Backward Classes was rejected on the ground that he had failed to run 100 metres in 17 seconds.
In the test conducted by the Director, National Institute of Sports, he is reported to have run 100 metres in 131 seconds.
Similarly, he was required to jump 340 metres in the second event.
His performance is well above this mark.
He jumped 491 metres.
The candidates were required to throw the shot put to a distance of 5 metres.
He was able to throw the shot put of 16 lbs.
weight to a distance of 798 metres while that weighing 12 lbs.
was thrown to a distance of 962 metres.
Similar is the position with regard to the test in High Jump and 800 metres run.
Similarly the performance of petitioner Vinod Kumar was well above the prescribed standards.
In this situation, it would be grossly unfair if the petitioners are excluded from appointment only on the ground that they have failed to qualify the physical tests.
9.
Even otherwise, the respondents have not been able to produce any record indicating as to what was the result of the performance of these two petitioners.
Mr. Sibal states that those who did not qualify were merely eliminated and no record was kept regarding them.
In fact, no record indicating that the petitioners had failed to qualify the physical tests has been produced.
In such a situation, it is not possible to find any basis on which it has been stated on affidavit that the petitioners had failed to qualify.
Whenever a selection is connected, the result has to be compiled.
Those who secure the requisite standard have to be assigned a position in the merit list on the basis of their respective performances.
As against this, the others who have failed to attain the requisite standard are not included in the merit list.
But record of the performance is always available.
In the present case, it has been categorically stated that there is no record regarding the performance of the petitioners as they had been, in the words of the learned counsel for the respondents "eliminated in the process of physical test."
10.
Mr. Deepak Sibal contends that the performance of the petitioners in September, 1992 is of no relevance to their performance in October, 1991.
In abstract, he may be right.
However, in the facts and circumstances of this case, when the respondents have kept no record of the actual performance of the petitioners and there is no basis to support the averments made in the affidavit that they had failed to qualify the physical test, the contention cannot be accepted.
Still further, the performance of the petitioners as certified by the Director, National Institute of Sports clearly mitigates against the correctness of the averment made on behalf of the respondents.
11.
Another thing which may be noticed is that directions for conducting fresh physical test in respect of the petitioners were given on August 10, 1992.
At that stage no specific objection to this course of action was raised.
Now that the report has come against the respondents, they cannot be allowed to say that its consequence should not follow.
12.
In view of my above finding, I do not consider it necessary to go into the question as to whether or not petitioner Vinod Kumar had been initially selected.
13.
No other point was raised.
14.
Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for appointment on the basis of the report of the Director of National Institute of Sports, Patiala.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.