Radhakrishna Rao, J - This writ petition is filed for a declaration that the petitioner's appointments to various categories like Junior Assistants, Examiners.
Amins, Readers, Record Assistants and Copyists are valid and they are entitled to continue in service, and for a consequential direction that appointments sought to be made to the Posts of Junior Assistant by the Public Service Commission are invalid and illegal.
2.
The 21st petitioner was appointed as Amin on 721989 on account of a vacancy that arose due to promotion of one of the employees to the category of Junior Assistants.
Petitioners 1 to 5, 9, 11 to 13, 15 to 18 were promoted as Junior Assistants on various dates and the 6th petitioner was promoted as Reader from the category of Amin.
Likewise, the petitioners 7, 10 and 15 were promoted as Examiners from the category of Amins and the 8th petitioner was promoted as Copyist from the category of Record Assistants.
Petitioners 14 and 20 were promoted as Amins from the category of Record Assistants.
Due to the promotion of the above petitioners to the next higher categories, certain vacancies arose in the categories of Examiners, Amins, Readers, Copyists and Record Assistants and against that, petitioners 21 to 33 were appointed on various dates during the year 1986 and 1987.
3.
The petitioners' main case is that when once they are appointed by the competent authority i.e., the District Judge, after following the procedure against the aforesaid vacancies, as junior Assistants, they cannot be reverted and that even if reversions are to be made, they cannot be ousted from service.
This argument is based on the plea that from the very beginning, the District Judges are appointing and promoting persons and the Government is relaxing the prescribed qualifications for such appointments from time to time, the latest order in that behalf being the Government Order in GO Ms. No. 81, dt. 13.2.1986.
The Government has got the power to relax the prescribed qualifications for such appointments under Rule 50 of A.P.J.M.S.
Rules.
Under Rule 9(2), the district Judge can appoint by transfer or promote candidates working in the lower cadre to higher category if they art qualified to be appointed or promoted as Junior Assistants, Typists and Steno-Typists as the case my be and that the services of the Departmental candidates will be regularised in the said categories in the ratio of 3 :1 between candidates allotted by the APPSC, and in service candidates.
Following that Rule, the District Judge has to notify the vacancy position of the Junior Assistants, Steno-Typists and Typists to the Public Service Commission to enable it to select candidates by conducting examinations and allot them for appointment to the respective post notified.
4.
When the rule provides that certain number of posts have to be filled up through the Service Commission and the rest by way of promotion, it cannot be said that merely in a stop gap arrangement, the persons promoted as Junior Assistant and the persons who are appointed under direct recruitment, can still hold that posts and the Rule 50 can be deemed to have been relaxed.
Sri PR Prasad, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that by virtue of practice that has been developed from time to time, Rule 50 must be deemed to have been relaxed.
5.
In this case, the 4th respondent, the District Judge, Anantapur placed indents to the Public Service Commission in his letters dis.
No. 3275 dt. 361986, and dis.
No. 7040, dt. 20111987 for sponsoring candidates for the posts of Junior Assistants, Steno-Typists and Typists in accordance with the roaster position.
The lists of the candidates sponsored by the Commission was in its letter dis.
No. 3636/E-40/3/92, dt. 19.11.1982.
However, the Commission has not so far sponsored any candidates.
The Government issued orders in GO' Ms. No. 81, dt. 13.2.1986 for regularisation of services of the candidates who worked till 111986.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon a decision reported in Narender Chadha v. Union of India, AIR 1986(1) SC 437 and argued that since the petitioners were already appointed in regular course and they were continuing as such and subsequently promotion, also were made, the authorities now cannot see to revert the petitioners after they were promoted.
He has also relied upon the correspondence entered into between the Service Commission and the Register of the High Court in the months of December, 1987 and February, 1988.
6.
As on the date of the filing of the writ petition, no relaxation was made by the Government.
The petitioners continuance by virtue of orders in the writ petition and the subsequent relaxation, if any, will not enure to their benefit.
We have to see the position as was prevailing on the date of the allotment of the candidates by the Service Commission.
When the Rule prescribes Service Commission candidates to be appointed and temporary promotions are made by way of stop gap arrangement, such promotees cannot claim any preferential treatment on the ground that they were appointed on a stop gap arrangement earlier in point of time.
This view has been expressed following the reasoning given in HC Puttaswamy v. The Honourable Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court of Bangalore, AIR 1991(1) SC 166 : 1991(1) SCT 161 (SC).
7.
Each case has to be decided on its own facts and circumstances.
Rule 9(2) is mandatory and the District Judge is bound to follow Rule 9(2) and in the case of Junior Assistants, the rule that has too be followed in the promotion is 3 :1.
The Government issued GOMs.
No. 386 for regularisation of all the temporary employees, who were appointed between 6.3.1982 and 111986.
According to that GO, the District Judge Anantapur absorbed these persons who are entitled as per that GO Now the petitioners cannot claim that the District Judge has not regularised their services according to the above GO, inasmuch as they were appointed subsequent to the date of the GO, by seeking remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It is a regular feature that is being observed by this Court that the District Judges are appointing candidates and immediately promoting them, and those persons coming to the High Court directly and obtaining stay orders and continuing in service.
Ultimately when cases come for final hearing, they are raising an argument that since they have already put in service of so many years, equity must be shown.
The Supreme Court held, in a case where persons completed more than 15 to 20 years of service, that it would be certainly unjust to hold that they have no sort of claim to such posts and could be reverted unceremoniously or treated as persons not belonging to the Service at all, particularly where the Government is endowed with the power to relax the Rules to avoid unjust results."
Each case has to be taken into consideration on is own facts and circumstances.
Viewing from that angle, no case has been made out by the petitioners to interfere in the writ petition.
When the Service Commission duly allotted the candidates pursuant to the notification issued by the District Judge and when no relaxation was given by the Government, the appointing authority is bound to absorb those persons and consequently the persons holding higher posts have either to be reverted to the lower posts, or ousted from service.
However, if any person is ousted from service or any person is reverted to the lower posts, they will have a preferential right to claim appointment/promotion in the event any vacancies arise in future.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Advocate's fee Rs. 250/-.
Petition dismissed.