Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is aggrieved.
by the action of the respondents in not promoting him to the rank of Subedar with effect from October 1, 1989 and his consequential retirement from service with effect from October 1, 1990.
His statutory complaint having been rejected, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
A few facts May be noticed.
The petitioner was born on April 4, 1947.
He was enrolled in the Indian Army (Medical Corps) on September 18, 1964.
He was promoted to the rank of Nursing Assistant with effect from July 1, 1976 and to that of Havildar on August 21, 1982.
The petitioner was promoted to the rank of Naib Subedar on July 1, 1988.
He was retired from the army on completion of 26 years of service on October 1, 1990.
The petitioner claims that he was never conveyed and adverse report.
3.
On October 10, 1986, the petitioner was posted to NCC 5 Punjab (G) B. Moga as Nursing Assistant on instructional duties.
It is averred that the normal tenure of service in the NCC is only two years, but the petitioner remained posted in the NCC from October 10, 1986 to April 24, 1989.
He earned his confidential reports for the years 1986, 1987 and 1988 as High /Above Average and was recommended for promotion.
He was promoted to the rank of Naib Subedar but was denied promotion to the rank of Subedar which was due to him on October 1, 1989.
This was done on the ground that he did not earn his annual confidential report in the regiment.
On a representation, he was informed vide Annexure P-1 that he was not eligible for promotion to the rank of Subedar as he did not fulfil "A.C.R.
grading criteria" (Def.
of Regimental ACR in the present rank).
He was, however, informed that his case would be reviewed on receipt of A.C.R.
for the year 1989.
Vide letter dated March 10, 1990 the petitioner was informed that "he was considered for promotion to the rank of subedar against the vacancy of April 1, 1990.
He is not eligible for the reasons as he does not fulfil A.C.R.
grading criteria.
Hence, he has been superseded for promotion by his qualified and eligible juniors."
The petitioner submitted a statutory complaint vide Annexure P-4, which was followed by a reminder, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-5.
On October 1, 1990, the petitioner was retired.
On completion of tenure of 26 years which have been prescribed for the post of Naib Subedar.
If he had been promoted as Subedar with effect from October 1, 1989 he would have been entitled to continue till he completed the pensionable service of 28 years.
This would have also resulted in other benefits like Honarary rank and higher rate of pension.
The petitioner served a notice on the respondents.
Vide letter dated December 12, 1990 the counsel for the petitioner was informed that the statutory complaint submitted by the petitioner had been rejected by the Chief of the Army Staff.
A copy of this letter has been placed as Annexure P-7.
Aggrieved by the action of supersession and the consequential retirement on completion of 26 years of service, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
Their case is summarised in paragraph 3 of the written statement.
This reads as under :-  "3.
In reply to para 3 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the petitioner was posted to 5 Punjab (G) Bn.
NCC, Moga on 10 Oct 86 as Nursing Assistant on instructional duties.
He was promoted to Nb/Sub on 01 July 88.
The correct details or gradings earned by the petitioner in the ACRs for the years 1984 to 1989 are as under : Year Grading Recommendation on awarded for promotion Rank in which initiated Unit by which initiated 1989 'Average' 'R' Nb/Sub 151 BN (Regt) 1988 ' High Average' 'R' Nb/Sub 5 Punjab (G) Bd.
NCC(EBE) 1987 'Above Average' 'R' Hav 5 Punjab (G) Bd.
NCC(EBE) 1985 ' High Average' 'R' Hav 433 Fd Amb(Regt) 1986 'Above Average' 'R' Hav 433 Fd Amb (Regt) 1984 'Above Average' 'R' Hav 433 Fd Amb (Regt) 5.
It is submitted that in terms of Army HQ letter No. 09930/AG/PS 2(c) dated 18 Dec 85 for promotion to the rank of Subedar a Naib Subedar should have at least three ' High Average' reports during the last 5 years and one ' High Average' out of three must be on regimental duty.
The petitioner was earlier considered for promotion to the rank of Subedar (Nursing Assistant) against the vacancy of 01 Oct 89 and was superseded due to non-availability of Regimental ACR of requisite grading in the present rank.
Intimation regarding his supersession was sent to his unit vide this office letter No. 356006 J(N Asst) dated 05 Sep 89.
The petitioner was posted to 151 Base Hospital vide this office letter No 341007 JPT/NUR (CN-3615) dated 25 Nov 88 for earning a regimental ACR in the present rank.
However, he moved to his new unit only on 25th April 89.
On receipt of regimental ACR for the year 1989 he was considered for promotion to Subedar (N Asst) against the vacancy of 01 April 90 and was superseded due to ACR grading criteria since he was graded 'Average' in the ACR 1989 (Regimental ACR) against the requirement of ' High Average' grading.
Intimation regarding his supersession was sent to his unit vide this office letter No. 356005 J(N Asst) dated 10 March 90.
It is added that had the petitioner earned at least ' High Average' grading in the ACR for the year 1989, his seniority for promotion would have been protected under the provisions of Army HO letter, No. 94930/Ag/Ps-2(c) dated 18 Aug 88.
A copy of the army HQ letter dated 181285 is annexed as Annexure R 1."
The instructions to which reference has been made above, were issued by the authorities on February 27, 1986.
Clause 3(c) which has been relied upon by the respondents provides as under :  (c) For promotion to the rank of Ris/Sub.
(i) Three out of the last five reports rendered on an individual should be ' High Average' out of which at least one should be on regimental duty or as an instructor in an army school or institution in the Rank of Nb.
Ris/Nb Sub.
(ii) No report should be lower than 'Average' in the last three years (iii) Should have been recommended for promotion in the last three reports.
Even these instructions appear to have been issued on the basis of the letter dated December 18, 1985.
The respondents have produced only an extract from the letter.
A complete copy thereof has been produced by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is placed on record as Mark 'A'.
Note (4) provides as under :  "(4) Reports earned by JCOs/NCOs while serving with Army HQ/Other formation HQs/Establishment/NCC units Indian Missions aboard etc. will not be treated as regimental reports.
However, in order to safeguard the promotion prospects of such personnel on ERE the following measures may be adopted :  (i) JCOs/NCOs who are expected to get promotion to the higher ranks during the period of their tenure on ERE should not be detailed on ERE.
(ii) Only junior JCOs/NCOs whose tenure on ERE will not interfere with their promotion prospects should be posted on ERE.
(iii) Only those JCOs/NCOs who have already earned one regimental/instructional reports in the rank held as per the criteria should be posted on ERE and be reverted to regimental/instructional duty in time to remain eligible for promotion.
(iv) The tenure of Clerks (GD) on ERE with Army HQ may be allowed upto 4 years provided the promotion prospects of the JCOs/NCOs concerned do not suffer adversely owing to their not having earned at least one regimental/instructional report in the rank held."
6.
A perusal of the pleading for the parties shows that the petitioner was initially due for promotion on October 1, 1989.
According to the criteria laid down by the respondents, his last five annual confidential reports had to be taken into consideration.
The summary of reports as given in the written statement shows that two reports i.e. for the years 1986 and 1988 were ' High Average' and the three reports viz., for the years 1984, 1985 and 1987 were 'Above Average'.
According to the instructions produced on behalf of the respondents, a person with three ' High Average' reports out of five was eligible.
The petitioner fulfilled this criteria.
In fact, in his case, two reports were ' High Average' and 3 were 'Above Average'.
According to Major Aggarwal, who appeared on behalf of the respondents, an 'Above Average' report is better than an ' High Average' report.
Consequently, the petitioner was fully qualified.
The only hurdle in his way was that one of the reports did not relate to regimental duty as an instructor in any army school or institution.
This was not on account of any fault on the part of the petitioner.
The employer and in this case the Army authorities had posted the petitioner on extra regimental assignment.
The petitioner could not earn a report on regimental duty unless he was posted thereto.
In accordance with the instructions on which the respondents are relying and an extract from which has been appended as Annexure R-1, only such JCOs/NCOs "who have already earned one regimental/instructional reports in the rank held as per the criteria should be posted on ERE and be reverted to regimental/instructional duty in time to remain eligible for promotion."
(Refer to Note 4(iii) of Mark 'A').
The petitioner should have been posted on extra regimental assignment only after he had earned one regimental/instructional report.
This was not done.
Having posted him to the NCC, the respondents cannot be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong and deny the petitioner his legitimate due.
If such a course of action is permitted it would be open to the authorities to post all the senior persons to extra regimental assignments, and deny them the promotion while their Juniors who are not so posted shall remain eligible for promotion.
Such a course of action would completely defeat the guarantee of equality of opportunity as enshrined in Article 16 of the Constitution of India  7.
In the present case, the respondents themselves had posted the petitioner to NCC in the year 1984 and remained as such till April 25, 1989.
The instructions violated by the authorities, the mandate contained in Note 4 of the instructions was not followed, still the stipulation contained in paragraph 3 of the instructions is sought to be enforced against the petitioner.
This is wholly unfair and arbitrary.
I am accordingly of the view that the order superseding the petitioner for the vacancy which became available on April 1, 1989 was wholly unfair.
It resulted in violation of the guarantee of equality of opportunity enshrined in Article 16 of the Constitution of India  8.
I accordingly allow this writ petition.
The impugned order viz. Annexure P-1 and the order dismissing the petitioner's statutory complaint are accordingly quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the rank of Subedar with effect from October 1, 1989 without insisting on his having one report on regimental duty.
If he is found suitable for promotion, necessary orders shall be passed by the respondents within three months of the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
He will then be entitled to have his tenure of 28 years service as provided for a person in the rank of Subedar.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.