MR Agnihotri, J - Venugopal Reddy was appointed as Constable in the Central Reserve Police Force on 30th June, 1986, and was posted at Hyderabad.
Therefore, he was deputed to undergo the requisite training for nine months and after completion of the training he was transferred for posting in Punjab under the Commandant, 29 Battalion, CRPF, Fatehabad, Punjab.
While he was working here, his services were terminated on 17th August, 1988, exercising powers under Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965, by offering him pay and allowances in lieu of the notice period.
Aggrieved against this, the petitioner approached the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
But on an objection raised against the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction, the writ petition was withdrawn on 14th February, 1990, with permission to file a fresh one in the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
Thereafter, the petitioner through the Legal Aid Office of Punjab and Haryana High Court, approached the authorities on 16th March, 1990, for the assistance of an advocate to represent his case as he had no means to engage an Advocate.
2.
Today, before us, Mr. KL Kohli, Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has contended that the impugned order of termination of services of the petitioner is violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution as also against the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as neither any charge-sheet nor any show-cause notice preceded by a disciplinary enquiry has been served upon the petitioner, nor was an opportunity of hearing afforded to him.
3.
In the return filed by the respondents, the factual position has been admitted, but attempt has been made to justify the action of the respondents by stating that services of the petitioner had been terminated as he wilfully suppressed the factual position regarding his involvement in a criminal case prior to his recruitment in the CRPF, which was serious offence.
Therefore, there was no discrimination in terminating the services of the petitioner nor was the impugned order in violation of the principles of natural justice.
4.
Mr. KL Kohli, learned counsel for the petitioner has, however, placed on record a certified copy of the judgment of the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Vayalpad (Chittoor District), in CC No. 64 of 1986, decided on 31st August, 1990, to prove that the petitioner had been acquitted of the charge.
5.
We have gone through the aforesaid judgment and find that firstly, the offence was under Section 324/34, Indian Penal Code, that is, causing hurt in a dispute among neighbours, which did not involve moral turpitude on the part of the petitioner, and secondly, when the petitioner was recruited, he had not been convicted of any criminal offence by any Court.
Only the criminal case stood registered against him and its trial had not even commenced.
Therefore, there was no legal obligation on the part of the petitioner to narrate all these facts and his omission to do so does not amount to suppression or concealment of any material particulars at the time of his recruitment to service.
Moreover, the learned Judicial Magistrate has found the petitioner not guilty of the offence and he was fully exonerated.
Therefore, there was no stigma whatsoever on the past career of the petitioner, much less indelible, disqualifying him for Government Service.
6.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and by issuing a writ of certiorari quash, the impugned order dated 17th August, 1988, by which services of the petitioner were terminated, with the direction to declare the petitioner as having been reinstated to his original post of Constable in the CRPF, with all consequential benefits to which he would have been entitled, had the impugned order not been passed.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the cost of this writ petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,100/-.
This amount shall be realised by the Registrar of this High Court and remitted to Mr. KL Kohli, Advocate, who has appeared as counsel for the petitioner under the directions of the Secretary, Legal Aid Office.
Petition allowed.