Prakash Tatia, J - Heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as learned counsel for the respondent.
2.
The plaintiff filed the suit for award of damages of Rs. 71,500/- on account of damages which according to her she suffered because of initiating departmental inquiry against her by the respondents-defendants as it caused mental harassment and mental torture to the plaintiff.
According to plaintiff, the respondents treating her to be the officer incharge on behalf of the State in Civil Original Suit No. 21/85, initiated departmental inquiry against the appellant-plaintiff wherein she was exonerated by order of the disciplinary authority dated 24th July, 1993.
The appellant's-plaintiff's contention is that the respondents from the very beginning were well aware that the appellant was not the officer incharge in the said civil original suit No. 21/85 but still she was asked to submit her explanation and when she submitted her complete explanation, then by ignoring that explanation, the respondents decided to hold inquiry under Rule 17 of the CCA Rules of 1958.
During this period of inquiry, which continued from the month of Feb, 1993 to July, 1993, promotions were given to the persons junior to the appellant- plaintiff and even after her exoneration in the said departmental inquiry, further promotions were given to the persons junior to the appellant- plaintiff.
However, the appellant's admitted that matter of her promotion was kept in sealed cover by decision dated 3rd Dec., 1993.
The appellant challenged the order of the department dated 3rd Dec., 1993 by filing SBCWP No. 5931/1993.
The said writ petition was decided by this Court by order dated 321994 and the copy of the said decision of this Court was sent to the defendant No. 2 by the plaintiff-appellant by speed post on 11.2.1994.
Appellant also submitted a contempt petition being SB Civil Contempt Petition No. 99/1994 and, thereafter only on 23rd May, 1994, the plaintiff- appellant was given promotion and was posted in Jodhpur itself.
In pursuance of the order of promotion dated 23rd May, 1994, the plaintiff- appellant joined the duties of her post of promotion on 25th May, 1994.
The plaintiff further stated in the plaint that neither she get the salary from 711994 to 24.5.1994 nor she was given due increments.
The plaintiff also pleaded that before all that on 28th Sept, 1992, she came to know from one of her husband's friend that during visit of Hon'ble Chief Minister, some school children held demonstration and in that demonstration they shown banner wherein plaintiff's name has been shown as a corrupt officer and that caused mental torture to the plaintiff.
However, fortunately, her name was not shown in the news published by the newspapers on the next day.
The plaintiff further pleaded that on 29th Sept, 1992 she gave a letter to the defendant No. 2 through defendant No. 4 and prayed that the action may be taken against the officers of the Education Department because of their corruption.
The said letter was sent for proper action by defendant No. 4 to defendant No. 2 on 30th Sept, 1992.
The defendant No. 2 also sought explanation of the plaintiff vide letter dated 12th Oct, 1992 and according to the plaintiff in the said explanation the principal question was whether the plaintiff was officer incharge in the above civil original suit No. 21/85.
The plaintiff gave her explanation and submitted that she was never officer incharge in the said case as she was holding the post of District Education Officer (Girls) and was incharge of Account Section only.
The court cases were dealt with by the District Education Officer, General Section.
The appellant's contention is that since the respondents were knowing it well that she was not officer incharge in the said civil original suit No. 21/85, still they initiated proceedings for departmental inquiry against the appellant for not conducting said case properly and granted promotions to the certain junior persons during short period of inquiry and gave promotion to the plaintiff but after delay, therefore, she is entitled for damages against the respondents, which is about Rs. 50,000/- because of causing harassment to the plaintiff from 28th Sept, 1992 to 24th May, 1994, expenses for making correspondence Rs. 5,000/-, expenses incurred by plaintiff on telephone Rs. 1,000/- and Rs. 3,500/- which she incurred for travelling to restore her position on the post of promotion and other travellings and the plaintiff also claimed Rs. 6,000/- for expenses incurred by her for filing writ petition No. 5931/1993 and contempt petition No. 99/1994 as well as Rs. 6,000/- for conducting SBCWP No. 3472/1995.
In total, the plaintiff claimed decree of Rs. 71,500/- with interest @ 18% per annum.
3.
In the trial court an application was submitted by the defendants pointing out that plaintiff claimed salary for the period from 7194 to 24594 treating her to be on duty with pay and also claimed interest @ Rs. 18% per annum.
The appellant also preferred writ petition No. 3475/1995 which has been rejected by the High Court on 27th Sept, 1996 and the High Court observed that the relief, which has been claimed in the writ petition, is already subject matter in the appeal preferred before the Rajasthan Civil Services Appellate Tribunal.
On this application, the trial court vide order dated 24th Oct, 1996 ordered that the plaintiff may file amended plaint as per Order 6 Rule 2 CPC.
4.
Thereafter, one application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC was submitted by the defendants, upon which, the trial court held that no cause of action has been disclosed against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 and, therefore, the suit against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 was dismissed by the trial court.
While allowing the defendants' application and rejecting the plaint of the plaintiff against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8, the trial court observed that in case, the suit will be decreed against the defendants Nos. 1 and 2- State of Rajasthan and the Director, Education Department of the Government of Rajasthan then the court may also determine the liability of any of the defendants Nos. 3 to 8.
Therefore, the suit remained against the defendants Nos. 1 and 2 -State of Rajasthan and the Director, Primary and Secondary Education, Bikaner.
5.
The trial court framed the issues and the plaintiff gave her statement and produced witness PW-2 Laxmi Sharma, PW-3 OP Shani, PW-4 Dr. DK Ranley and closed the evidence without reserving any right to lead evidence in rebuttal.
On behalf of the defendants, witness DW-1 Nathulal Verma, the then District Education Officer (Primary), Jodhpur was examined.
The plaintiff in her evidence produced as many as 127 documents whereas the defendants produced 5 documents in support of their case.
6.
The trial court in the impugned judgment held that the plaintiff failed to prove that she was not officer incharge in civil original suit No. 21/85 and other officer - District Education Officer (Girls), Jodhpur was appointed as officer incharge.
The trial court observed that it cannot be believed that the plaintiff went as witness in the said suit and not as officer incharge.
The trial court also rejected the plaintiff's contention that since she was directed to give statement in said suit, therefore, she appeared as witness in the suit filed against the State and merely because she appeared as witness in the said suit she cannot be treated to be officer incharge.
The trial court also held that in said civil suit, the plaintiff was appointed as officer incharge by virtue of her post.
The defendants also produced Ex.A/1 by which she was authorized to take part for assisting in the court cases.
The trial court also held that in view of the order Ex.A/3, the plaintiff was officer incharge in said case.
For holding as above, the trial court considered the preponderance of probabilities also.
On the basis of the above finding, the trial court held that there was reasonable reason for giving charge-sheet to the plaintiff by the respondents and, therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to any decree for damages, may she has been exonerated from the said charge.
7.
The trial court rejected the appellant's claim for each and individual item under which she claimed damages.
Ultimately, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 8th Dec, 2003, hence, this appeal.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that the trial court committed serious error of law in holding the plaintiff to be officer incharge in the said suit.
The finding runs contrary to the documentary as well as oral evidence and further contrary to the trustworthy documentary evidence of the defendants themselves.
Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that when defendants' witnesses gave total false statement in court then plaintiff sought permission to lead evidence in rebuttal and that was denied by the trial court vide order dated 19th April, 2002.
Said order deprived appellant from rebutting the evidence of the defendants, which according to the appellant-plaintiff is nothing, but a total lie.
The appellant also submitted an application under Order 18 Rule 17 and 17A CPC on 17th May, 202 and prayed that the defendants' witness DW-1 Nathulal Verma gave vague statement and to clear the ambiguity, the witness may be recalled.
The trial court rejected the plaintiff's said application after observing that after going through the statement of the witness DW-1 Nathulal Verma, the court finds no ambiguity in the statement, which requires further clarification or further cross-examination.
The trial court also held that so far as how much statement of DW-1 is to be relied upon can be decided at the time of final decision only.
Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that the trial court should have allowed further cross-examination of defendants' witness DW-1 Nathulal Verma and the order of the trial court dated 14th Oct, 2003 is liable to be set aside.
9.
Learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that the appellant- plaintiff submitted an affidavit in the trial court on 20th Oct, 2003, but that affidavit was not considered by the trial court anywhere nor defendants were called upon to give reply to the affidavit of the plaintiff and the trial court without considering said affidavit and without rebuttal of that affidavit, heard the final arguments in the case and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
According to learned counsel for the appellant, the trial court should not have ignored the affidavit of the plaintiff nor could have refused to call upon the defendants to explain all facts and issues which have been raised by the plaintiff in her affidavit dated 20th Oct, 2003.
10.
So far as merits is concerned, learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the office order Ex1 dated 31st Dec., 1990 by which the appellant- plaintiff was transferred to the post of Senior Special Divisional Education Officer (Girls) and order Ex13 passed by the Addl.
Director (Admn.)
Primary and Secondary Education, Bikaner dated 24th July, 1993 by which she was exonerated from the charge of not handling the civil original suit No. 21/85 properly on behalf of the State after accepting the appellant's-plaintiff's plea that she was never officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85.
For the same purpose, the appellant relied upon her letter Ex.37 by which she conveyed to the District Education Officer that she has not received any order appointing her to be the officer incharge in the case.
She appeared in the court in above case in compliance of the direction issued by the District Education Officer to appear in said case for giving evidence.
The appellant also relied upon her statement recorded in the said civil suit on 621992.
11.
In this appeal after arguments, the appellant submitted an application under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC on 13th Dec, 2007 and prayed that additional evidence may be taken on record, which includes the copy of the Civil First Appeal filed against the judgment and decree of the trial court passed in the above civil original suit No. 21/85 and applications filed in the said appeal and the affidavits, which were filed by the other officer incharge on behalf of the State and prayed that the above documents came in her possession during or at the end of trial of the suit and some of the documents came in her possession in March, 2007 only.
According to learned counsel for the appellant from these documents it is clear that appeal was preferred by the District Education Officer (Girls), Education Department, Jodhpur to challenge the judgment and decree of the trial court passed in the civil original suit No. 21/85 dated 25th April, 1992.
In the affidavit submitted alongwith the application filed under Section 5 of the Limitation Act as well as under every sign of said District Education Officer (Girls), Jodhpur it is clearly mentioned that the said District Education Officer (Girls) was the officer incharge not only in the appeal, but was officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85.
In view of the above additional evidence also, it is clear that the finding of the trial court holding the appellant to be officer incharge in the suit is absolutely illegal.
12.
According to learned counsel for the appellant, the appellant herself approached her higher authorities for holding an inquiry against some officers for their inaction and for their corruption and particularly, in the matter, which was involved in the suit itself then her bona fides cannot be doubted and she would not have approached the higher authorities for inquiry against the other officers had she been the officer incharge in the suit on behalf of the respondent-State and was negligent.
In the brief appeal, the appellant raised the ground that the learned trial judge has erred in not exercising his jurisdiction to order ex parte proceedings against the respondents-defendants Nos. 3 to 8. when they did not appear in court inspite of service of summons on them and the trial court committed error of law by rejecting the plaintiff's application filed under Order 6 Rule 5 CPC, which would have shortened the litigation.
The appellant was not given opportunity to rebut the evidence of the defendant inspite of fact that appellant-plaintiff pointed out to the trial court that the evidence given by the defendants is false and vague and contains lot of inconsistencies and mis-statements, which could be clarified by the appellant-plaintiff only.
The appellant also assailed the observation of the trial court on evidence of the witness PW-4, the doctor who gave evidence about the plaintiff's sickness.
It is also challenged in the memo of appeal that the trial court did not frame the proper issue and that was whether the plaintiff was officer incharge of the case or not.
It is also assailed that observation of the trial judge that disciplinary authority did not hold any inquiry on the issue whether the plaintiff was officer incharge in the case or not.
13.
Learned counsel for the respondents supported the judgment of the trial court and submitted that the appellant was officer incharge by virtue of her post and she herself appeared in the court in the said case and she also contacted the Government Advocate.
Learned counsel for the respondents relied upon the order of the District Education Officer (Girls) dated 29th June, 1991 whereby the appellant was directed to submit report about the various pending cases of the department, copy of which is placed on record as Annex.A/1.
The office order Ex.A/3 whereby the Senior Dy.
District Education Officer (Girls), Jodhpur was appointed as officer incharge to conduct the case filed by Ram Singh S/o Bajrang Singh (the case in question).
This appointment was not by name but was by post and the appellant was holding the said post as appellant herself admitted that she was holding the post of Senior Dy.
District Education Officer (Girls), Jodhpur Copy of the said order is Ex.A/3.
Another letter relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents is Ex.A/4 whereby the appellant was conveyed that from earlier time, Senior Dy.
District Education Officer (Girls) is the officer incharge and, therefore, she was directed to appear in the said case for evidence.
In view of the above documentary evidence, the appellant was officer incharge in the said case and departmental inquiry was conducted against her because of the valid reasons in view of the decision of the court given in the civil original suit No. 21/85 wherein the department was of the view that the officer incharge did not conduct the case properly.
It is submitted that in inquiry under Rule 17 of the CCA Rules, the appellant-plaintiff may have been exonerated, but the scope and ambit of the said inquiry is entirely different and it cannot be said that the initiation of the inquiry itself was mala fide on the part of any of the officers.
It is also submitted that otherwise also, the appellant was not entitled to any relief in the suit because of the reason that none of the act of the respondents or its officers gave actionable cause to the appellant- plaintiff for claiming damages even if there was any error of judgment of any officer in holding the appellant to be the officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85 and taking a decision to initiate inquiry.
Learned counsel for the respondents also contested all the legal issues raised by the appellant in this appeal.
14.
I considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties and perused the record also.
15.
The facts in nut shell are only that a civil suit was pending against the State having No. 21/85.
In that suit, the plaintiff while holding the post in Education Department, on some occasions appeared and also gave her statement.
Because of some observations made in the judgment of the civil original suit No. 21/85 against the State, the respondent-State's department was of the view that departmental inquiry against the appellant-plaintiff be conducted and for which explanation was sought for from the appellant by defendant No. 4 by issuing letter dated 12th Oct, 1992.
The plaintiff replied to this letter.
The appellant's contention is that she apprehended that she may be suspended and, therefore, she suffered mental torture.
When plaintiff did not receive any communication of further departmental inquiry, then she gave a letter on 20th Dec, 1992 to the defendant No. 2 and requested for holding an independent inquiry against the guilty persons, but on 1021993, the charge- sheet was given to the appellant-plaintiff.
The appellant-plaintiff submitted her representation against the charges and submitted that she was never officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85.
The plaintiff also gave more letters for dropping the proceedings against her and initiating proceedings against other guilty persons and also vide registered letter dated 12th April, 1993 requested the defendant No. 2 to exonerate her from the charges and ultimately, the appellant was given full opportunity of hearing on 22nd July, 1993 and she was exonerated in the inquiry conducted under Rule 17 of the CCA Rules vide order dated 24th July, 1993.
Therefore, the entire period of departmental inquiry was from 1021993 to 24.7.1993.
The appellant also submitted writ petitions being SBCWP Nos. 5931/1993 and 5462/1993 as well as preferred appeal before the Rajasthan Civil Services Appellate Tribunal for various reliefs.
16.
The appellant had full knowledge of the civil original suit No. 21/85 and had knowledge of the appeal preferred against the judgment and decree passed in civil original suit No. 21/85.
After the decision of the trial court on 8th Dec, 2003, the appellant preferred appeal before this Court on 5th July, 2004 and submitted an application under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC after the arguments and when the case was reserved for pronouncement of judgment.
The application of the appellant for taking on record the above documentary evidence can be rejected only on the ground that there is no reason given by the appellant for not filing the above documents in the trial court or alongwith this appeal and on earlier occasion before hearing of the arguments.
Further, it appears from the above documents that these all documents are certified copies of the memo of appeal and the applications and affidavits submitted before the appellate court in appeal preferred against the decision of the civil original suit No. 21/85, which was decided on 25th April, 1992.
This Court is of the view that root question is that if it is held that plaintiff was not officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85 on behalf of the State and even if the respondents decided to hold an inquiry against the appellant treating her to be officer incharge in civil original suit No. 21/85 and departmental inquiry continued for the period from 1021993 to 24.7.1993 whether, can it be said to be a mala fide action of the respondents and respondents' officers so as to give actionable cause of action to the plaintiff.
The above is the core issue and goes to the root of the matter.
The civil wrongs may be of two types, one is of wrong simplicitor giving no actionable cause to the victim and another is civil wrong giving actionable cause to the victim.
To find out whether any actionable cause accrued to the party, all relevant facts and circumstances are required to be considered, which includes the relationship between the parties.
In the present case, the appellant was officer of the respondent State and was holding the post of responsibility.
The respondent department's officers before initiating departmental inquiry against her, issued a notice to the appellant and sought her explanation for which they were entitled to as per the service rules applicable to the plaintiff-appellant.
After obtaining the explanation if the department and the department's officers decided to hold an inquiry with respect to the conduct under the provisions of relevant rules governing the service conditions of the appellant-plaintiff, they could have done so.
If the action is mala fide from the beginning or became mala fide subsequently because of any reason to cause harm to the appellant and has been caused loss to aggrieved party may it be mental torture or humiliation or monetary loss, the aggrieved could have sought relief from the civil court by filing suit for damages against the guilty persons.
The mala fides may be mala fide in law and mala fide in fact.
In the present case, the plaintiff- appellant has alleged that the fact was in the knowledge of the respondents and that fact was that plaintiff-appellant was not officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85, still they proceeded against the appellant.
There is no pleading in the plaint that before initiation of any action against the plaintiff-appellant any officer had mala fide intention to cause harm to the appellant, therefore, appellant had drawn inference from the act of the respondents of serving notice upon the appellant and calling upon explanation from the appellant about her conduct in the civil original suit No. 21/85, which according to the appellant was uncalled for.
From above facts, it appears that the allegation of the appellant against the respondents was not allegation of mala fides in fact but mala fides in law only.
For claiming damages in such situation, one is required to plead and prove pre- existing malice in the mind and action of the defendants.
Unless action is mala fide in fact, the action under the colour of exercise power under the relevant rules may not give actionable cause of action to the aggrieved party.
In discharge of official duty there may be some act of indiscretion and some decision may go wrong, but all wrong decisions taken in discharge of official duties cannot give actionable cause of action to the person who suffers some injury, may it be harassment or mental torture or he has to incur some expenses.
This aspect has been considered in view of the fact that if plaintiff's best case that she was not officer incharge in civil suit No. 21/85 is accepted and still she is found not entitled to any damages then the issue whether the plaintiff was officer incharge in civil original suit No. 21/85 becomes redundant.
17.
Calling upon the appellant to submit here explanation to show her conduct in civil original suit No. 21/85 itself cannot be termed to be any mala fide action.
Mere rejection of the appellant's plea that she was not officer incharge in the case referred above without further proof of mala fide intention of any person in taking decision, the action cannot be held to be mala fide action.
The departmental inquiry which was started by serving a charge-sheet upon the plaintiff-appellant vide order dated 1021993 and concluding of the entire departmental inquiry within a period of less than six month's period by order dated 24th July, 1993 can be treated to be a period reasonably consumed by the department.
The rules provide keeping of decision of grant of promotion to the delinquent officer in sealed cover during pendency of departmental inquiry which compelled the respondents to keep the decision of promotion of the appellant in sealed cover.
There is no pleading that to give favour to any particular officer junior to the appellant, the officers of the respondent-department kept the departmental inquiry pending and caused harm to the appellant.
The appellant-plaintiff had drawn inference of mala fide from the situation that the department decided to promote some persons in between 1021993 to 24.7.1993.
There is no pleading in the plaint nor it can be believed that the entire department decided to keep the departmental inquiry pending against the plaintiff with intention to cause harm to the plaintiff-appellant as in the entire process of grant of promotion, several officers are involved.
18.
At this juncture it will be worthwhile to mention here that the trial court vide order dated 811997 rejected the plaint against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 and the appellant who has not challenged the said order during trial of the suit has also not challenged the said order dated 811997 of the trial court as such but submitted that the trail court should have passed the order to proceed ex-parte against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 who did not appear in spite of service before the trial court.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the trial court should have proceeded against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 ex-parte even then the necessary pleadings about the mala fides of defendants Nos. 3 to 8 are not in the plaint, therefore, no useful purpose could have been served by passing the order to proceed ex-parte against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 nor the suit could have been decreed against the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 because of their not contesting the suit individually.
The plaintiff could have proved what she alleged and as stated above, pleaded by her in plaint and allegations are not allegations of mala fide in fact and against any individual nor there is allegation that all the defendants Nos. 3 to 8 decided to cause harm to the appellant and therefore, initiated the proceedings against the appellant.
19.
If the respondent State and its officers were entitled to proceed departmentally against the appellant and there is no direct allegation of personal mala fide of any officer and mala fide cannot be alleged against the post, then the plaintiff's suit as such could not have been decreed even if plaintiff would have successfully proved that she was not officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85.
In the background of the above if the evidence produced by the parties are considered then the plaintiff's contention that she was exonerated in departmental inquiry held under Rule 17 of the CCA Rules itself cannot be ground to hold that she was not officer incharge in the civil original suit No21/85.
The departmental inquiry under Rule 17 is a summary inquiry and the ambit and scope of the inquiry is different than the issue as raised before the civil court.
The exoneration order dated 24th July, 1993 of the appellant from the departmental inquiry was not binding upon the civil court and the civil court therefore, after considering the orders Ex.A/1, A/2, A/4 and A/5 has reached to the conclusion that the appellant was the officer incharge in the suit.
The trial court has not committed any error of fact or error of law.
Ex.A/3 is the order of appointment of the officer incharge in the civil original suit No. 21/85 and it is not by name of a person but is in the name of post, therefore, when the appellant was appointed on the said post mentioned in the Ex.A/3, becomes the officer incharge without any further order.
The Government Advocate vide letter dated 171219911 Ex.A/2 also informed the appellant that she is officer incharge.
The appellant was dealt with by the respondent-department responsible to furnish information about the various cases.
The above communication at least made the appellant aware that she is concerned with the civil original suit No. 21/85.
She was also directed to give her statement vide Ex.A/4 dated 27121991 and in this communication also, it is clearly mentioned that the officer incharge has been appointed by name of post.
The appellant also appeared in the case and gave her statement.
In view of the above documentary evidence available, the officers of the respondent department were of the view that the appellant-plaintiff was officer incharge then it cannot be said that they held so without there being any basis.
As stated above, the basis may be wrong or the decision of treating the appellant may be wrong even then it cannot be said that the initiation of departmental inquiry against the appellant was with ill motive or mala fide or to cause harm to the appellant.
The appellant if because of her own zeal and because of own fear if took extra steps while writing various letters or travelling then that was a natural consequence of a lawful act of the officers of the respondent and for this the defendants cannot be held liable to reimburse the plaintiff.
20.
In addition to above a bare perusal of the judgment of the trial court would show that the trial court considered all the documentary and oral evidence produced by both the parties in detail and, thereafter, held that the appellant was the officer incharge in the suit No. 21/85.
I do not find any of the observations or findings recorded by the trial court on above issue suffers from any error of fact or law.
The trial court also rightly held that the appellant is not entitled to any damages on facts also as she failed to prove her entitlement to any sort of damages.
The disease with which the plaintiff suffered cannot be a direct consequence of merely giving some notices by the department to the plaintiff-appellant or because of pendency of the departmental inquiry or because of grant of promotion to some junior persons of appellant when appellant was facing departmental inquiry.
If that could have been the position then appellant might have suffered more diseases or mental torture when some students even went to demonstrate against her by showing her banners to the Hon'ble Chief Minister of the State by describing the appellant as corrupt officer and for that there is no evidence that, that demonstration was conducted by the officers of the defendants or at their instigation.
Therefore, it cannot be said that appellant suffered any disease and had to take some medicine because of any action of the respondents.
21.
Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted that appellant was victimized and she was not given promotion at due time and she was not paid salary in time and other benefits in time.
22.
The above allegations have remote connection with the present controversy as raised in the present suit by the plaintiff.
So far as the plaintiff's claim in the suit with respect to the payment of salary from 711994 to 24th May, 1994 with interest @ 18% per annum till the payment is made is concerned, the plaintiff approached the defendants by filing representation and approaching the appellant tribunal for the relief and for other reliefs, she failed to prove any damages.
23.
It will be worthwhile to consider the argument of learned counsel for the appellant with respect to the appellant's prayer for recalling the witness for further cross-examination.
The appellant's contention is that in the statement of DW-1 there is some ambiguity, inconsistency and most of the part of the statement is false.
To remove the ambiguity and to show credibility of the witness, the right to cross-examination is given to the opposite party.
The plaintiff had full opportunity to cross-examine the defendants' witness and he availed this opportunity.
The defendants' witness's examination-in-chief was recorded on 25.2.2002 and she cross-examined him for some time on the same day then the matter was adjourned and again same witness appeared for his cross- examination on 19th April, 2002.
Therefore, the appellant-plaintiff had full opportunity to cross-examine the witness as she could have and she must have obtained the copy of the statement of DW-1 much prior to witness's cross- examination on 19th April, 2002.
The recalling of witness is not ordered in routine manner because it causes harassment to the witness as well as consumes the court's time.
Therefore, a strong case is required to be made out for further cross-examination of the witness of other party.
In this case, no ground has been made out by the appellant for grant of permission to further cross-examine the witness DW-1.
24.
The appellant's contention that her affidavit dated 20th Oct, 2003 was not considered by the trial court which was submitted as rebuttal evidence by the plaintiff-appellant before the trial court, for this it will be suffice to state that the burden to prove the issue was upon the plaintiff and only issue on which burden to prove was upon the defendants was whether the suit of the plaintiff was not maintainable for want of notice under Section 80 CPC.
The trial court rightly held that firstly the plaintiff led evidence on all issues, burden of which was upon him to prove and consequently, the plaintiff neither got the right to lead evidence in rebuttal nor could have done so in the light of the issues framed in the suit.
Despite rejection of the plaintiff's prayer for leading evidence in rebuttal by order dated 19th April, 2002, the plaintiff submitted evidence in rebuttal in the form of affidavit which is dated 20th Oct, 2002.
Learned counsel for the appellant could not show any provision under which evidence by affidavit could have been accepted by the trial court when plaintiff's evidence was already closed and he had no right to lead evidence in rebuttal.
25.
The contention of learned counsel for the appellant that respondent-State should have been called upon to reply the affidavit of the plaintiff dated 20102003 is devoid of any force as no such provision is available under Civil Procedure Code by which the court is required to call the explanation of the defendant with respect to the allegations or facts stated on oath in affidavit by one party even if any affidavit is taken on record as substantive piece of evidence in civil trial of case then the court may grant opportunity to the other party to rebut the evidence and the other party if chooses to rebut the evidence and may produce evidence in rebuttal.
There is no procedure that court should seek explanation of other party in civil suit to the affidavit filed by his rival.
The appeal of the appellant is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.