Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order dated 26.10.2005 (Annexure P.6), whereby the services of the petitioner have been terminated and order dated 14122006 (Annexure P.8), whereby an appeal against the said order was dismissed.
2-3.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted vide memo dated 15112002.
The reply submitted by the petitioner was not found to be satisfactory and an Inquiry Officer was appointed.
On receipt of the inquiry report, the competent authority issued a show cause notice.
In the show cause notice, the competent authority recorded that it finds no reasons to disagree with the Inquiry Report and it has been tentatively decided to terminate the services of the petitioner.
The copy of the Inquiry Report was enclosed with the show cause notice.
After considering the reply submitted by the petitioner to such show cause notice, the order of termination of the services of the petitioner was passed, which is under challenge in the present writ petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a Division Bench Judgment of this Court reported as Ramesh Kumar v. State of Haryana, 2006(3) SCT 799 (P&H) (Civil Writ Petition No. 17710 of 2005 decided on 1552006) (Annexure P.9), to contend that the decision of the competent authority agreeing with the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer without supplying the copy of the inquiry report to the petitioner is violative of the principles of natural justice and is against the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad and others v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 : (1993)4 SCC 727.
Counsel for the petitioner further contends that the petitioner has suffered prejudice on account of the procedure adopted by the disciplinary authority and, therefore, the order of punishment is not sustainable.
4.
Before the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is examined, it would be necessary to reproduce the Regulation pertaining to action on the inquiry report by the Disciplinary Authority.
Regulation 7(6) of the Haryana State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1990, reads as under :-  "7(6) After the enquiry against a Board employee has been completed, and after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be inflicted, the Board employee shall if the penalty proposed to be inflicted is major penalty, be supplied with a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer and be called upon to show cause, within reasonable time, not ordinarily exceeding one month against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted upon him.
Any representation submitted by him in this behalf, shall be taken into consideration before final orders are passed.
Provided that if the punishing authority disagrees with any part or whole of the findings of the enquiry officer, the point or points of such disagreement, together with a brief statement of grounds thereof, shall also be supplied to the board employee."
5.
The Division Bench of this Court in Ramesh Kumar's case (supra) has taken a view that the agreement of the Disciplinary Authority with the findings of the Inquiry Officer without furnishing a copy of the inquiry report to the delinquent employee is in violation of the principles of law enunciated in Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 : 1991(1) SCC 588 and Karunakar's cases (supra).
In Ramesh Kumar's case (supra), the Disciplinary Authority agreed with the findings of the Inquiry Officer and enclosed a copy of the inquiry report while serving the show cause notice proposing the penalty.
The Court found that the Disciplinary Authority had failed to furnish a copy of the inquiry report before agreeing with the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
Thus, it was held that there is a violation of the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
It was held to the following effect :-  "A perusal of the above extracted Rule 7(6) of the Rules would show that law has changed by virtue of the judgment in the cases of Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, (1991) 1 SCC 588 and B Karunakar's case (supra).
However, Rule 7(6) continues to be static.
The result is disastrous for the Disciplinary Authority as it continued to follow Rule 7(6).
the Rules which were framed in the year 1987 would certainly required to be creased out in accordance with the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The necessity for incorporation of the above suggestion has been felt in view of the fact that number of cases appears before the Court by virtue of lapse committed by the Disciplinary Authorities.
Another petition bearing CWP No. 15524 of 2005 has been allowed by us today for the same reason.
If the amendment is carried it would avoid unnecessary burden on the public exchequer, wastage of precious time and advance public interest."
6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at some length, we have our reservations to accept the view of this Court in Ramesh Kumar's case (supra).
As mentioned above, in the present case as well, the Inquiry Officer has found the charges proved against the petitioner and while issuing show cause notice to the petitioner proposed punishment.
The Disciplinary Authority recorded to the following effect :-  "The EO has made detailed enquiry of all the charges levelled against you.
The enquiry officer has submitted his report vide this Memo No. Ch.
23/OCC-77 dated 28604 wherein all the charges/allegations levelled against you stand proved.
The competent authority finds no reason to disagree with the same, moreover you have repeated such charges.
Therefore, it has tentatively been decided to terminate you from the services of the Nigam under provisions contained in Reg.
4 of erstwhile HSEB now Nigam (P&A) Reg.
1990.
You are called upon to show cause within a period of 21 days from the receipt of this communication as to why the above proposed action may not be taken against you.
It may be mentioned here that in case you fail to submit your explanation within stipulated period, it will be presumed that you have nothing to say and action proposed will be taken against you."
7.
The question which is required to be examined is whether the Disciplinary Authority is required to issue a show cause notice to the delinquent even before the finding of guilt recorded by the Inquiry Officer is accepted provisionally and whether the agreement, if any recorded, to the findings of Inquiry Officer in the show cause notice is only tentative.
We may point out that we are not examining a case where the Inquiry Officer has exonerated the delinquent of the charges levelled against him and the Disciplinary Authority disagrees with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
We are examining a case, wherein the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer are agreed to by the Disciplinary Authority.
8.
One of the first judgments interpreting the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India is Khem Chand v. Union of India and others, AIR 1958 Supreme Court 300, wherein it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to the following effect :-  "19.
To summarise : the reasonable opportunity envisaged by the provision under consideration includes - (a) An opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence, which he can only do if he is told what the charges levelled against him are and the allegations on which such charges are based; (b) an opportunity to defend himself by crossexamining the witnesses produced against him and by examining himself or any other witnesses in support of his defence; and finally (c) an opportunity to make his representation as towhy the proposed punishment should not be inflicted on him, which can only do if the competent authority, after the enquiry is over and after applying his mind to the gravity or otherwise of the charges proved against the government servant tentatively proposes to inflict one of the three punishments and communicates the same to the government servant."
9.
In The State of Assam and another v. Bimal Kumar Pandit, AIR 1963 Supreme Court 1612, a Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court examined the situation where the Disciplinary Authority agrees with all the findings of the Inquiry Officer holding the delinquent guilty; or disagrees with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer and also the situation whereby some of the charges are said to have been proved against the delinquent whereas some other not proved and that how the Disciplinary Authority should proceed in the matter.
Since we are concerned with a case where the Disciplinary Authority agrees with the findings of the Inquiry Officer, we will deal only with the first situation as has been discussed in the aforesaid case.
In the aforesaid case, it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to the following effect :-  "When the enquiry is over and the enquiring officer submits his report, the dismissing authority has to consider the report and decide whether it agrees with the conclusion of the report or not.
If the findings in the report are against the public officer and the dismissing authority agrees with the said findings, a stage is reached for giving another opportunity to the public officer to show why disciplinary action should not be taken against him.
In issuing the second notice, the dismissing authority naturally has to come to a tentative or provisional conclusion about the guilt of the public officer as well as about the punishment which would meet the requirement of justice in his case, and it is only after reaching conclusion in both these matters provisionally that the dismissing authority issues the second notice.
(Emphasis supplied) There is no doubt that in response to this notice, the public officer is entitled to show cause notice only against the action proposed to be taken against him, but also against the validity or the correctness of the findings recorded by the enquiring officer and provisionally accepted by the dismissing authority.
In other words, the second opportunity enables the public officer to cover the whole ground and to plead that no case had been made out against him for taking any disciplinary action and then to urge that if he fails in substantiating his innocence, the action proposed to be taken against him is either unduly severe or not called for.
This position is not in dispute."
10.
In the aforesaid case, an argument was raised that the Disciplinary Authority must communicate its conclusion on the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
It must specify reasons in support of such findings while issuing the second show cause notice.
It was held that it is desirable that the dismissing authority should communicate in the second notice concurrence with the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer before it issues the second notice under Article 311(2) of the Constitution, but if the dismissing authority does not specifically say that it has accepted the findings of the Inquiry Officer against the delinquent, still it does not introduce such an infirmity in the proceedings as to make the final order invalid.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :-  "It seems to us that it would be plain to the delinquent officer that the issuance of the notice indicating the provisional conclusions of the dismissing authority as to the punishment that should be imposed on him, obviously and clearly implies that the findings recorded against him by the enquiring officer have been accepted by the dismissing authority; otherwise there would be no sense and no purpose in issuing the notice under Art. 311  (2).
Besides, we may add that in the present case, the affidavit made by appellant No. 2 clearly shows that before the impugned notice was served on the respondent, the Government had accepted the findings of the enquiring officer which means that the Government agreed with the enquiring officer in regard to both sets of findings recorded by him.
Therefore, we do not think that the failure to state expressly that the dismissing authority has accepted the findings recorded in the report against the delinquent officer, justifies the conclusion that the notice given in that behalf does not afford a reasonable opportunity to the delinquent officer under Art. 311(2).
On receiving the notice in the present case, it must have been obvious to the respondent that the findings recorded against him by the enquiring officer had been accepted by the appellants and so, we think it would not be reasonable to accept the view that in the present case, he had no reasonable opportunity as required by Art. 311 (2)".
It may be noticed that aforesaid was a case where the Disciplinary Authority has not stated in the show cause notice its agreement with the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer and the Hon'ble Supreme Court was dealing with an argument that such agreement should have been recorded by the Disciplinary authority.
As reproduced above, it was held that issuing of a show cause notice proposing the penalty itself shows the agreement of the Disciplinary Authority with the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
11.
The Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble supreme Court in Union of India v. HC Goel, AIR 1964 Supreme Court 364, has held that the first stage of inquiry shall be after the Inquiry officer appreciates the evidence, records his conclusion and submits his report to the Government concerned.
Such stage begins after charge has been served on the delinquent public servant.
After the report is received by the Government, the Government is entitled to consider the report and the evidence led against the delinquent public servant.
The Government may agree with the report or differ, either wholly or partially, from the conclusions recorded in the report.
It was found that if the report makes findings in favour of the public servant and the Government disagrees with the findings and holds that the charges framed against the public servant are prima-facie proved, the Government should decide provisionally what punishment should be imposed on the public servant and proceed to issue a second notice against him in that behalf.
The Court held to the following effect :-  "If the report makes findings in favour of the public servant and the government disagree with the said findings and holds that the charges framed against the public servant are prima facie proved, the government should decide provisionally what punishment should be imposed on the public servant and proceed to issue a second notice against him in that behalf.
If the enquiry officer makes findings, some of which are in favour of the public servant and some against him, the government is entitled to consider the whole matter and if it holds that some or all the charges framed against the public servant are, in its opinion, prima facie established against him, then also the government has to decide provisionally what punishment should be imposed on the public servant and give him notice accordingly.
It would thus be seen that the object of the second notice is to enable the public servant to satisfy the government on both the counts, one that he is innocent of the charges framed against him and the other that even if the charges are held proved against him, the punishment proposed to be inflicted upon him is unduly severe.
(Emphasis supplied)"  12.
In State of Madras v. AR Srinivasan, AIR 1966 Supreme Court 1827, another Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court examined the question as to whether it is obligatory on the State Government to give reasons in support of the order imposing a penalty on the delinquent officer.
It was held therein to the following effect :-  "Having regard to the material which is thus made available to the State Government and which is made available to the delinquent officer also, it seems to us somewhat unreasonable to suggest that the State Government must record its reasons why it accepts the findings of the Tribunal.
It is conceivable that if the State Government does not accept the findings of the Tribunal which may be in favour of the delinquent officer and proposes to impose a penalty on the delinquent officer, it should give reasons why it differs from the conclusions of the Tribunal, though even in such a case, it is not necessary that the reasons should be detailed or elaborate.
But where the State Government agrees with the findings of the Tribunal which are against the delinquent officer, we do not think as a matter of law, it could be said that the State Government cannot impose the penalty against the delinquent officer in accordance with the findings of the Tribunal unless it gives reasons to show why the said findings were accepted by it.
The proceedings are no doubt, quasi-judicial; but having regard to the manner in which these enquiries are conducted, we do not think an obligation can be imposed on the State Government to record reasons in every case."
13.
In The Union of India and others v. K Rajappa Menon, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 748, while examining the argument whether the Disciplinary Authority should proceed to give its finding on each charge, it was found by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that it is not obligatory on the Disciplinary Authority to discuss the evidence, facts and circumstances established in the departmental inquiry in detail and write as if it were an order or judgment of the judicial Tribunal.
It was held to the following effect:-  "When he agreed with the findings of the Enquiry Officer that all the charges mentioned in the charge-sheet had been established it meant that he was affirming the findings on each charge and that would certainly fulfil the requirement of the Rule.
The Rule after all has to be read not in a pedantic manner but in a practical and reasonable way and so read it is difficult to escape from the conclusion that the Chief Commercial Superintendent had substantially complied with the requirement of the Rule.
The interference by the High Court, therefore, on the ground that there had been non compliance with R1713 was not justified.
Learned counsel for the respondent has sought to raise the second point which the High Court had declined to decide, namely, that the disciplinary authority was not entitled to have finally made up its mind before the explanation to the second show cause notice had been received by it and at a stage prior to the issuance of the notice.
Such a contention is wholly untenable in view of the decisions of this Court.
It has been made quite clear in Khem Chand v. the Union of India, 1958 SCR 1080 : (AIR 1958 SC 300) that the procedure which is to be followed under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of affording a reasonable opportunity includes the giving of two notices, one at the enquiry stage and the other when the competent authority as a result of the enquiry tentatively determines to inflict a particular punishment.
It is quite obvious that unless the disciplinary or the competent authority arrives at some tentative decision, it will not be in a position to determine what particular punishment to inflict and a second show cause notice cannot be issued without such a tentative determination.
(Emphasis supplied)."
14.
A Full Bench of this court in The State of Haryana and others v. Shri Ram Chander, 1976 PLR 842, held that an order of dismissal need not necessarily be supported by reasons.
It was held to the following effect :-  "Where under the rules an Enquiry Officer is appointed to conduct a detailed enquiry into the guilt of the delinquent, where the Enquiry Officer submits a detailed report giving his findings and the reasons for his findings and where the disciplinary authority agrees with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, it cannot be said as matter of law that the disciplinary authority is bound to record reasons in every case.
There is a vital difference between a case where the disciplinary authority agrees with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and acts upon them and a case where the disciplinary authority disagrees with the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
In the former, it is not always necessary for the disciplinary authority to record reasons while in the latter case, it is necessary for the disciplinary authority to do so."
15.
All these judgments were prior to the amendment of Article 311 (2) of the Constitution by 42nd amendment.
After the 42nd Amendment, the opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed was deleted.
The effect of deletion providing an opportunity on the proposed punishment first came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra), wherein it was held that deletion of the second opportunity from the Scheme of Article 311(2) of the Constitution, has nothing to do with providing of copy of the inquiry report to the delinquent in the matter of making representation.
It was held to the following effect :-  "We have already noticed the position that Forty-second Amendment has deleted the second stage of the inquiry which would commence with the service of a notice proposing one of the three punishments mentioned in Article 311(1) and the delinquent officer would represent against the same and on the basis of such representation and/or oral hearing granted the disciplinary authority decides about the punishment.
Deletion of this part from the concept of reasonable opportunity in Article 311(2), in our opinion, does not bring about any material change in regard to requiring the copy of the report to be provided to the delinquent.
(Emphasis supplied)"  The said conclusion of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) was approved by the later Constitution Bench judgment in Karunakar's case (supra), but holding that the judgment in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) would be applicable only in respect of an order passed after the judgment in the aforesaid case.
It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to the following effect :-  "The second stage follows the inquiry so carried out and it consists of the issuance of the notice to show cause against the proposed penalty and of considering the reply to the notice and deciding upon the penalty.
What is dispensed with is the opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed and not of opportunity of making representation on the report of the Inquiry Officer.
The latter right was always there.
But before the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, the point of time at which it was to be exercised had stood deferred till the second stage viz., the stage of considering the penalty.
Till that time, the conclusions that the disciplinary authority might have arrived at both with regard to the guilt of the employee and the penalty to be imposed were only tentative.
All that has happened after the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution is to advance the point of time at which the representation of the employee against the Inquiry Officer's report would be considered.
Now, the disciplinary authority has to consider the representation of the employee against the report before it arrives at its conclusion with regard to his guilt or innocence of the charges."
16.
The Division Bench in Ramesh Kumar's case (supra) has relied on para Nos. 29 and 30(iv) of the judgment in Karunakar's case (supra), to return a finding that it is mandatory for the Disciplinary Authority to issue a show cause notice along with a copy of the inquiry report and only then the Disciplinary Authority can record its agreement with the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
The words used "arrives at its conclusion" in para 29 and "its finding" in para 30(iv) have been interpreted to mean that such findings are required to be recorded after opportunity of hearing is granted to the delinquent by enclosing a copy of the inquiry report.
17.
A Division Bench of this Court in PK Khanna v. National Fertilizers Ltd and another, 2005(2) SCT 642, has held that on issuing the show cause notice along with the tentative agreement with the findings of the Inquiry Officer, the Disciplinary Authority was required to consider the objections-cum-reply filed by the delinquent in the order of punishment.
Since in the aforesaid case, no reasons were recorded by the Disciplinary Authority dealing with the contentions raised in the reply and objections, the principles of natural justice stand violated.
It was held to the following effect :-  "We have absolutely no doubt in our mind that after the supply of enquiry report to a delinquent employee if he opts to submit his reply/objections against the findings of the Enquiry Officer, it is imperative upon the disciplinary authority to meet out the said challenge/objections and to respond with its own reasons in support of its conclusions.
Non observance of such a procedure would be negation of all tenets of natural justice and will render the mandatory requirement of supplying the enquiry report to an employee as an empty formality.
The consequences will be disastrous.
If the disciplinary authority is not required to give independent reasons in support of its conclusions, it will be nothing short of reverting to the same stage where 42nd amendment of the Constitution intended to bring but for the rider imposed by the Apex Court, firstly in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) and thereafter in B Karunakar's case (supra).
In other words, giving liberty to the disciplinary authority to overlook the objections submitted by the delinquent employee against the findings of the Enquiry Officer would be an utter disregard to the principles of natural justice which have been read into Article 311(1) of the Constitution by their Lordships in a catena of judgments referred to above.
We, therefore, hold that when the enquiry report has been supplied to a delinquent employee and he has chosen to submit his objections against the findings of the Enquiry Officer, it is imperative upon the disciplinary authority to meet out those objections and give reasons in support of its conclusions.
It cannot escape from the rigours of rules of natural justice, fair and just play merely by making a mechanical statement that it finds itself in complete agreement with the enquiry report."
The said judgment has not met the approval of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in National Fertilizers Ltd and another v. PK Khanna, 2005(4) SCT 295 : (2005)7 Supreme Court Cases 597.
In the said case, while relying upon Ram Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1987 Supp.
SCC 582 and examining Karunakar's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court, held as under :-  "10.
It is apparent from sub-rule (2) that the disciplinary authority is not required to record its reasons if it concurs with the enquiry officer's findings in contradiction with the situation in which the disciplinary authority disagrees with the findings of the enquiring authority.
Only in the latter case does sub-rule (2) expressly mandate that the disciplinary authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the enquiry officer record its reasons for such disagreement as well as its own findings on such charges.
11.
The respondent's reliance on the decision in MD, ECIL v. B Karunakar, (1993)4 SCC 727, is misplaced.
That decision relates to the right of a delinquent officer to a copy of the enquiry officer's report.
In the course of judgment, the Court had no doubt said that the report of the enquiry officer is required to be furnished to the employee to make proper representation to the disciplinary authority before such authority arrives at its own finding with regard to the guilt or otherwise of the employee and the punishment, if any, to be awarded to him.
By using the phrase "its own finding" what is meant is an independent decision of the disciplinary authority.
It does not require the disciplinary authority to record separate reasons from those given by the enquiry officer.
The concurrence of the disciplinary authority with the reasoning and conclusion of the enquiry officer means that the disciplinary authority has adopted the conclusion and the basis of the conclusion as its own.
It is not necessary for the disciplinary authority to restate the reasoning.
12.
As far as the second question is concerned, neither the decision in Karunakar nor Rule 33 quoted earlier postulate that the delinquent employee should be given an opportunity to show cause after the finding of guilt as to the quantum of the punishment.
The Rules envisage the passing of an order by the disciplinary authority not only finding the delinquent guilty, but also imposing punishment after the delinquent has been given a copy of the enquiry report and had an opportunity of challenging the same."
After holding so, the Hon'ble Supreme Court set aside the judgment of this Court and remanded the matter to the Appellate Authority with liberty to the delinquent to raise all such grounds before the Appellate Authority.
18.The Hon'ble Supreme Court interpreted the phrase "its own finding" in its earlier judgment in Karunakar's case (supra), and held that it is not required for the disciplinary authority to record separate reasons than those given by the Inquiry Officer.
19.
With 42nd Amendment, the provision of providing of an opportunity to delinquent against the proposed punishment only was done away with.
But the said amendment does not change the position which existed prior thereto.
It only means that it is not necessary to give notice on the proposed punishment.
In Karunakar's case (supra), it was further held that all Rules of the State and the Public Sector Undertakings, which deny an opportunity to the delinquent before accepting the findings of the Inquiry Officer, including a right to receive a copy of the Inquiry Report before order of punishment is passed by the competent authority, are against the principles of natural justice.
It was held to the following effect :-  "30.
Hence the incidental questions raised above may be answered as follows :- [1] Since the denial of the report of the Inquiry Officer is a denial of reasonable opportunity and a breach of the principles of natural justice, it follows that the statutory rules, if any, which deny the report to the employee are against the principles of natural justice and, therefore, invalid.
The delinquent employee will, therefore, be entitled to a copy of the report even if the statutory rules do not permit the furnishing of the report or are silent on the subject."
In view of the said principles, the findings recorded by the Division Bench of this Court in Ramesh Kumar's case (supra) that Rule 7 (6) framed in 1987, continues to be static, seems to be not correct.
In fact, Rule 7(6) of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 or Haryana State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1990, as applicable, appears to be is in tune with the principles of law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan's case and Karunakar's case (supra).
The said cases dealt with the effect of amendment doing away with an opportunity to the proposed punishment.
The Rules do not deny an opportunity to the delinquent to receive a copy of the inquiry report and to submit its representation.
In any case, the principles of natural justice commands the Disciplinary Authority to communicate the inquiry report.
The Rules further contemplate that the representation received in response to show cause notice is to be taken into consideration before final order is passed.
Merely because the Disciplinary Authority has not used the word "tentative" with the agreement along with the findings of the Inquiry Officer, will not materially change the nature and effect of the show cause notice.
What is implicit in issuing of the show cause notice, if not expressly stated will not make the show cause notice as vitiated in law.
In view of the above, we deem it appropriate to refer the matter to the Larger Bench, for authoritative decision on the following question:-  "Whether the agreement recorded by the Disciplinary Authority in the show cause notice with the findings of the Inquiry Officer, violates the principles of natura justice ?"
Let the papers of the case be put up before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice, for appropriate orders.
Petition allowed.