TPS Mann, J - By a common order, we intend to dispose of the present writ petition as well as similar other writ petitions bearing Nos. 7963, 8023, 8234, 8445, 8708, 8766, 8822, 8831, 9201, 9436, 9717, 9846, 9887, 10143, 11106, 12647, 12670, 12729, 13320, 13333, 13339, 13352, 13867, 13228 of 2007 as all of them involve similar questions of law and facts.
However, for facility of reference, the facts are taken from the present petition.
2.
The petitioners have prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing advertisement dated 06.05.2007 issued by Haryana Staff Selection Commission (for short `the Commission') for filling up 243 posts of Canal Patwaris of Irrigation Department, Haryana as according to them, the same was issued contrary to Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Patwaris State Service, Class III, Rules 1955 (here-in-after referred to as `the 1955 Rules'), besides not prescribing passing of Patwar Examination as a condition precedent for applying for the said posts.
3.
According to the petitioners, they had passed their Patwar examination in the years 1992 and 1993, besides completing apprenticeship as required under the 1955 Rules.
Their names had also been entered in the register maintained at the Divisional Level as per Rule 10(a) for their appointments on the posts of Canal Patwaris as well as in the register maintained at the Circle Level as envisaged under Rule 12(a).
In the year 1994, the respondents decided to fill up 427 posts of Canal Patwaris in accordance with the 1955 Rules.
In response thereto, the petitioners, who had already passed the Canal Patwar examination, applied for those posts through the Employment Exchange.
Divisional Level Committees were constituted and the petitioners were selected and appointed as Canal Patwaris.
However, some of the candidates, who could not be selected moved the Court for quashing the selection of the petitioners.
The matter came to be finally decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on February 11, 1997 when the appeals filed by Raj Kumar and others came to be allowed.
Although it was held that the posts of Canal Patwaris were required to be filled up through the Subordinate Services Selection Board (for short `SSS Board') in view of the Notification of the year 1970, yet 1955 Rules were held to operate as regards the qualification and other conditions of eligibility prescribed thereunder.
As under 1955 Rules, only those candidates were to be appointed as Canal Patwaris, who possessed educational qualification of matriculation, besides having passed the Patwar examination, therefore, the Commission vide impugned Notification was not justified in inviting applications from one and all for filling up the posts of Canal Patwaris, wherein it was also prescribed that the selected candidates would be required to undergo the training for six months and on completion thereof they will be required to pass the departmental Patwar examination before being appointed as Canal Patwaris.
The requirement laid down by the Commission of undergoing training for those candidates and passing of departmental Patwar examination for being appointed as Canal Patwaris was contrary to the qualifications prescribed under the 1955 Rules.
Therefore, the impugned advertisement, which has been attached as Annexure P45 with the present petition, be quashed.
4.
Reply has been filed by respondents No. 1 and 2, wherein it has been pleaded that the conditions regarding appointment to the post of Canal Patwari were contained in Rules 10, 11 and 12 of the 1955 Rules.
The appointment to the post of Canal Patwari is made by direct appointment and the names of the accepted candidates then kept on a register maintained by the Divisional Officer from where they were trained for a period of not less than three months in the practical duties of a Canal Patwari, besides passing the Patwar examination.
After passing the examination, the concerned candidates were to be brought on to the Circle register in serial order of passing the examination and the candidates thereafter appointed as and when any vacancy occurred.
In the year 1994, when 427 posts of Canal Patwaris were advertised, a Committee was constituted for selecting eligible candidates.
The selection so made was challenged by the unsuccessful candidates by moving the High Court and thereafter the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The matter was decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the appeal of Raj Kumar and others by issuing a direction that the selection process be carried out by the SSS Board, instead of Selection Committee.
Accordingly, the names of all the candidates, who had cleared the Patwar examination in the year 1992, including the petitioners were sent to the SSS Board.
The petitioners, however, remained unsuccessful and were, therefore, replaced by the candidates recommended by SSS Board.
Inspite of all this, the petitioners did not agitate the matter till the year 2003 when some of them filed C.W.P.
No. 17083 of 2003, wherein they also prayed for filling up the posts of Patwaris as per 1955 Rules.
The said writ petition was disposed of by this court on 26102004 as no vacancy was available in the department and therefore, no direction could be issued to the respondents to fill up the same.
In the year 2006, the vacancies became available and accordingly, 243 posts were advertised by way of the impugned advertisement.
It was specifically stated therein that the selected candidates shall undergo the training for six months and after completion of training, to pass the departmental Patwar examination before being appointed as Canal Patwari.
This requirement was made in accordance with the 1955 Rules.
It is also only in accordance with the directions by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Raj Kumar and others (supra) that the Commission, which was earlier known by the name of SSS Board would be conducting the examination, instead of Divisional Officer as required by 1955 Rules.
Therefore, it was prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and also perused the writ petition along with its Annexures, besides the written statement.
6.
The recruitment of Canal Patwaris was governed by the 1955 Rules.
Rule 6 required that no person could be appointed to the service unless he passed the matriculation or School Leaving Certificate examination of a recognized university or its equivalent but preference to be given to a candidate possessing higher qualifications.
Rule 10(a) ordained that appointments to the service shall be made by direct appointment.
Rule 10(b) provided that the Divisional Officer shall keep a register of accepted candidates for training purposes of not more than twice the number of candidates required for filling up the vacancies for the ensuing year, who were trained and then sent up for the examination.
Rule 12 comes into play after the candidates had passed the examination, who were then to be brought on the Circle register in serial order of passing the examination.
As and when a permanent vacancy occur in any division, the next passed candidate was to be posted from the Circle register and the appointment order to be issued by the Divisional Officer.
All those passed candidates, who reach the age of 25 years without having been employed temporarily as Patwari, were to be removed from the list.
There was some relaxation regarding the maximum age limit in the case of members of reserved categories.
Sub-rule (b) thereunder then specified that no person could be brought on to the Circle register of passed candidates unless he had passed the Patwar examination.
Rule 14 provided for the seniority of members of the service which was to be determined in accordance with the Circle register of passed candidates in serial order of passing the Patwar examination.
7.
After formation of the State of Haryana, SSS Board was constituted for recruitment and appointment to Class-III and Class-IV posts vide notification dated 28011970 issued by the Governor of Haryana (hereinafter referred to as `the 1970 Notification').
The posts of Canal Patwaris in the Irrigation Department of the State of Haryana are Class-III posts.
Para 6 of the 1970 Rules provided that a Board be constituted for appointments to Class-III posts under the State Government, except appointment of officers and employees of the High Court.
The Board was required to be consulted in the matter of methods of recruitment and the principles to be followed in making appointments.
However, it was provided that it shall not be necessary to consult the Board in respect of such posts and matters as the State Government may by notification specify.
Thus, in the matter of recruitment of Class-III posts, 1970 Notification modified the 1955 Rules by providing for recruitment in consultation with the Board instead of recruitment by the Canal Divisional Officer as required under 1955 rules.
8.
The controversy as to whether the 1955 Rules operated as regards the qualifications and other conditions of eligibility prescribed thereunder for filling up the posts of Canal Patwaris or the 1970 Notification was considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Raj Kumar and others (supra) reported in (1997) 9 Supreme Court Cases 527, wherein it was held that after the issuance of the 1970 Notification, 1955 Rules regarding the method and manner of selection of Canal Patwaris stood modified and the only competent authority to select the candidates was SSS Board.
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced here-in-below :-  "From the facts, it is seen that 1955 Rules operate as regards the qualifications and other conditions of eligibility prescribed thereunder.
They are statutory rules.
Equally, 1970 Notification has also statutory character.
They are in modification of the extant 1955 Rules.
In other words, the source of manner and method of recruitment for selection of Canal Patwaris stood modified by 1970 Notification.
As a consequence, the direct recruitment of Canal Patwaris shall be made only through SSS Board.
Unfortunately, the Government chose to select candidates at their convenience, sometimes under the 1955 Rules and sometimes under the 1970 Notification.
But in this case, they have dispensed with both and instead constituted a Committee for selection of the candidates having excluded from the purview of the 1970 Notification, that too after written examinations were conducted under the 1955 Rules.
The question, therefore, is whether the method of selection adopted by the Selection Committee is correct in law ?
It is seen that the procedures adopted both under the 1955 Rules and 1970 Notification are not correct.
After the 1970 Notification came to be issued, to the extent of the method and manner of selection of Canal Patwaris, 1955 Rules stood modified and the only competent authority to select the candidates is SSS Board."
In view of the above, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that before filling up the posts of Canal Patwaris, names from Employment Exchange should be called in addition to giving of wide publicity in the media inviting applications from qualified persons for selection.
After holding a written examination, the Board shall conduct an interview and marks should be awarded strictly in accordance with the procedure.
The relevant observation is as below :-  "In view of this legal position, the necessary requirement should be that they should necessarily not only notify but also call the names from employment exchange; in addition they should give wide publicity in the media inviting applications from qualified persons for selection.
Instead, they have adopted the procedure under the 1955 Rules.
They did not call the names from the employment exchange and conducted the examinations for them.
After the selection of the candidates, names of selected candidates were called from the employment exchange.
Obviously, the successful candidates in the written examination were asked to approach the employment exchange of the circle concerned and, accordingly, names came to be sponsored.
The procedure adopted is clearly illegal denying equal opportunity to many a candidate waiting in the register of the employment exchange concerned.
Therefore, the Government hereafter should strictly follow the procedure by not only calling their names from the employment exchange, but also by publishing in the local and national newspapers and giving wide publicity in the media as well as getting the written examination and the interview conducted by the SSS Board; marks should be awarded strictly according to the procedure."
Ultimately, it was held that although the examinations were conducted under the 1955 Rules and after the results were announced, the Government exercised the power under the proviso to para 6 of 1970 Notification, therefore, the procedure offered under the 1955 Rules as well as action taken by the government was not correct in law.
Finally, the Court out-lined the correct procedure for appointment to the posts of Canal Patwaris by specifying that the SSS Board should call the names of all candidates, who were successful in the written examinations conducted in April, 1992, interview them and select them in accordance with law as was being laid down.
The government was directed to send within three weeks all the names of the candidates, who had become successful in the Patwar examination to the SSS Board as per results declared and the Board would then to call them for interview and select the candidates as per merit-list by applying the rule of reservation.
In accordance with the directions given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Raj Kumar's case (supra), the impugned advertisement has been issued.
9.
According to the petitioners, they had the necessary educational qualifications, besides having passed the Patwar examination in the years 1992 and 1993 and, therefore, they could not be now treated at par with those, who only possess the basic educational qualifications and have not undergone the requisite training of this post and passed the departmental Patwar examination.
10.
As is clear from the 1955 Rules, the names of all those candidates, who had passed the Patwar examination were to be brought on to the Circle Register and as and when any permanent vacancy occurred, they were to be posted as such.
However, Rule 12(a) of the 1955 Rules clearly prescribed that in case the candidate, who had passed the Patwar examination and his name had been brought on the Circle register, such a name was to be struck off the list if the passed candidate had reached the age of 25 years and that too without having been employed temporarily as a Patwari.
However, there had to be some relaxation in the maximum age limit in the case of candidates belonging to the reserved categories.
11.
It is not in dispute that all the petitioners before us have already crossed the age of 25 years as they were already matriculates before they appeared in the Patwar examinations held in the years 1992 and 1993.
About 15 years have elapsed since then.
In the present petition, petitioners have attached a detailed list in their respect as Annexure P39 in which they have specified their educational qualifications, besides their respective dates of birth.
The petitioners were born in 1960s and 1970s, except Bir Singh- petitioner, who was born in the year 1959.
Even amongst the petitioners, who were born in 1970s, the youngest of them, i.e., Balwan Singh-petitioner, was born on 10061975.
As such, all of them are in their 30s and 40s.
They will not be eligible to be considered eligible for being appointed as Canal Patwaris on the basis of Rule 12(a) of the 1955 Rules, unless they now compete with other fresh candidates in pursuance of the impugned advertisement Annexure P45.
In view of the above, there is no merit in all these petitions, which are, accordingly dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.