Hima Kohli, J - By way of the present petition, the petitioner workmen seek to assail the order dated 15th June, 1998, passed by the Secretary (Labour), Govt. of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, respondent No. 1 herein, by which the said authority in exercise of its powers under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to in short as 'the Act'), refused to refer the industrial dispute raised by the petitioner workmen for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court, on the ground that the industrial dispute was raised at a belated stage and was therefore not fit for reference.
2.
Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to briefly narrate the facts of the present case.
The petitioner No. 1 joined employment of the Delhi Development Authority (DDA), respondent No. 2 herein, w.e.f.
1st May, 1989 as a 'Mate' and the petitioner No. 2 workman joined employment of DDA w.e.f.
8th June, 1988, also as a 'Mate'.
However the services of the petitioner workmen was terminated w.e.f.
3rd January, 1991 and 2nd December, 1990, respectively on the ground that they had sought employment on the basis of false caste certificates.
The petitioners allege that thereafter they had made several representations to the respondent No. 2/management, and on receiving no reply to the same, they served a demand notice on the respondent No. 2/management through their Union vide communication dated 25th October, 1995.
However, not having received any reply to the said notice, the petitioners raised an industrial dispute under the provisions of Act, by filing a Statement of Claim before the Conciliation Officer of the respondent No. 1 on 10th November, 1995.
Thereafter, the petitioner workmen also filed an application for condonation of delay dated 18th June, 1997 with the Conciliation Officer.
On 15th June, 1998, the respondent No. 1 passed the impugned order whereunder it was held that :  "As admitted in the Statement of Claim, services of Shri.
Sushil Kumar and Shri Vinod Kumar were terminated w.e.f.
3-1-1991 and 2-12-1990, respectively.
The Industrial dispute is raised in November, 1995 and, therefore, it is a belated case and not fit for reference."
3.
In the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the respondent No. 1, while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 10(1) of the Act, had no power to go into the merits of the matter and to have refused to refer the matter for adjudication on the ground of delay.
It was submitted that firstly the present case is not one where the petitioner workmen were sleeping over their rights, as they had been pursuing their matter through the official channel by making representations to the respondent.
No. 2/management; and secondly that assuming but not conceding that the claim was raised at a belated stage still the respondent No. 1, was not justified in declining to refer the matter for adjudication as the same would amount to final adjudication of the dispute in total disregard of the procedure prescribed under the Act and the settled principles of law.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the petitioner workmen, placed reliance on the following judgments :  (i) Gurumurthy v. State of Karnataka, 1995(1) CLR 309 (Kar).
(ii) Subhash Chand v. Government of NCT and another, 2005(3) AD 206.
(iii) GM Haryana Roadways v. Pawan Kumar, (2005)12 SCC 459.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the facts as alleged by the petitioner are wrong and that the petitioner had never made any representations to the respondent No. 2/management and that it was because they knew that their services were terminated for the reason of submission of wrong caste certificates by them, that they never disputed their termination.
It was also submitted that in view of the fact that since the industrial dispute was raised after a long delay of almost 5 years from the date of termination of services, the claim petition was rightly rejected and that the respondent No. 1 was therefore, justified in declining to refer the matter for adjudication.
5.
I have heard the counsels for the parties and have perused the records including the impugned order passed by the respondent No. 1.
In view of the submissions made by the counsels for the parties, the only issue that needs consideration of this Court is as to whether the respondent No. 1 could have refused to refer the dispute for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court.
In other words, the limited issue that needs to be dealt with is that whether the Appropriate Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 10(1) of the Act, can itself reject a claim petition on the grounds of delay and can decline to refer the same for adjudication.
6.
Considering the question of delay in raising the dispute by the workmen and its effect, the Supreme Court in the case of GM Haryana Roadways (supra) has held as under :  "6.
It will appear from the facts stated above that though the respondent was prevented from working by the appellant Roadways after December 1991 he did not raise a dispute till 14-10-1995.
It is settled law that the mere factum of delay in raising a dispute by itself does not bring the dispute to an end.
The delay in raising the dispute, however, may be taken into account in the matter of grant of relief."
7.
The law regarding the ambit and scope of the powers of the appropriate Government to make or decline a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act, was considered at great length by this Court in the case of Shri Subhash Chand (supra), wherein the learned single Judge took into consideration a catena of judgments on the said issue including the following :-  (i) State of Madras v. CP Sarathy, 1953 SCR 334 : (AIR 1953 SC 53).
(ii) State of Bombay v. KP Krishnan & Ors., AIR 1960 SC 1223.
(iii) Bombay Union of Journalists and others v. The State of Bombay and another, AIR 1964 SC 1617.
(iv) Western India Match Co Ltd v. Western India Match Co Workers Union, (1970)3 SCR 370 : (1970 Lab IC 1033).
(v) Shambhu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, Jullundur, (1978)2 SCR 793 : (1978 Lab IC 961).
(vi) The MP Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of M.P. and another, AIR 1985 SC 860 : (1985 Lab IC 932).
(vii) Ram Avtar Sharma and others v. State of Haryana & Anr, AIR 1985 SC 915 : (1985 Lab IC 1001).
(viii) Workmen of Syndicate Bank, Madras v. Government of India and another, AIR 1985 SC 1667 : (1986 Lab IC 63).
(ix) Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh and another v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1565 : (1989 Lab IC 1546).
8.
The facts of the case of Subhash Chand (supra) and the question that arose for consideration therein are squarely applicable to the facts of the present case as also the issue that arises for consideration herein, since the appropriate Government therein had also rejected the claim of the petitioner workmen on the ground of delay and had refused to refer the matter for adjudication.
After having referred to various decisions of the Supreme Court and High Courts on the issue and after having traced the development of law in this regard, it was observed as under :  "20.
Reading of the above judgments of the highest Court of the land show that provisions of Section 10 of the Act were construed not quite liberally.
The jurisdiction of the State Government was stated to be an administrative function and not a judicial or quasi judicial function.
Formation of an opinion under Section 10(1) of the Act was relatable to whether an industrial dispute existed or is apprehended.
'It was not the same thing as to adjudicate the dispute itself on merits'.
In other words, the appropriate Government was not competent to travel beyond the limits of forming a prima facie opinion with regard to existence of the dispute or that an industrial dispute was apprehended.
The Government was not competent to directly or indirectly determine the merits of the dispute.
Formation of an opinion without encroaching upon the domain of adjudication was the essence of powers vested under Section 10(1) of the Act.
21.
The Industrial Law, developed as a result of subsequent amendments to the Act as well as by judicial pronouncements by different Courts, is having far reaching effects on the various facets of this law.
Section 11(a) was incorporated in the Act by Section 3 of the Industrial Disputes Amendment Act, 1971 with effect from 15th December, 1971.
The purpose of this amendment was primarily to enlarge the scope of the adjudication process before the Industrial Court or Tribunal and vest powers of wider magnitude in the Courts.
The basic intent was to prevent the unfair labour practice by the Management and to ensure that the workman was not subjected to victimisation.
This Section really did not effect the power of the Government under Section 10(1) of the Act in relation to refer or not to refer the industrial dispute to the Labour Court or Tribunal in exercise of its administrative power.
One obvious conclusion of this amendment is that a workman can also claim a reference even with regard to the quantum of punishment even in a case of proven misconduct.
He could raise an issue that the punishment inflicted upon him was ex facie disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct.
The Government would have hardly any jurisdiction to decline a reference even of this kind within the purview and scope of the provisions of Section 10 of the Act.
.... .... ...... .... ...... ..... ....... ...... 25.
It will be appropriate to conclude that the dimensions of the powers vested in the appropriate Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act are wide which require proper application of mind in consonance with the above enunciated principles but in no way the appropriate Government could usurp or abdicate to itself the powers of determination which are exclusively vested in the Labour Court/Tribunal.
Long delays by itself may not be sufficient to deny the reference requested for by the workman unless it is so seriously prejudicial to the other party to result in unfair unjust advantage to the workman and would permit the workman to take undue advantage of his own conduct or the dispute is so belated and stale that in the eyes of law it has extinguished or lost its substance."
9.
The observations of the Karnataka High Court in this regard are also noteworthy.
In the case of Gurumurthy (supra), again considering the issue of dismissal of the claim petition by the appropriate Government on the ground of delay, it was held as under:  "5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner also relied on the judgment of this Court in L Narayanappa v. State of Karnataka and Anr., WA No. 1219 of 1990, dt. 31-7-1991 wherein this Court has held that it is not open to the Government to reject the Reference either on the ground of delay or that the enquiry was not held properly etc. because these functions are within the domain of the adjudicating authority on a Reference.
Taking all these circumstances into consideration I am of the view that the Government does not pass a judicial or a quasi judicial order while rejecting the Reference and the Government cannot refuse Reference on the ground of delay alone.
I am respectfully bound by the Division Bench Decision of this Court (WA No. 1219 of 1990, dt. 31-7-1991) referred to above.
However, in this particular case the reason given for the delay has not been properly explained by the Government.
In these circumstances there will be a Writ of Certiorari quashing Annexure-F and a direction directing the Government to reconsider the matter afresh in accordance with law.
The Government will pass appropriate orders within a period of two months from the date of commencement of this Order.
Petition is disposed of accordingly.
There will no order as to costs."
10.
What flows from the above mentioned cases is that, while exercising power under Section 10(1) of the Act, the function of the appropriate Government is an administrative function and not a judicial or quasi-judicial function, and that in performing this administrative function, the Government cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of the lis, which would certainly be in excess of the powers conferred on it by Section 10 of the Act.
In the present case, the act of the appropriate Government in rejecting the claim of the petitioner workmen and declining to refer the dispute for adjudication amounts to going into the merits of the matter, and the same is not within the powers of the appropriate Government.
Also, the factum of delay, if any, is an issue which is to be considered by the Industrial Adjudicator and not the appropriate Government.
Such delay can be taken into consideration by the Industrial Adjudicator at the time of answering the reference.
11.
In view of the aforesaid discussion and in light of the settled law in this regard, the order passed by the respondent No. 1, dated 15th June, 1998, is quashed and the respondent No. 1 is directed to consider the case of the petitioners in accordance with law and refer the dispute for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court in accordance with the provisions of Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, preferably within six weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
12.
In terms of the aforesaid directions, the petition is allowed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.