Bhaskar Bhattacharya, ACJ.
- By this writ application the State of West Bengal has prayed for setting aside three different orders passed by the State Administrative Tribunal, 1) the order dated June 18, 1998 in OA No. 245 of 1998, 2) the order dated July 10, 2003 passed in OA No. 7960 of 1998 and 3) the order dated April 13, 2004 passed in RA, No. 1 of 2004.
2.
The facts giving rise to filing of this application may be summed up thus :  The respondents 22 in number, filed an application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act before the State Administrative Tribunal complaining various irregularities in the manner of giving appointment from a panel prepared by the State of West Bengal for the purpose of filling up the vacant post of the Veterinary Field Assistant/Assistant/Field Assistant under the Animal Resources Development Department, Government of West Bengal.
There is no dispute that the names of the respondents were sponsored by the local Employment Exchange in the year 1990 for the purpose of selection of the aforesaid posts and pursuant to such requisition, the respondents appeared in the written test in the year 1995 and their names found place in the panel prepared in the year 1996.
It was specifically provided that the said panel would remain alive for the next 18 months.
3.
Before the expiry of the life of the said panel, the respondents filed an application under Section 19 of the Act before the State Administrative Tribunal being OA No. 245 of 1998 and ultimately, by an order dated June 18, 1998, the Tribunal disposed of the said application by directing the State of West Bengal not to invalidate the panel till the same was exhausted and all the candidates included in the said panel were offered appointment.
The State of West Bengal was further directed to see that the persons included in the panel were offered employment according to the seniority in the panel with further direction that no appointment to the post of Veterinary Field Assistant/Field Assistant should be given except from the said panel till it was exhausted and that the age would not be a bar in giving appointment.
It may not be out of place to mention here that although the State of West Bengal entered appearance, ultimately, did not contest the application.
4.
Subsequently, the respondents filed another application under Section 19 of the Act before the Tribunal thereby praying for fixing a time limit for giving appointment to the successful respondents from the panel.
Such application gave rise to OA No. 7960 of 1998 and the Tribunal by order dated July 10, 2003 disposed of the same by giving leave to the respondents to withdraw the said application with liberty to file an application for contempt for redressal of their grievance with specific observation that the law of limitation should not act as a bar for filing such application for contempt.
5.
The State of the West Bengal thereafter filed an application for review of the order dated June 18, 1998 passed by the Tribunal which gave rise to RA.
No. 1 of 2004 along with an application for condonation of delay in filing such application.
The learned Tribunal by order dated April 13, 2004 dismissed the said application not only on the ground of limitation but also on merit.
6.
By the present writ application, the State of West Bengal has challenged not only the order dated June 18, 1998 passed by the Tribunal but also the subsequent two orders, dated July 10, 2003 and April 13, 2004 passed by the Tribunal as indicated above.
7.
Mr. Mukhopadhyay, the learned Junior Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of West Bengal has vehemently contended before us that the Tribunal by the first order dated June 18, 1998 passed a patent wrong order by directing the State Government to give employment from the panel of about 162 persons prepared in the year 1996 although the number of vacancy at the time of advertisement was not more than 50.
Mr. Mukhopadhyay further contends that his client bona fide contested the second proceedings initiated by the respondents for affixing a time limit for giving employment and when the said application was withdrawn with liberty to file an application for contempt, his client was advised to file an application for review, as a result, the order dated June 18, 1998 could not be challenged earlier.
Mr. Mukhopadhyay, thus, prays for setting aside the original order dated June 18, 1998 as well as the two subsequent orders.
8.
The present application is seriously contested by Mrs. Mukherjee, the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the private respondents.
Mrs. Mukherjee contends that this Court should not entertain the present writ application filed after long lapse of eight years for the purpose of challenging an order passed in the year 1998 when the State respondents were aware that already such a direction was passed in favour of her clients.
Mr. Mukherjee contends that the State of West Bengal decided not to contest the proceeding initiated in the year 1998 and in view of specific order of the Tribunal, directing the State Government to give appointment to her clients, they had a legitimate expectation that they would be offered the employments, and consequently, they also did not try for any other job.
In other words, Mrs. Mukherjee contends that in spite of having full knowledge of the order of the Tribunal dated June 18, 1998, the State having decided not to challenge the same till the year 2004, when an application for review was filed, it should not be permitted to challenge the previous order by filing the instant application.
Mrs. Mukherjee, therefore, prays for dismissal of this writ application.
9.
Therefore, the questions that arise for the determination in this application is whether after such a long time, this Court should entertain the present writ application and whether the original order dated June 18, 1998 and the subsequent orders are illegal justifying interference after such a long time under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
10.
As pointed out by the Supreme Court in the case of State of UP v. Raj Bahadur Singh and others, reported in (1998)8 SCC 685, there being no period of limitation prescribed for filing an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, for entertaining a belated application, all that is required by High Court is to see whether the laches on the part of the applicant is such as to disentitle him to the relief claimed.
The rule, which says that the Court may not enquire into the belated and stale claim, is not a rule of law but a rule of practice based on sound and proper exercise of discretion.
The principle on which the relief to a party on the ground of laches or delay is denied is that the right, which had accrued to the third parties by reason of delay in filing the petition, should not be allowed to disturb unless there is reasonable explanation of delay.
The real test to determine delay in such cases is that the petitioner should come to Court before a parallel right is created in favour of a third party and the lapse of time is not attributable to any laches and negligence.
(See M/s. Dehri Rohtas Railway Company Limited v. District Board, Bhojpur, reported in A.I.R. 1993 SC 802 at 805.)
11.
Bearing in mind the previously mentioned principle, we now proceeded to decide whether the State should be deprived of its right to challenge the order of the Tribunal for the simple reason that the order of 1998 is sought to be challenged in the year 2006.
12.
In the case before us, after the passing of the order dated June 118, 1998, the private respondents filed another application under Section 19 of the Act thereby praying for fixing a time limit for compliance of the earlier order passed by the Tribunal.
The said application under Section 19 of the Act was very much contested by the State-respondent till the year 2003, when the Tribunal gave liberty to the respondents to withdraw the second application, and to file a fresh application for contempt with further observation that the law of limitation would not be a bar in maintaining such application.
Subsequently, the State respondent filed an application for review of the order dated June 18, 1998 in the year 2004 along with an application for condonation of delay.
According to the Rules framed by the State Government, there is no period of limitation fixed for filing any application for review.
We have already pointed out that the application for review has been dismissed not only on the ground of limitation but also on merit and all the previously mentioned three orders are the subject-matter of challenge before us in this writ application.
13.
Since the present writ application has been filed challenging three different orders, the first one of the year 1998, the second one of the year 2003 and the last one in the year 2004, we first propose to take into consideration the order dated April 13, 2004 by which the application for review of the order dated June 18, 1998 was dismissed both on the ground of bar of limitation and also on merit.
14.
We have already pointed out that for the purpose of filing an application for review, there is no period of limitation prescribed in the Statutory Rules framed by the State Government.
Therefore, the observation of the Tribunal that the application was not filed within the period of limitation fixed by the Statute was on the face of it wrong.
There was even no necessity of filing any application for condonation of delay by treating the period of limitation as 30 days as provided in the Limitation Act for filing an application under Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In such a situation, it was the duty of the Tribunal to see whether any parallel right has intervened for the laches or in action on the part of the applicant.
The total approach in dealing with application for condonation was, therefore, wrong.
Since the Tribunal has also gone into merit, we instead of remanding the matter to the Tribunal after such a long time, propose to examine the reasons assigned by the Tribunal in rejecting the application for review on merit.
15.
The Tribunal has observed that the applicant did not come up with any new material, which they discovered subsequently.
As regards the question whether there was an error apparent on the face of record, the Tribunal was of the view that the applicant came before the Tribunal for changing the entire text of the order, which was possible only by way of appeal.
The Tribunal, in that fashion, rejected the application on merit.
16.
It is now a settled law that if a Court or Tribunal while passing final order ignores the decision of the Supreme Court and comes to any conclusion in conflict with the existing decision of the Supreme Court, such mistake amounts to an error apparent on the face of record.
(See : C.S.T.
v. Pine Chemicals Limited, reported in (1995)1 SCC 58).
17.
In the case before us, the Tribunal while passing the original order dated June 18, 1998 totally over-looked the face that it could not pass a direction for giving employment to all the empanelled candidates beyond the sanctioned vacant post at the time of advertisement or the vacancy indicated in the advertisement as the case may be.
It appears from the record that all the respondents before us ranked below 50 in the panel whereas at the time of advertisement, the existing vacancy was not above 50.
The Tribunal, therefore, in the year 1998 couldn't pass a direction for taking all the persons from the panel of about 162 persons and restraining the State Government from appointing any person so long the panel was not exhausted.
Such direction encroached upon the right of the citizens who acquired qualification for getting the job in question at a subsequent point of time.
In this connection, reference may be made to the following Supreme Court decisions :  (1) Gujarat State Dy.
Executive Engineers Associations v. State of Gujarat, reported in 1994 Supp (2) SCC 591 (2) State of UP v. Raj Kumar Sharma, reported in (2006)3 SCC 330.
18.
We, therefore, find that the Tribunal ignoring the aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court passed direction for giving employment to all the persons in the panel although the existing vacancies had already been filled up and the life of the panel had expired.
Such decision is in direct conflict with the previously mentioned decisions of the Supreme Court and thus, there was error apparent on the face of the order dated June 18, 1998 passed by the Tribunal.
As regards the question of limitation, we have already held that the approach of the Tribunal was totally wrong as if there is a fixed period of limitation for filing such application for review.
We are of the view that for the delay in filing the application for review, no parallel right had accrued in favour of any third party; on the other hand, the order of the Tribunal dated June 18, 1998 passed by the Tribunal.
As regards the question of limitation, we have already held that the approach of the Tribunal was totally wrong as if there is a fixed period of limitation for filing such application for review.
We are of the view that for the delay in filing the application for review, no parallel right had accrued in favour of any third party, on the other hand, the order of the Tribunal dated June 18, 1998 infringed the fundamental right of various young persons who acquired the requisite qualification between the year 1990 and onwards.
Moreover, it was not a case of total inaction on the part of the State Government as it appears from the fact that the State contested the second application under Section 19 of the Act successfully up to the year 2003 and when the Tribunal permitted the respondents to withdraw the said application with liberty to file an application for contempt, the State took decision to file an application for review, of the order dated June 18, 1998.
We, therefore, find that it is a fit case where the application for review should be allowed by setting aside the direction contained in the order dated June 18, 1998.
19.
Once we hold that the application for review should be allowed and the original application under Section 19 of the Act on which the order dated June 18, 1998 was passed should be set aside, there is no necessity of further challenging the original order dated June 18, 1998.
20.
As regards the order dated July 10, 2003 passed in OA No. 7960 of 1998, we find that the Tribunal while giving liberty to the respondents to withdraw the application under Section 19 of the Act could not hold that their future application for contempt would not stand to scrutiny of the provision of the period of limitation prescribed under the Statute.
Whether the application for contempt sought to be filed subsequently would be barred by limitation or whether the applicant will get the benefit of condonation would be decided by the Tribunal when such application will be filed, but a Tribunal, permitting a litigant to withdraw an application under Section 19 of the Act, cannot pass a direction upon the Co-ordinate Bench of the Tribunal not to apply the period of limitation fixed by Statute for the purpose of dealing with a future application for contempt.
We, therefore, set aside the said order dated July 10, 2003 by which the aforesaid observation was made.
21.
We, consequently, find that the order dated July 10, 2003 passed in OA No. 7960 of 1998 and the order dated April 13, 2004 passed in RA.
No. 1 of 2004 should be set aside.
In view of our order, goes without saying, the original order dated June 18, 1998 has lost its significance.
22.
We have found that the 22 respondents, who are unemployed youths are fighting the litigation for last eight years and if the State of West Bengal contested the first application being OA No. 245 of 1998 or straightway challenged the order dated June 18, 1998 earlier without contesting the subsequent application under Section 19 of the Act being OA No. 7960 of 1998, the respondents would have known their fate much earlier.
23.
In such circumstances, we propose to allow the present writapplication as indicated above provided the State/Petitioner pays costs of Rs. 1,000/- to each of the respondents as penalty for not contesting the first application without any reason and for committing delay in making the present application.
Such costs be paid within a month from today; by Account Payee Cheques to be handed over to Mrs. Mukherjee, their learned advocate; in default, this writ application will stand dismissed.
Kishore Kumar Prasad, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.