Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioners are questioning the decision of the Director of School Education, West Bengal dated April 7th, 2006 rejecting their applications seeking mutual transfer.
2.
The first petitioner, on being selected and recommended by the school service commission, was appointed as an assistant teacher of Zoology in Deopara Champamoni High School., Bankura on August 16th, 2002.
The second petitioner was also selected by the school service commission, and on receipt of requisite recommendation for appointment as an assistant teacher of Zoology, the authority of Raghunathbari RT High School, Purba Medinipur appointed her on October 31st, 2000.
They requested the schools to allow their mutual transfer.
The matter was ultimately referred to the director of school education, who, by the impugned decision, rejected the request.
3.
Counsel argues that the director wrongfully recorded in his decision that orders of this court previously made (including order made by Prabir Kumar Samanta, J) were not produced before him for consideration.
He is unable to produce the orders before me.
He argues that when in the past the director permitted mutual transfers in compliance with orders made by this court in the respective writ petitions, there was no reason to refuse the same benefit to the petitioners I find that the director rejected the request principally on the ground that the appointments given to the petitioners being school specific, there was no scope to permit any mutual transfer.
4.
The whole question for decision is whether the petitioners were legally entitled to seek mutual transfer from their respective schools.
They were selected by the school service commission which is the authority to recruit, select and recommend candidates for appointment as assistant teachers in secondary schools in the state.
It was established in terms of provisions in the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997.
The recruitment processes are initiated by it keeping in view the notified vacancies, and the selected candidates are recommended according to their area wise options, on the basis of their respective merit position in the panel of selected candidates.
On recommendation the school concerned is to offer appointment, and if the selected candidate accepts the offer, he becomes a member of the teaching staff of the school concerned.
5.
Under no provision of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963, and the Management of Recognized Non- government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) Rules, 1969, there is no dispute that both the schools are governed by those legislations, a member of the teaching staff of a particular school is entitled to seek transfer to any other school.
The school authority, the employer, has no power either to transfer a member of its staff to any other school.
A member of the teaching staff of a secondary school is at liberty to take the examination of the commission again and again for getting better appointments by securing better merit positions.
For accepting a better appointment the teacher concerned has to tender resignation to his existing employer.
It is therefore clear that neither of the petitioners had any statutory or other enforceable right to seek mutual transfer.
6.
The director noticed the situation and held that there was no scope to make an order permitting their mutual transfer.
In my view, in the absence of their any legal right to get the benefit of mutual transfer, the court cannot make an order creating such right, simply because in the opinion of the court a mutual transfer will alleviate their difficulties.
In the absence of any power conferred on the director to mutual transfer, the court cannot direct him to do so, as the court cannot create any confer power.
To my mind, an order, if made by the court for the purpose, will be without any legal basis.
Illegality, if any, committed by the director in any case in the past cannot be the basis for making an illegal order by the court.
I repeat that no binding precedent has been cited to me in support of the contention that petitioners are entitled to seek mutual transfer.
7.
For these reasons, I hold that the petitioners have failed to make out any prima facie case for admitting the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.