Prafulla C Pant, J - By means of this writ petition, the petitioner has sought writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the proceedings of summary court martial held against the petitioner whereby he appears to have been dismissed from service.
2.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
3.
Brief facts of the case, as narrated in the writ petition, are that the petitioner joined Corps of Engineers as a Sapper/Cook on 24071997, and number allotted to him was 1494780W.
Later, he was a promoted to the rank of Lance Naik/Cook.
During the year 2004-05 the petitioner was posted with 60 Engineer Regiment.
On 19022005, the petitioner was attached with 10 Engineer Regiment, where he was tried by a summary court martial on 23rd February 2005, on the charge sheet (copy Annexure-1 to the writ petition).
The charge sheet discloses that the petitioner allegedly committed civil offence of house breaking by night in order to commit an offence punishable with imprisonment.
The charge sheet further includes absence from duty without leave.
After the summary court martial proceedings, the petitioner was dismissed from service.
Challenging the same in view of the provisions contained in Section 116 and 120 of the Army Act, 1950, it is alleged that proceedings of summary court martial got vitiated as the petitioner was attached to a Unit different from the Unit to which he belonged and the Commanding Officer of the Unit where he was attached had no jurisdiction to conduct the proceedings of summary court martial.
In this connection, petitioner relied on the case laws of Havildar Mahipal Singh v. Union of India and others, reported in 1994 (8) SLR 434 and Ex. Havildar KP Pandey v Union of India and others, reported in 104 (2003) Delhi Law Times 442 (DB).
4.
The respondents contested the petition and filed their counter affidavit in which it has been stated that though the petitioner belonged to 60 Engineer Regiment, but he was working since 24th December 2004, at BGS Residence, Head Quarters 4 Corps, which is nearby 10 Engineer Regiment.
In the intervening night of 4th and 5th of February 2005, petitioner committed the disgraceful act by entering in the rear balcony of Major Anuj Bhatnagar respondent where his wife was staying alone with his minor child.
With evil thoughts in his mind, petitioner committed this act twice, firstly, at about 0030 hrs., and again at 0230 hrs.
The matter was reported to the higher authorities.
A summary court martial proceeding was held against the petitioner and during the trial he admitted having committed the offence and on conclusion of the proceedings he was dismissed from service.
In the counter affidavit it is further stated that in the Army, there are numerous occasions when the families have to live alone because of the operational commitments of the husbands.
Defending the punishment awarded to the petitioner, it is stated in the counter affidavit that there is no jurisdictional error committed by the Commanding Officer.
In this connection, it is further stated that the Commanding Officer of the Unit where an individual is attached, is the Commanding Officer of the employee, in view of the Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter No. B/80328/JAG/1965/ 2001-D (AG) dated 28th August 2001.
It is further stated on behalf of the respondents in their counter affidavit that Note 5 to Section 120 of the Army Act, 1950 was deleted vide letter dated 28082001, and as such, the protection of the Note is not available to the petitioner.
The judgments referred in the writ petition are said to be not applicable to the present case.
5.
Learned Central Government Counsel raised preliminary objection that under Section 164 of the Army Act, 1950, the petitioner should have sought his remedy before the higher authorities.
In reply to this (Lt. Col) Lalit Kumar, Advocate for the petitioner rightly pointed out that since matter pertaining to the petitioner was of a summary court martial, which did not require any confirmation from the higher authority, as such, the writ petition, on the ground that the petitioner did not petitioned before the confirming authority, cannot be thrown out.
6.
Before further discussions, it is pertinent to mention here, the relevant provision of law applicable to this case.
Section 116 of the Army Act, 1950, reads as under :  "116.
Summary court-martial.- (1) A summary court-martial may be held by the commanding officer of any corps, department or detachment of the regular Army, and he shall alone constitute the court.
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or junior commissioned officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed."
Section 120 of the same Act, reads as under : "116.
Powers of summary court-martial.
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a summary court-martial may try any offence punishable under this Act.
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference can without detriment to discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a district court-martial or on active service a summary general court-martial for the trial of the alleged offender, an officer holding a summary court-martial shall not try without such reference any offence punishable under any of the sections 34, 37 and 69, or any offence against the officer holding the court.
(3) A summary court-martial may try any person subject to this Act and under the command of the officer holding the court, except an officer, junior commissioned officer or warrant officer.
(4) A summary court-martial may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act, except a sentence of death or transportation, or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub-section (5).
(5) The limit referred to in sub-section (4) shall be one year if the officer holding the summary court-martial is of the rank of lieutenant-colonel and upwards, and three months, if such officer is below that rank."
Earlier there used to be a Note, numbered 5, appended to above Section 120, which read as under :  5.
A NCO (non Commissioned Officer) or a sepoy cannot be attached to another unit for the purpose of his trial by SCM (Summary Court Martial) except as provided in para 381 of the Army Regulations.
Para 381 of the Army Regulations, reads as under :  "381.
Trial of Desserts.-Under normal circumstances trial by summary court martial for desertion will be held by the CO of the unit of the deserter.
However, when a deserter or an absentee from a unit shown in column one of the table below surrenders to, or is taken over by, the unit shown opposite in column two and is properly attached to and taken on the strength of the latter unit he may, provided evidence, particularly evidence of identification, is available with the latter unit, be tried by summary court- martial by the CO of that unit when the unit shown in column one is serving in high altitude area or overseas or engaged in counter-insurgency operation or active hostilities or Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
In no circumstances will a man be tried by summary court-martial held by a CO other than the CO of the unit to which the man properly belongs; a unit to which the man may be attached subsequent to commission of the offence by him will also be a unit to which the man properly belongs.
Column one  Column two Armoured Corps Regiment  Armoured Corps Centre and School.
A unit of Artillery  Regimental Centre Concerned  A unit of Engineers  Headquarters Engineers Group, concerned A unit of Signals  Signal Training Centre, Jabalpur Infantry battalion  Regimental Centre concerned Gorkha Rifle battalion  Gorkha Regimental Centre concerned ASC unit  ASC Centre concerned  RV Corps  RVC Centre  7.
Referring to above Note 5 to Section 120 of the Army Act, 1950 and Regulations 381, quoted above, and relying on principle of law laid down in Ex. Havildar KP Pandey v Union of India and others, reported in 104 (2003) Delhi Law Times 442 (DB) and Havildar Mahipal Singh v. Union of India and others, reported in 1994 (8) SLR 434, (Lt. Col.) Lalit Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner, contended that since the petitioner belonged to 60 Engineer Regiment and the Commanding Officer of that regiment was the competent Commanding Officer to hold the summary court martial and not the Commanding Officer of the Unit where he was attached.
8.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court is of the view that had the Note 5 to Section 120, quoted above, not deleted before the impugned summary court martial proceedings, the aforesaid case laws and the Note would have helped the petitioner, but as pointed by learned Central Government Counsel, it is found that said Note 5 has already been deleted, as is clear from Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter dated 28th August 2001, a copy of which is Annexure CA 2 to the counter affidavit.
Learned counsel for the petitioner at this stage referred to the contents of para 4 of the rejoinder affidavit, filed on behalf of the petitioner, and argued that deletion of Note 5 to Section 120 does not make a difference in the case, as the Note was explanatory one.
In the opinion of this Court, if the Note was explanatory to Section 120, than all the more the same does not carry the mandatory force in it, nor can the violation of contents of said Note could vitiate the trial.
This Court does not want to go in to go in that controversy for the reasons that the Delhi High Court in the aforementioned cases has held that if spirit of Note 5 is not complied with, as provided in it, the summary court martial proceedings get vitiated.
Both the cases referred above, relate to the period prior to 28th August 2001, when said Note 5 did form part of the Notes to Section 120.
However, after aforesaid date, this Note itself has been deleted by issuing fresh Army orders, as such, the spirit of said Note is no more available to the petitioner.
That being so, the summary court martial proceedings against the petitioner cannot be said to be illegal or erroneous in law, nor does it require interference by this Court to quash the same, particularly, when the proceedings show that the petitioner was given due opportunity and he himself admitted the guilt before the summary court martial.
Apart from what has been discussed above-it is also pertinent to mention here that in para 2 of Regulations 381, it is clearly mentioned that the Unit to which the man may be attached subsequent to the commission of the offence by him will also be a Unit of which the man properly belong.
Learned cousnel for the petitioner in this connection submitted that the said provision in Army Regulations 381, should be read for the purposes of trial of deserters, only.
In the opinion of this Court, though, the heading of the said Regulation is `Trial of Deserters', but reading of whole of the para of Regulation 381, makes it clear that an absentee from Unit is also to be dealt in the manner provided in the Regulation.
Needless to say, that one of the charge against the petitioner is absence from duty, without leave.
9.
For the reasons as discussed above, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
The writ petition is dismissed.
(All pending applications in this Petition also stand disposed of).
Petition dismissed.