SD Anand, J - Learned counsel for the appellant indicated, at the very outset, that he does not contest the validity of the impugned enquiry proceedings but would confine his relief to the question of disproportionate character of the punishment.
2.
A 10% cut in the pension of the plaintiff-appellant was ordered by the Competent Authority following his indictment on charges alleging, inter alia, that he did not report for duty in pursuance of the transfer orders and that he opted instead to go to the Court of law.
It was argued that the penalty imposed is highly disproportionate, inasmuch as there was no other adverse entry otherwise in the service record of the plaintiff-appellant and no economic loss is even averred to have been caused to the respondent-State by non-joining of duty by the appellant.
3.
I have heard Mr. Surinder Sharma, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. Palwinder Singh, Senior DAG Punjab for the respondents and have carefully gone through the file.
4.
It is beyond the pale of controversy that the plaintiff-appellant retired, on superannuation, from service on 31121998.
The charge-sheet was served upon him on 211999.
On conclusion of the enquiry, the impugned penalty was imposed upon him on 14122000.
Thus, it is obvious that no order, in the context of the impugned penalty, came to be passed against the plaintiff- appellant before his retirement.
5.
Learned State counsel has also not been able to invite the attention of this Court to any order which may have been passed by the Competent Authority (before the retirement of the plaintiff-appellant) to continue the proceedings after the retirement of the appellant.
In fact, no proceedings had been initiated against him before his retirement.
The legal position, in the context, was authoritatively laid down by Patna High Court in Sachchidanand Singh v. State of Bihar, 2000(3) SCT 914.
Reliance, in support of that view, was placed by Patna High Court upon a number of judicial pronouncements including those rendered by the Apex Court.
6.
A suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant for invalidation of the impugned orders was decreed by the learned Trial Court, vide judgment and decree dated 382005.
The first appeal against that judgment and decree was rejected by the learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, vide judgment and decree dated 13112006.
7.
Though, normally this Court would be reluctant to interfere in the manner of exercise of discretion by the Competent Authority on point of imposition of punishment, this Court cannot be oblivious of the attendant facts if it is apparent that the punishment imposed is unconscionable and thoroughly disproportionate to the proven charge.
I also have serious legal reservations about whether the respondent State was not rendering itself open to the charge of contempt of Court by charging the appellant for having gone to the Court of law against the impugned transfer order.
It also requires notice that the respondents ordered the transfer of the appellant only before a fortnight of his retirement.
There is not even an indication that the movement of the appellant at that point of time would have served any public purpose.
In the normal course of things, the rules provide that a man nearing retirement ought to be posted at the place of his choice or should not at least be transferred from his current station of posting.
That rule has an evident purpose to serve.
The basic underlying idea is that the public servant, who is due to retire, should be able to settle down after due deliberation.
The learned First Appellate Court has recorded adequate reasons in support of its order of concurrence.
8.
However, I find that the imposition of a penalty which is highly disproportionate and unconscionable in character raises a substantial question of law which I have framed in this case.
9.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, though the judgment and decree of the learned Trial Court and the learned First Appellate Court shall stand affirmed on the point of validity of the impugned enquiry proceedings, the orders passed by the latter Court shall stand modified to the extent that the respondent-State shall only deny wages to the plaintiff-appellant for the period he did not function on duty, consequent upon his transfer.
The 10% cut in his pension shall stand invalidated.
10.
In the light of foregoing discussion, the present Regular Second Appeal is devoid of force and is ordered to be dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.