We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the order dated 832006 (Annexure P-13) passed by the respondents rejecting the claim of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds.
Husband of the petitioner died whilst in service on 3092002.
He is survived by his wife (petitioner), two major sons and a daughter.
The elder son is already employed, but lives separately.
The respondents took into consideration the assets and liabilities of the deceased.
The family of the deceased was not found to be living in indigent condition and the request of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds was rejected by order dated 832006 (Annexure P-13).
In the order, it is stated that an objective assessment of the financial condition of the family was made taking into account its assets and liabilities, including the family pension and retiral benefits received by the family.
It was also observed that the children are grown up and are able to sustain themselves.
They have completed their education.
There is no expense being incurred by the family on education etc. Keeping in view all these factors, the respondents have come to the conclusion that family is not considered to be living in penury.
It is further stated that the BSNL is following DOPT guidelines, according to which, while ascertaining the financial condition of the family of the ex official, the family pension and other retiral benefits are also to be taken into consideration along with all other relevant factors.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner has been wrongly denied the benefit of appointment on compassionate grounds of her son by taking into consideration the retiral benefits given to the family members of the deceased employee.
In support of this submission, learned counsel relies on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Balbir Kaur and another v. Steel Authority of India Limited, 2000(2) SCT 899 (SC) : JT 2000(7) SC 135; Govind Parkash Verma v. Life Insurance Corporation, 2005 SCC (L&S) 590 and Union of India v. Daraupadi Behara, 2005 SCC (L&S) 267.
4.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the paper-book.
The claim of the petitioner has been rejected by the respondents under the "Scheme for Compassionate Appointment" which admittedly governs the parameters on which the claim for appointment on compassionate grounds can be considered.
The object of the Scheme is as under :-  "1.
Object  The object of the Scheme is to grant appointment on compassionate grounds to a dependent family member of a Government servant dying in harness or who is retired on medical grounds, thereby leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood, to relieve the family of the Government servant concerned from financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency."
Clause 5 of the aforesaid Scheme provides as under :-  "5.
Eligibility (a) The family is indigent and deserves immediate assistance for relief from financial destitution; and (b) Applicant for compassionate appointment should be eligible and suitable for the post in all respects under the provisions of the relevant Recruitment Rules."
Clause 10(a) of the Scheme further provides as under :-  "10(a) In deserving cases even where there is already an earning member in the family, a dependent family member may be considered for compassionate appointment with prior approval of the Secretary of the Department/Ministry concerned who, before approving such appointment, will satisfy himself that grant of compassionate appointment is justified having regard to number of dependents, assets and liabilities left by the Government servant, income of the earning members as also his liabilities including the fact that the earning member is residing with the family of the Government servant and whether he should not be a source of support to other members of the family."
5.
It is under the aforesaid Clauses that the claim of the petitioner was evaluated.
The respondents have come to the conclusion that the family of the deceased has not been left in penury due to the death of the employee or without any means of livelihood.
It has also been observed that the family is not indigent and does not deserve immediate assistance for relief from financial destitution.
The respondents have taken into consideration the relevant factors in determining the claim of the petitioner.
Provisions contained in the aforesaid Scheme have not been challenged by the petitioner.
She is rather claiming the benefit of the Scheme.
6.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Govind Parkash Verma (supra) has been rendered on the interpretation of Rule 212(iii) of the Life Insurance Corporation Rules, 1956 which would be applicable to the employees of the LIC.
The judgment in the case of Balbir Kaur (supra) pertains to the interpretation of the Family Benefit Scheme as introduced in NJSC (NJCS) Tripartite Agreement of 1989 and the consequences thereof on the existing welfare measures as contained in NJSC (NJCS) Agreement in 1983.
It was held that the 1989 agreement did not take away the existing rights of the employees for seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
In such circumstances, it was held that NJSC (NJCS) Agreement being a Tripartite Agreement expressly preserves the 1982 circular to the effect that any benefit conferred by the earlier circular shall continue to be effective.
Therefore, it was held that the relief could not be denied to the writ petitioners.
We are of the opinion that the aforesaid judgments relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner are not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In our opinion, the matter is squarely covered by the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 138.
In the aforesaid case, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "2.
The question relates to the considerations which should guide while giving appointment in public services on compassionate ground.
It appears that there has been a good deal of obfuscation on the issue.
As a rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
However, an exception, out of pure humanitarian considerations has been made in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
A provision is, therefore, made to enable the family to make both ends meet.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for the post held by the deceased.
Furthermore, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Classes III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such lowest posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is not discriminatory.
The favourable treatment given to such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz., relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected or required to be given by the public authorities for the purpose.
It must be remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
The exception to the rule made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment which are suddenly upturned."
7.
The aforesaid observations have been specifically approved and followed in the case of Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar and another, 1996(2) SCT 778 (SC) : 1996(1) RSJ 792.
In the aforesaid case, the Supreme Court whilst approving the observations made by the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra), also considered the ratio of an unreported decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1996(2) SCT 207 (SC) : C.A.
No. 10682 of 1995, decided on 13111995.
In that case, the question of appointment on compassionate ground to an applicant who was four year old at the time when his father an ex-employee died in harness, came up for consideration.
It was contended before the Supreme Court that since the appellant was minor when the father died in harness, the compassionate circumstances having continued till the date he made an application for appointment, he was entitled to be appointed on compassionate ground.
Such contention was not accepted by the Court below and upholding the rejection of such claim for appointment, the Supreme Court has indicated to the following effect :-  "The very object of appointment of a dependent of the deceased employees who die in harness is to relieve unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family.
Since the death occurred way back in 1971, in which year, the appellant was four years old, it cannot be said that he is entitled to be appointed after he attained majority long thereafter.
In other words, if that contention is accepted, it amounts to another made of recruitment of the dependent of a deceased Government servant which cannot be encouraged, de hors the recruitment rules."
8.
A perusal of the aforesaid observations clearly shows that the Supreme Court has categorically held that the object or granting appointment on compassionate grounds is to enable the family of the deceased to make both ends meet.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is just to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
Mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased.
It has been further held that the High Courts in a number of cases have justified and even directed compassionate employment either as a matter of course or in posts above Classes III and IV.
Sometimes the High Court endorses the policy of the State Government to make compassionate appointment in posts equivalent to the posts held by the deceased employees and above Classes III and I .
It was held that these directions are contrary to law.
In the present case, the respondents have examined the claim of the petitioner in accordance with the policy and have come to the conclusion that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of appointment on compassionate grounds.
We see no reason to interfere with the order passed by the respondents.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.