AK Sikri, J - Delhi Transport Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the 'petitioner'), which has filed this petition, is a body corporate set up under the Delhi Road Transport Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 read with Government of India, Ministry of Shipping and Transport (Transport Wing) Notification dated November 3, 1971.
This notification was issued in exercise of powers conferred by Section 3 of the Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950 and was duly published in the Gazette of India.
The conditions of appointment of the employees of the petitioner, which is a public utility service, are governed by the DRTA (Conditions of Appointment & Service) Regulations, 1952.
It has prescribed different grades/pay-scales for different category of posts with varying qualifications and experience.
2.
As is well known, Central Government constitutes Pay Commissions from time to time for revision/rationalisation of the pay scales of the Central Government employees.
Fourth Pay Commission, which was constituted for such purpose, submitted its report and the Government accepted the recommendations of the Commission with effect from 1st January 1986.
Many employees of other Government bodies/statutory bodies wanted implementation of these recommendations in respect of their establishments also.
This was the demand of the employees of the petitioner as Well.
As their demand was not conceded by the petitioner, the workers of the DTC, through as many as six unions, raised the industrial dispute.
It was referred to the Industrial Tribunal No. 3 vide reference order dated 17th March 1988 for adjudication with the following terms of reference :-  "Whether the workmen are entitled to the benefit of Fourth Pay Commission and if so, from which date and what directions are necessary in this respect ?"
3.
On receipt of reference, notices were issued by the Industrial Tribunal to the parties concerned.
Petitioner filed written statement thereto in June 1988.
However, before filing this written statement, petitioner also filed Civil Writ No. 1001/88 and challenged the aforesaid reference as illegal and not maintainable.
4.
In the meantime, some workers' unions approached the Apex Court directly and filed writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India claiming that the revised pay-scales, as per the recommendations of the 4th Pay Commission, be extended to them as well.
Since prayer was almost identical, which was the subject-matter of the Industrial Tribunal and the Supreme Court proceeded to consider the said writ petition on merits, the petitioner filed transfer petition for transfer of the writ petition to the Supreme Court.
On this transfer petition, order dated 16th February 1989 was passed by the Supreme Court suspending further proceedings before the Industrial Tribunal, Delhi.
It appears that on the initiative taken by the Supreme Court, the Central Government ultimately decided to extend the benefit of the 4th Pay Commission pay scales to the employees of the DTC as well.
The Central Government, accordingly, issued letter dated 21st February 1991 approving the proposal.
Information to this effect was also circulated by the DTC vide circular letter dated 25th February 1991.
Operative portion of this circular letter reads as under :  "(i) All the pay-scales, existing prior to 1683 will be allowed corresponding Fourth Pay Commission pay-scales; (ii) The fixation will be related to the notional pay which would have been drawn on 1186 if the pre-June 1983 Third Pay Commission scales had continued to operate.
The fixation will be as per the procedure adopted for Central Government employees.
In other words, the benefits in emoluments already allowed to DTC employees w.e.f.
161983 will have to be ignored.
(iii) However, there will be no recovery from the employees consequent on the comparatively higher benefits of fixation having been enjoyed by them w.e.f.
161983 till the date of decision regarding the implementation of the IV Pay Commission pay-scales and allowances.
(iv) The other allowances such as DA, HRA, CCA, Washing Allowance, Conveyance Allowances etc. will be regulated as applicable to Central Government.
In view of the above approval granted by the Govt. it has been decided to extend the benefits of the IV Pay Commission scales of pay and allowances and fixation formula to DTC employees w.e.f.
111986 subject to the conditions as mentioned above and further subject to the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the writ petitions No. 320 of 1987 and 396 of 1987 pending before it.
The above orders would apply to all DTC employees who were in service as on 1186 or joined services on any date thereafter."
5.
The matter was listed thereafter before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court passed order dated 2nd April 1991 disposing of the writ petition filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, inter alia, observing that whatever may be the amounts actually payable in terms of interim reliefs, which was given to the DTC employees vide Office Order dated 7th February 1984, the employees of the DTC should neither be paid less nor more than the Government employees in the corresponding categories and disposed of the petition by giving following directions :  "7.
This means that all employees, whether retained on the original pay- scale or placed on the revised interim pay-scale during the period preceding 1186, will be placed on the pay-scale adopted as per the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission in such a way that they will be fitted exactly in positions corresponding to their positions on the earlier pay-scales.
But the corresponding positions in the new pay-scales will naturally carry better emoluments, so as to maintain parity with the Government employees in like categories.
8.
In the circumstances, we have no doubt that the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission will be fully implemented in terms thereof.
Mr. Kapil Sibal, appearing for the Corporation, assures that it will be so done.
Mr. Sibal's submission is recorded.
In the circumstances, no further order is required.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
No costs."
6.
This judgment is reported as DTC Workers' Union and others v. Delhi Transport Corporation, JT 1991(2) SC 49.
On the same day transfer petitions were also disposed of and the order passed thereon is reported as Delhi Transport Corporation v. Delhi Administration and Others, 1992(1) SCT 180 : JT 1991(2) SC 52.
This one paragraph order is in the following terms :  "These Transfer Petitions are for the transfer of Civil Writ Petition No. 1001 of 1988 pending in the High Court of Delhi and Reference ID No. 17/1988 pending before the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal No. III, Delhi.
In the light of our judgment in Writ Petition No. 320 of 1987, we have no doubt that these cases will be disposed of expeditiously in terms of what we have stated.
Accordingly, the Transfer Petitions are dismissed."
7.
After the aforesaid orders are passed by the Supreme Court, DTC filed application dated 16th September 1991 before the Industrial Tribunal enclosing therewith copies of the judgment and orders of the Supreme Court and contending that in view of these orders and implementation of the benefits of the 4th Pay Commission to the DTC employees, reference had become infructuous.
8.
DTC also filed CM No. 3421/92 in Writ Petition No. 1001/88 (whereby reference was challenged before the High Court) with identical prayer, namely, the matter had become infructuous after the passing of orders by the Central Government and disposal of their petitions by the Supreme Court.
In this CM, this Court passed the following order dated 1st September 1992 :  "The controversy in the present case appears to have been fully resolved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of DTC Workers Union & others v. Delhi Transport Corporation, reported as 1991(1) LLJ 607 (supra).
Even in the present writ petition, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has directed that the same principle which has been laid down in the aforesaid judgment would apply.
There appears to be no conflict left after such pronouncement by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the said judgment.
In the circumstances, this writ petition has become infructuous and is dismissed as such with the only direction to the Tribunal to dispose of the matter expeditiously in ID No. 17/88 in terms of the pronouncement of the Supreme Court.
No order as to costs."
9.
Matter was, thereafter, taken up by the Industrial Tribunal.
It may be useful to point out at this stage that earlier, on 19th July 1988, the Industrial Tribunal had framed the following issues in this reference :  1.
"Has this tribunal no jurisdiction as allowed in preliminary objection No. 1 of the written statement ?
2.
Is the reference bad and illegal as alleged in preliminary objection para 12 of the written statement ?
3.
Is this dispute liable to be stayed as alleged in para 23 of the preliminary objection of the written statement ?
4.
Was this reference made by the Asstt.
Labour Commissioner without there being any material before him, as alleged in preliminary para 42 of the written statement and as alleged in preliminary objection 52 of the written statement ?
5.
Is DTC Mazdoor Sangharsh Samiti registered or a recognised union ?
If not, to what effect ?
6.
Has Delhi Administration no jurisdiction to make this reference as alleged in para 7 of the written statement ?
7.
As per the terms of reference."
10.
The Industrial Tribunal, after hearing the matter, rendered its award dated 5th August 1994.
Perusal of the award would show that all other categories of the employees of the DTC were satisfied with the implementation of the Pay Commission.
However, the category of drivers still had a grievance, as, according to them, the pay scales of the 4th Pay Commission were not properly implemented in their case.
Therefore, the Industrial Tribunal confined its adjudication only qua the drivers working in the DTC.
Perusal of this award would also reveal that grievance of the drivers was that they be paid same pay-scales as given to the drivers of their category working in the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, as per the award dated 26th September 1987 rendered by the Industrial tribunal, Delhi in the case of drivers of heavy vehicles working with MCD.
11.
The Tribunal, in the impugned award, has accepted this plea of the drivers of DTC also by directing that the drivers of DTC be placed in the scale of 1200-30-1560-ED-40-2040 with effect from 1st January 1986.
Against these directions present writ petition is filed by the petitioner-DTC impugning the award dated 5th August 1994.
12.
In respect of motor vehicle drivers working in the Central Government, in the Central Secretariat to be precise, 4th Central Pay Commission had given the following recommendations which were accepted by the Central Government as well :  "XI.
MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVERS 1164 At present staff car drivers in central secretariat are in the pay- scale of Rs. 260-400.
In other offices, the drivers of light motor vehicles are in the scale of Rs. 260-350 and drivers of heavy vehicles are in the pay- scale of Rs. 320-400.
In Organisations where there is a composite fleet comprising both light and heavy vehicles, the drivers are in the pay- scale of Rs. 260-400.
The Central Government staff car drivers association has represented that the disparity in the pay-scales of drivers in ministries and other offices should be removed.
We agree and recommend that drivers of motor vehicles including staff cars in the existing scales of Rs. 260-350 and Rs. 260-400 in all offices of government may be placed in the scale of Rs. 950- 1500."
(Page 84) 13.
On reading the aforesaid recommendations it is clear that the Pay Commission was concerned with the disparity existing in the pay-scales of drivers of heavy vehicles and light motor vehicles, as there were two different pay-scales existing for them.
It was noted that although in Central Secretariat pay-scales of the drivers were Rs. 260-400, in those offices where there were drivers of only light motor vehicles, pay-scale was Rs. 260-350 and drivers of heavy vehicles were in the pay-scale of Rs. 320-400.
In the organisations where there were composite fleet comprising of both light and heavy vehicles, pay-scale of the drivers was Rs. 260-400.
The Central Government Staff Car Association had represented that this disparity be removed.
The 4th Pay Commission accepted this suggestion and recommended revised pay-scale of Rs. 950-1500 in respect of both the pre-revised pay- scales of Rs. 260-350 and Rs. 260-400.
Thus, pay-scale of drivers of staff cars and also the drivers where there was composite fleet comprising light and heavy vehicles, one revised scale of Rs. 950-1500 was suggested and accepted by the Central Government.
14.
Pre-revised pay-scales of drivers of heavy vehicles was Rs. 350-400.
Wherever pre-revised scale was Rs. 320-400, corresponding revised scale suggested by the 4th Pay Commission was Rs. 950-1500 even for those whose pre-revised scale was suggested.
It is, thus, clear that while removing the anomaly the revised pay-scales even of drivers whose pre-revised scale was Rs. 260-350 and Rs. 260-400.
To put it simply, whether pre-revised scale of the drivers was Rs. 260-400 or Rs. 260-350 and Rs. 320-400 one revised pay-scale of Rs. 950-1500 was suggested and approved by the Central Government.
In this backdrop Mr. SN Bhandari, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner DTC, submitted that when the pay-scale of drivers of DTC were also revised as Rs. 950-1500 and Office Orders issued in this behalf, nothing was left to be determined by the Industrial Tribunal and the Industrial Tribunal should have returned the reference as infructuous.
The Industrial Tribunal could not go into the exercise of comparing the pay-scales of examining the matter vis-a-vis drivers of heavy vehicles of MCD and recommending the same pay-scale as given to the drivers of heavy vehicles in the MCD, i.e. Rs. 1200-2040.
15.
Learned counsel for the workmen, on the other hand, submitted that this exercise was permissible in view of specific directions given by the Supreme Court to the effect that employees of DTC were entitled to the same pay-scale, neither less nor more, as given to the Government employees in the corresponding categories and directing that they would be placed on the pay- scales adopted as per the recommendations of 4th Pay Commission in such a way that they will be fitted exactly in position corresponding to their position in the earlier pay-scales.
He further submitted that reference had not become infructuous as the Supreme Court had given categorical direction to the Industrial Tribunal to dispose of the reference in terms of what was stated by it in order dated 2nd April 1991.
16.
After perusing the directions contained in order dated 2nd April 1991 of the Apex Court and order dated 1st September 1992 passed by this court in Civil Writ No. 1001/88, it cannot be said that Industrial Tribunal should have disposed of the matter as infructuous simpliciter.
The orders clearly obligated the Industrial Tribunal to dispose of the reference "in terms of what we (Supreme Court) have stated".
However, the more important and fundamental question is whether the exercise undertaken by the Industrial Tribunal in comparing the duties of MCD drivers and DTC drivers and directing that DTC drivers, who are running the buses, are entitled to the same pay- scale, (i.e. Rs. 1200-2040) which is given to the drivers of MCD, was permissible ?
17.
In order to appreciate the controversy and answer this question, some background facts need to be reiterated.
18.
While raising the industrial dispute, grievance of the workers' union was that they were not extended the benefits of revision of pay-scales which were recommended by the 4th Pay Commission and accepted by the Central Government in respect of its employees.
This is abundantly clear from even the terms of reference dated 17th March 1988 whereby the Industrial Tribunal was called to decide as to the workmen of the DTC were entitled to the benefit of the 4th Pay Commission.
This was a general reference in respect of all the employees.
When the Central Government itself agreed to extend the benefit of the 4th Pay Commission pay-scales to the DTC employees vide letter dated 21st February 1991 and DTC also issued circular letter dated 25th February 1991 extending this benefit, normally no further exercise was required to be undertaken by the DTC as relief claimed by the workers, subject-matter of reference, was acceded to administratively/departmentally by the DTC itself.
However, limited exercise was still necessary in view of Supreme Court orders dated 2nd April 1991.
In these orders Supreme Court had observed that "the employees of the Corporation should neither be paid less nor more than the Government employees in the corresponding categories."
It was further clarified that the employees of DTC will be placed on the pay scales adopted as per the recommendations of 4th Pay Commission "in such a way that they will be fitted exactly in positions corresponding to their positions on the earlier pay-scales.
But the corresponding positions in the new pay-scales will naturally carry better emoluments, so as to maintain parity with the Government employees in like categories."
19.
The meaning and tenor of the aforesaid directions is abundantly clear, namely, (a) employees of DTC were to be fitted in the pay-scales as recommended by the 4th Pay Commission in respect of different categories of employees; (b) in those cases where the pre-revised scales of the DTC were lesser than the pre-revised scales of their counterparts in the Government, they were to be given fitment in such a way that parity is maintained with the Government employees in the like categories.
To put it differently, in such a situation implementation was not by merely giving the corresponding pay-scale of the re-revised scale if such a pre-revised scale was lesser than the pre- revised scale enjoyed by the Government employees in like categories.
It was to be brought at par with the higher pre-revised scale and then fitment was to be given in the new pay-scale.
Because of this kind of fitment to be given, the Supreme Court had observed that the corresponding positions in the new pay-scales will naturally carry better emoluments.
The intention was to bring them at par with the Government employees in like categories, i.e. they should get the same pay-scales with effect from 1st January 1986 which the Government employees in the like categories enjoyed after the implementation of 4th Pay Commission.
The jurisdiction of Industrial Tribunal was, therefore, limited to examine this aspect alone.
20.
Before the Industrial Tribunal it was submitted that since pay-scale of the drivers, whether of staff cars or heavy vehicles, was fixed at Rs. 950- 1500 and DTC had already fixed the pay-scales of its drivers at Rs. 975-1660, recommendations were fully implemented.
However, the representative of workmen argued that in view of the observations of the Supreme Court to the effect that parity was to be maintained with the Government employees in like categories, while giving fitment to the DTC drivers, the DTC drivers were entitled to have same pay-scales as the pay-scales of drivers of the MCD, who also ply the heavy vehicles as the drivers of DTC.
This contention of the workmen found favour with the Industrial Tribunal and, therefore, Industrial Tribunal proceeded to examine this issue.
Approach of the Industrial Tribunal, in my opinion, was clearly erroneous for the following reasons :  (a) As already pointed out above, reference was limited to extension of benefit of 4th Pay Commission payscale to DTC employees.
This has been done.
(b) The limited jurisdiction, in spite of DTC's own orders, as given by the Supreme Court was to ensure that the fitment done is of such a nature that parity with the Government employees in like category is maintained.
The Supreme Court has categorically mentioned about the parity with Government employees in like categories.
As far as Government employees in the like categories are concerned, as already pointed out above, revised pay-scales suggested by them was Rs. 950-1500.
In fact, this revised pay-scale was suggested in order to remove anomaly of different pay-scales given to drivers of light motor vehicles and heavy vehicles.
(c) Industrial Tribunal, instead of examining the issue from this limited angle and to see that the corresponding pay-scales of "Government employees" proceeded to examine the pay-scales payable to the MCD employees.
(d) Further if the grievance of the DTC drivers was that they should be given the same pay-scales as enjoyed by the heavy vehicle drivers working in the DTC, that was a totally different cause of action.
It is stated at the cost of repetition that the grievance raised by the employees of the DTC was for extension of 4th Pay Commission recommendation.
It is this dispute which was specifically referred.
So far as implementation of 4th Pay Commission is concerned, it had been implemented.
It is further seen that while giving fitment of Rs. 960-1675 the drivers of DTC were given the pay-scale which was not even equivalent but little higher than the pay-scale granted to the Government employees in the corresponding category.
If these drivers still wanted higher pay-scale or their contention was that they should be given same pay-scale as given to the heavy vehicle drivers in MCD, it was incumbent for them to raise fresh industrial dispute in this behalf.
On the basis of the observations made by the Supreme Court, as recorded above, the Industrial Tribunal could not enlarge the scope of reference and tread on a path which was not even delineated by the Supreme Court for the Industrial Tribunal.
No doubt, the Industrial Tribunal is supposed to adjudicate industrial disputes between the management and the workman, settle them and pass effective awards and is not constrained by the formal rules of law.
However, it cannot grant relief not claimed by the workman or award relief in excess of the demand of the workman.
Likewise, the tribunal is not permitted to grant relief with respect to disputes not referred to it because `it cannot proceed to adjudicate the disputes not referred'.
(See Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co Ltd v. Its Workmen, 1969(2) LLJ 755 (SC).
The consistent approach of the Supreme Court in various judgments is that in adjudicating upon an 'industrial dispute', the tribunal must look at the order of reference itself as it is only the subject-matter of reference with which the tribunal can deal with.
(See Calcutta Electric Supply Corpn.
Ltd. v. Calcutta Electric Supply Workers' Union, AIR 1959 SC 1191).
Where in an order referring an 'industrial dispute' to a tribunal under section 10(1) or in a subsequent order, the 'appropriate government' has specified the points of dispute for adjudication, the tribunal shall confine the adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto.
It would, therefore, appear that while it is open to the 'appropriate government' to refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected therewith for adjudication, the tribunal must confine its adjudication to the points of dispute referred and the matters incidental thereto.
In other words, the tribunal is not free to enlarge the scope of the dispute referred to it but must confine its adjudication to the points specifically mentioned and anything which is incidental thereto [See Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co Ltd v. Their Workmen, (1967) 1 L.L.J.
423 (SC)].
Therefore, it is stated at the cost of repetition that since main dispute referred had already been taken care of by issuing necessary office orders, the only further inquiry permissible was the one stated by the Supreme Court in its order dated 2nd April 1991.
21.
Although impugned award of the Industrial Tribunal is liable to be quashed on the aforesaid reason alone holding that it exceeded its jurisdiction, even on merits I do not find any valid justification for giving direction to give pay-scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
Perusal of the impugned award would show that the reason given by the Industrial Tribunal for extending this benefit is that the DTC drivers were driving heavy vehicles and were supposed to possess heavy vehicles' driving licence.
Likewise, MCD drivers, who were driving heavy vehicles, were given the pay-scale of Rs. 120O-2040 by the Industrial Tribunal in its award dated 2691987.
Applying the principle of `equal pay for equal work' and relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Randhir Singh v. Union of India and Others, 1982(3) SCR 298.
For applying this principle, the benefit has been extended to DTC drivers also as would be clear from the following discussion contained in the award :  "Although the different categories of the drivers have not been classified in the 4th pay commission, but in 1982(3) SCR page 298, Randhir Singh v. Union of India & Ors., the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the third pay commission after considering the, qualifications etc. possessed by drivers proposed pay-scales for various categories of the drivers like drivers of light motor vehicles, drivers of heavy motor vehicles, drivers employed in organisations with large fleet of vehicles, drivers of staff cars etc.
The pay-scales were professed to be fixed with reference to the qualifications for driving.
WW-4, Shri Gopi Ram Gupta in his affidavit also stated that the MCD vide its order No. F.6/5/UDC(P)/Driver/AP-1/64 dated 12-12-89 revised the pay- scale of drivers in pursuance of Industrial Tribunal Award dated 26-9-87 from Rs. 320-400 to Rs. 330-560 (pre revised) w.e.f.
1-1- 73 and its corresponding pay-scale under the 4th Central Pay Commission in the pay-scale of Rs. 1200-30-1560-EB-40-2040 w.e.f.
1-1-86.
He has also proved the order of the MCD to that effect as WW-4/2.
The statements of WW-4 and WW-5 as referred to above have remained unrebutted.
Accordingly, I hold that it stands proved on the record through documents Ex. WW-4/2 that the pay scales of the drivers of the MCD who ply heavy vehicles has been revised from Rs. 320-400 to Rs. 330-560 w.e.f.
1-1-73 and its corresponding pay scale under the 4th Central Pay Commission w.e.f.
1-1-86 which pay-scale according to the Central Civil Services revised pay rules is Rs.
1200-30-1560-EB-40-2040."
22.
Admittedly, Randhir Singh's case (supra) was concerned with the implementation of 3rd Pay Commission Report.
Tribunal has itself accepted the fact that by the 3rd Pay Commission different categories of drivers were given different pay-scales and the 4th Pay Commission has not classified the drivers into different categories.
The Tribunal ignored this vital aspect, namely, it is because of different categories and different pay-scales for these categories given by the 3rd Pay Commission which became a matter of grievance for the Central Government staff or drivers' association who wanted union (uniform ?)
pay-scales for all these categories and 4th Pay Commission removed this anomaly by recommending one pay-scale, namely, Rs. 950-1500.
Notwithstanding this, Industrial Tribunal has again created the anomaly by giving different pay-scales.
That apart, principle of 'equal pay for equal work' cannot be applied by comparing the pay-scales given to the employees in some other departments.
23.
`Equal pay for equal work' although has its root in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India read with Article 14 thereof, the courts will be loathe to interfere in the decision of an expert committee.
24.
In State of TN And Anr. v. MR Alagappan & Ors., (1997) 4 SCC 401, the apex court referred to a large number of decisions.
Having regard to the difference in the nature of appointment, the nature of service, the minimum educational qualification etc.; it was held therein that the Deputy Agricultural Officers and the Agricultural Officers do not stand on the same footing.
25.
Fixation of scale of pay, is generally in the discretion of the employer which in turn would depend upon the nature of the work.
When the employees of one branch claim parity in pay with the their counterpart working in the other, it has to be established that their position is not only identical so far as actual performance of work is concerned, but they are functionally identical and carrying on the same responsibilities, confidentialities, efficiency and other relevant factors.
No two cases may be similar in nature inasmuch as it may be possible that although their functions are apparently identical, but in effect and substance they are not so.
26.
In Union of India & Anr. v. PV Hariharan & Anr., 1997(2) SCT 649 : (1997) 3 SCC 568, the Apex Court observed :  "Before parting with this appeal, we feel impelled to make a few observations.
Over the past few weeks, we have come across several matters decided by Administrative Tribunals on the question of pay scales.
We have noticed that quite often the Tribunals are interfering with pay scales without proper reasons and without being conscious of the fact that fixation of pay is not their function.
It is the function of the Govt., which normally acts on the recommendations of a Pay Commission.
Change of pay scale of a category has a cascading effect.
Several other categories similarly situated, as well as those situated above and below, put forward their claims on the basis of such change.
The Tribunal should realise that interfering with the prescribed pay- scales is a serious matter.
The Pay Commission, which goes into the problem at great depth and happens to have a full picture before it, is the proper authority to decide upon this issue.
Very often, the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" it also being misunderstood and misapplied, freely revising and enhancing the pay-scales across the board.
We hope and trust that the Tribunals will exercise due restraint in the matter.
Unless a clear case of hostile discrimination is made out, there would be no justification for interfering with the fixation, of pay scales ......" Thus, from any angle the matter is to be looked into, impugned award of the Tribunal cannot be sustained, The impugned award is set aside.
Rule is made absolute.
No costs.
Petition allowed.