SS Nijjar, J - This Review Petition seeks review of the judgment dated 14.3.2001 rendered by a Division Bench consisting of RS Mongia and KC Gupta, JJ in CWP.
No. 13597 of 1999.
The prayer of the petitioners in the aforesaid writ petition was for quashing the appointment of respondent Nos. 3 to 7.
A direction was sought to the respondents-Board to absorb the petitioners on the post of Junior Engineer (Electrical) with effect from the date when other direct recruits were appointed on the post or in the alternative with effect from the date of availability of the vacancy.
The writ petition filed by the petitioners was dismissed.
A perusal of the judgment shows that all the arguments raised by the petitioner were considered and rejected by this Court.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the respondents-Board had placed on record marks obtained by the petitioners and the private respondents in the interview as well as in the written examination.
Counsel for the petitioners prayed that marks obtained by other selected candidates be also supplied to the petitioners.
Consequently, a direction was issued to the respondents-Board to supply the information to the petitioners' counsel within three weeks.
The other point raised by the counsel for the petitioners was that those persons who had applied in the reserved category like Scheduled Castes etc. could only be considered in that Category and not as a General Category candidate.
This argument was rejected with the observation that a candidate belonging to the Reserved Category has a dual right of consideration i.e. one amongst the General Category Candidates and the other amongst the Reserved Category Candidates in which he had applied.
Counsel for the petitioners also argued that in view of the provisions of the Apprentices Act, 1961, after completion of petitioners apprenticeship with the respondent Board, their merit could not have been adjudged by written examination/interview and viva-voce vis-a-vis the other candidates for recruitment.
This argument was also rejected in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in UP Rajya Vidyut Parishad Apprentice Welfare Association and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, JT 2000(6) SC 227 where the earlier view of the Supreme Court in UP State of Road Transport Corporation and Anr. v. U.P.
Parivahan Nigam Shiskhukhs Berozgar Sangh and others, JT 1995(2) SC 26 had also come up for consideration.
In the aforesaid judgment, it was held that other things being equal, a trainee apprentice should be given preference over direct recruits and secondly, that such apprentices will have to rub their shoulders by way of written examination and interview, if any, alongwith other direct recruits.
On the basis of the directions issued, the respondent-Board supplied the list of marks obtained by the selected candidates alongwith the marks obtained by the petitioners, by letter dated 3032001 (Annexure RA/2).
From the list, the review-petitioner came to know that one Harvinder Singh son of Swinder Singh shown at Sr. No. 106 of the list, had obtained 158 marks and had been appointed.
The review petitioner having done apprentice training with the respondent-Board was entitled to be given preference, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court.
The review-petitioner also came to know that among the candidates who have done one year apprenticeship in the respondent- Board, secured 158 marks, the review petitioner stands at Sr. No. 1.
He, therefore, requested the authorities for appointment on the post of Junior Engineer.
Since the respondents did not accept the request of the review- petitioner, he filed CWP No. 5313 of 2001, seeking a direction to the respondents to appoint him on the post of Junior Engineer.
The aforesaid writ petition came up for hearing before this Court.
We may notice at this stage, that although the review-petitioner was seeking preference over Harvinder Singh, he was not initially impleaded as a party.
In fact, he was not even impleaded as a party in CWP No. 13597 of 1999.
When CWP No. 5313 of 2001 came up for hearing before the Division Bench on 27122002, the Bench was of the opinion that since the detailed marks were available before the earlier Bench, the matter would have been considered by the earlier Bench.
Mr. Gopal Mahajan, learned counsel for the review-petitioner, however, submitted that this aspect of the matter was not dealt with by the earlier Bench.
In such circumstances, the Division Bench observed that review of the order dated 1432000 would be a more appropriate remedy.
Mr. Mahajan, therefore, made a prayer to withdraw the aforesaid writ petition in order to avail the remedy of review of the order dated 14.3.2001 passed in CWP No. 13897 of 1999.
On the basis of the aforesaid observations, made by the Bench, the review-petitioner filed the present review petition on 10.10.2002.
Since by that time, RS Mongia, J was no longer a judge of this Court, the matter was placed for hearing before KC Gupta, J After hearing the learned counsel for the review-petitioner, KC Gupta, J issued notice of motion to respondent Nso.
1 and 2 for 2522003.
Thereafter, the matter was adjourned.
2.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed reply to the review petition on 2542003.
The respondents took a preliminary objection that the review petition is liable to be dismissed as Harvinder Singh son of Swinder Singh had not been impleaded as a respondent.
The review-petitioner, therefore, filed CM No. 10521 of 2003 with a prayer to implead Harvinder Singh as respondent No. 8.
Harvinder Singh filed reply to the aforesaid application and stated that he had not been impleaded as a party-respondent in the original writ petition.
The review-petitioner who was petitioner No. 11 in CWP No. 13597 of 1999 cannot now be permitted to challenge his appointment in the review petition.
It was further pointed out that Harvinder Singh had been appointed as Junior Engineer pursuant to the directions issued by this Court in CWP No. 17156 of 1999 (Kulvinder Singh v. PSEB).
However, the application filed by the review- petitioner for impleading respondent No. 8 was allowed by KC Gupta, J by order dated 852003.
Subsequently, KC Gupta, J retired from service on 222004.
Thereafter, the matter has been placed for hearing before this Bench.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
4.
Learned counsel for Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submits that CWP No. 13897 of 1999 was dismissed after taking into consideration all the facts narrated in the present review petition.
It is also submitted that the review- petitioner cannot take much credit of being placed at Sr. No. 1 of the merit list of the candidates who had done apprenticeship training.
In all, 31 candidates had secured 158 marks.
Therefore, merely because the review petitioner also had 158 marks, would not entitle him to any preference.
In fact, there are five other candidates who have also secured 158 marks and had done apprenticeship training.
The review-petitioner was merely put at Sr. No. 1 of the merit list as he was the eldest in age.
5.
Mr. Mahajan, however, submits that the Division Bench had made a mistake in not giving preference to the review-petitioner on the basis of apprenticeship training.
In such circumstances, the review-petition deserves to be allowed.
In support of the submission, learned counsel relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Common Cause, A Registered Society v. Union of India and others, JT 1999(5) SC 237.
In paragraph 177 of the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court observed as under :  "177.
We may also point out that the powers of this Court under Article 32 and that of the High Court under Article 32 and that of the High Court under Article 226 are plenary powers and are not fettered by any legal constraints.
If the Court, in exercise of these powers has itself committed a mistake, it has the plenary power to correct its own mistake as pointed out by this Court in S. Nagaraja and Ors. v. State of Karnataka & Anr, JT 1993(5) SC 27, in which it was observed as under : "Justice is a virtue which transcends all barriers.
Neither the rules of procedure nor technicalities of law can stand in its.
The order of the Court should not be prejudicial to anyone.
Rule of stare decision is adhered for consistency but it is not as inflexible in Administrative Law as in Public Law.
Even the law bends before justice.
Earlier concept of writ jurisdiction exercised by the higher courts is founded on enquity and fairness.
If the Court finds that the order was passed under a mistake and it would not have exercised the jurisdiction but for the erroneous assumption which in fact did not exist and its perpetration shall result in miscarriage of justice then it cannot on any principle be precluded from rectifying the error.
Mistake is accepted as valid reason to recall as order."
The Court also observed : "Review literally and even judicially means re-examination or reconsideration.
Basic philosophy inherent in it is the universal acceptance of human fallibility.
Yet in the realm of law the courts and even the statutes lean strongly in favour of finality of decision legally and properly made.
Exceptions both statutorily and judicially have been carved out to correct accidental mistakes or miscarriage of justice.
Even when there was no statutory provision and no rules were framed by the highest court indicating the circumstances in which it could rectify its order the courts culled out such power to avoid abuse of process or miscarriage of justice."
The Court further observed : "Rectification of an order thus stems from the fundamental principle that justice is above all.
It is exercised to remove the error and not for disturbing finality."
We are unable to accept the submission of Mr. Mahajan that the judgment rendered by the Division Bench in CWP No. 13597 of 1999 suffers from any error apparent on the face of the record.
All the arguments raised by the petitioners were considered and rejected.
The marks obtained by different selected candidates were produced by the respondents before the Division Bench.
After considering the entire matter, the Division Bench rejected the claim of the petitioners.
We are unable to come to the conclusion that the Division Bench which rendered the judgment dated 14.3.2001 in CWP No. 13597 was unaware of the marks obtained by the review-petitioner and the marks obtained by other candidates who had secured 158 marks.
In the aforesaid judgment rendered in the case of Common Cause, A Registered Society (supra), the Supreme Court has observed as follows :  "178.
We have already held above that in the judgment under review, there are errors apparent on the face of the record, which has resulted in serious miscarriage of justice.
It is for this reason only that we have proceeded to exercise the power of review."
From the above observations, it becomes apparent that the Supreme Court was considering a judgment which had been held to contain errors apparent on the face of the record which had resulted in serious miscarriage of justice.
In the present case, no miscarriage of justice has occurred.
Initially, CWP No. 13597 of 1999 had been filed by 16 petitioners.
Harvinder Singh had not been impleaded as a party.
Thereafter, petitioner No. 11 filed CWP No. 5313 of 2001.
Even in this writ petition, Harvinder Singh was not impleaded as a party.
As noticed earlier, the aforesaid writ petition was withdrawn by the petitioner in order to avail the remedy of review.
The aforesaid observation made by us cannot be treated as a direction for filing the review petition.
These observations can also not be treated as an expression on the merits of the claim put forward by the review-petitioner, more so in favour of the review-petitioner.
Be that as it may, we are of the considered opinion the judgment of the Division Bench rendered on 14.3.2001 did not suffer from any error apparent on the face of the record.
We are also of the opinion that no injustice has been done to the review-petitioner.
We may also notice that although initially CWP No. 13597 of 1999 was filed by 16 petitioners, subsequently, CWP No. 5313 of 2001 was only filed by the review- petitioner.
Throughout the proceedings, Harvinder Singh had not been impleaded as a party.
He has only been impleaded when an objection was taken by the respondent-Board that the review petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of non-joinder of necessary parties.
We are of the considered opinion that it would be wholly unjust and improper to now annul the appointment of Harvinder Singh on his being impleaded as party in the review petition.
6.
In view of the above, the Review Application is dismissed.
Review Application dismissed.