Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - The petitioner above named being the teacher in a school called Elias Meyer Free School and Talmude Torah (hereinafter referred to the said school in this writ petition) has challenged the show- cause notice dated 19th December, 1990, disciplinary proceedings pursuant thereto and order of dismissal dated 28th June, 2001.
In this case short narration of fact is required to be stated as it has got little history before the order of dismissal was passed which is sought to be impugned.
In 1978 the petitioner was appointed as Assistant Teacher in the said school.
On 13th December, 1990 it was alleged that the petitioner, while taking her class of the pupils in Class III of the said school, pulled the ears of one of the students of the said class and it resulted in bleeding.
Immediately thereafter an investigation was carried out by the Principal of the school and the petitioner was supplied a copy of the recording of the investigation and she was asked to give a written explanation.
Petitioner submitted written explanation alleging that she had never pulled nor twisted the ears of the said student and she denied the charges levelled against her.
The school authority not being satisfied with the explanation issued the impugned show cause notice and she was called upon to show cause as to why further proceedings should not be taken against her.
Simultaneously, she was put under suspension.
On 24th December, 1990 the petitioner submitted a written reply against the show cause.
The petitioner challenged the said show cause notice by filing a suit and prayed for consequential reliefs.
Ultimately, the said suit was allowed to be withdrawn by the Learned Judge of the City Civil Court on 21st November, 1997.
On l7th December, 1998 the petitioner thereafter filed an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in this Court (W.P. No. 2336 of 1997) (hereinafter referred to as the first writ) challenging the said show cause notice and the disciplinary proceedings initiated against her pursuant thereto.
The said first writ was disposed of by this Hon'ble Court directing the respondents to complete the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner in accordance with law within a period of two months from the date without going into the merit.
On 10th February, 1999 after completion of the disciplinary proceedings a second show cause notice was served upon the petitioner and on receipt thereof the petitioner challenged the same by filing another writ petition (hereinafter referred to as the second writ) questioning legality and validity of the second show cause notice dated 10th February, 1999.
The second writ was disposed of by the judgment dated 24th August, 2000, by setting aside the second show cause notice and directing the school to start de novo proceedings pursuant to the said first show cause notice dated 19th December, 1990.
The school authority preferred appeal against the said judgment and order dated 24th August, 2000 passed on the second writ.
The Appeal Court, however, declined to interfere with the said judgment and order and granted extension of the time for completing the enquiry within certain time.
2.
Pursuant to the said judgment and order of the Learned Trial Judge read with the order of the Appeal Court enquiry was initiated on 2nd May, 2001 by appointing Learned Advocate for this Court as Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer duly gave notice to both the parties and heard them.
He examined witnesses produced by the parties.
On 19th June, 2001 Enquiry Officer furnished a report holding the petitioner's guilty of misconduct.
On 19th June, 2001 itself the petitioner received the said copy of the report and on 28th June, 2001 the impugned order of termination was served.
3.
On the aforesaid narration of facts it is clear that there is no scope to scrutinize and examine the legality and validity of the show cause notice as by the three orders this Court allowed the school authority to proceed with the said show case notice.
Unless there were grounds to proceed with the same this Court would not have time and again asked the disciplinary authority to proceed with the same.
As such the petitioner now cannot challenge the same.
4.
Now, it has to be examined whether order of dismissal has been passed in accordance with law or not.
Before I decide this question, preliminary question raised, is to be resolved.
Mr. Jayanta Kumar Mitra, Learned Senior Counsel, has raised question of maintainability of present writ petition as the school is neither a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India nor "other authorities" within the meaning of Article 226 thereof.
He submits that the school does not receive any find from the Government except the dearness allowance for the staff and this receipt of dearness allowance is not sufficient fact itself, to decide that the school has got any government instrumentality.
He further submits that the Division Bench of this Court in one case has held that mere factum of payment of dearness allowance cannot be termed to be a financial control of the Government in the school.
Admittedly the governing body of the school is run by the private individuals.
No Government control in the management is there.
In support of his submission he has relied on a decision of this Court reported in (2003) 10 SCC 733, (2000) 2 Cal Law Times 484 (Ballygunge Siksha Samity & Ors. v. Susmita Basu & Ors.), AIR 1979 Ker 120.
5.
He contended that it is an accepted position that the schools are set up and run for imparting education to the students in this country on commercial basis.
It is true that imparting of education is having an element of public duty and services rendered to the Public.
But this ipse dixit is not a discharge of public duty so as to bring this institution within the meaning of "other authorities" under Article 226.
6.
He admits on earlier occasions that this Court entertained the writ petitions without any objection being raised and passed several orders.
It is also true that the respondents might or might not have raised the question of maintainability in the earlier writ petitions but this does not preclude the respondents from raising this point as it is a question of jurisdiction.
There cannot be any estoppel as against the provision of statute or Constitutional provision.
7.
It is pertinent to record at the time of filing of affidavit-in- opposition this point was not taken, but it was argued in course of hearing.
So, in all fairness I allowed the writ petitioner to file a supplementary affidavit stating jurisdictional fact as to how the aforesaid school is amenable to writ jurisdiction.
At the same time I allowed the respondents to file relevant documents relating to code of conduct to be observed by all the teachers while dealing with, amongst other, students.
8.
In the supplementary affidavit of the writ petition it is stated that the school authority receives dearness allowance from the Government nearly four times of the basic salary being paid by the school to the teachers.
According to the writ petitioner, unless this dearness allowance is received by the school is impossible to maintain or keep teacher for imparting education.
Therefore, it is clear that dominant financial control of the school lies with the Government.
9.
Mr. Kalyan Bandyopadhyay, Learned Counsel appearing for the writ petitioner on the question of jurisdiction stated that the aforesaid fact of receipt of Government grant as dearness allowance is good enough to hold that the school is pre-dominantly financially controlled by the Government.
Moreover, he contends that imparting of education to the students is a duty of public characters.
It is not possible for the Government alone to take this burden of imparting education to the students.
According to him, any private individual or body thereof is amenable to writ jurisdiction if it discharges the public duty either under the statute or under the provisions of the Constitution.
Now, with the insertion of Article 21A of the Constitution of India right to receive education up to the age of 14 years, has become fundamental right.
So, this fundamental right is to be safeguarded and/or be made a reality by Government or governmental agencies.
In support of his submission he has relied on the following decisions of the Supreme Court as well as this Court viz. AIR 1993 SC 2178 (paragraph 82), AIR 1998 SC 285.
10.
On merit he contends that the disciplinary authority without assigning any reason has accepted the report of the Enquiry Officer and without discussing anything else the order of dismissal has been passed.
He contends that this ground alone is sufficient to set aside the order of dismissal.
The report of the Enquiry Officer, if it is read plainly, is perverse in the sense that there has been no reliable or legal evidence to record guilt of the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer has relied on the report of the preliminary investigation only.
Neither the victim student nor any of the students of the same class, who are alleged to have witnessed the incident of pulling ears or bleeding, was not brought as a witness.
None of the teachers who have alleged to have seen such incident was examined as witness in the enquiry.
Only the Principal was examined as a witness though he has not seen such incident but reported about such incident.
He contends that even judging by the standard of proof in domestic proceedings viz., the preponderance of probability it cannot be said that the allegation of misconduct has been proved.
11.
The disciplinary authority has not even considered the proportion of the punishment.
Even assuming the charges have been proved still then the gravity of the misconduct, which is first of its kind, is not such grave for which the extreme punishment is to be inflicted.
The whole action is absolutely contrary to the principle of reasonableness.
12.
Therefore, this order of dismissal is liable to be set aside.
13.
Mr. Jayanta Kumar Mitra, Learned Counsel while arguing on merit contends that after giving all opportunities to the writ petitioner domestic enquiry was held by appointing an independent person viz. an Advocate of this Court.
He has examined the witnesses, considered all documents and the report of the preliminary enquiry which was conducted by the principal himself.
He has given fact finding report holding the petitioner being guilty of misconduct.
According to his, the evidence adduced is sufficient to match the standard needed in a domestic proceedings viz. preponderance of probability.
The charges apparently is not in ordinary sense, serious but it assumes seriousness when the code of conduct has been accepted that no corporal punishment shall be inflicted upon the students particularly the students of lower classes.
Here it appears from the preliminary enquiry that a student of Class III named as Sri Kunal Roy was manhandled by the teacher in such a manner, by pulling ears so severally that it bled.
The guardian of student was informed and immediately on the following day the boy was treated medically.
Medical report and document of treatment were sent to the school.
Guardian of the student also lodged a complaint with the local police station against the teacher for inflicting injuries.
14.
Under these circumstances, school authority did not feel it proper to retain this teacher who has despite knowledge, violated the code of conduct.
As far as the proposition of punishment is concerned, the same depends upon each and every facts and circumstances and the atmosphere of a particular organization and the nature of the work performed by the employees concerned.
A school which is a disciplined establishment and also a model to any other institution always views any infraction of the code of conduct with severity.
Moreover, the theory of proportionally has to be understood from the view point of the employer's mind set.
It cannot be substituted with the wisdom and the viewpoint of any other person.
It is essentially perception of the employer concerned for taking decision about who should be driven out.
15.
Having heard the respective contentions of the Learned Counsels I am of the view that it is too much for the school authority to raise the question of maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that school authority is not a "State" nor "other authority" within Article 226 of Constitution of India.
The writ petitioner has not come for the first time.
She came earlier on two occasions and the respondent submitted and accepted the jurisdiction of the Writ Court not only with participating in the earlier two writ proceedings, but also preferring appeal against the order.
They could have or would have agitated question of jurisdiction.
Therefore, this point is absolutely hit by the principle of res judicata as rightly pointed out by Mr. Kalyan Bandyapodhyay, for this purpose it is not necessary to quote the decisions of the Supreme Court or of the High Court as to the applicability of the principle of res judicata either constructive or expressed.
16.
It is said by Mr. Mitra that if the Court has no jurisdiction inherently then the School authority can raise this point at any time because parties by act could not confer or create jurisdiction of the Court.
Since this question is of some importance so I feel it necessary to discuss the same.
In the affidavit it is indisputably disclosed by the writ petitioner that school receives grant of dearness allowance.
Size of the amount is quite substantial even triple of the basic pay of the teachers.
From the salary sheets it appear so.
Therefore, it is doubtful whether a teacher can be possible to be retained with the meagre amount of basic pay if the Government stops supplying this hefty amount of dearness allowance.
This dearness allowance is really the sustenance of each and every teacher and I am sure if this is stopped it would be very difficult if not impossible for the school to run the school by retaining the teacher of the standard of the petitioner and other staff.
So I hold that the Government has substantial financial control over the institution.
Mr. JK Mitra has cited the aforesaid decision reported in 2000 (2) CLT 484 to say that the payment of dearness allowance cannot be said to be Government instrumentality.
I will deal with this judgment little later.
Moreover, the school performs a public duty by imparting education.
Education has now become an essential part in the life and in fact it is the source of livelihood.
As such it has been recognized by our legislature by inserting Article 21A in Part III of the Constitution of India viz. fundamental right of the petitioner.
Before such amendment it was merely a Constitutional provision.
It is now settled position of the law if private individual discharges its public duty, such authority can pre-eminently be termed as "other authorities" within the meaning of Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This principle of law has been settled by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the decision reported in AIR 1993 SC 2172 (Unni Krishnan's Case).
In paragraph 81 The Chief Justice Sharma and Justice Bharucha (as then he was) while agreeing with the judgment of Justice Reddy and Justice Pandian observed as follows :  "As a sequel to this, an important question arises : What is the nature of functions discharged by these institutions?
They discharge a public duty.
If a student desires to acquire a degree, for example, in medicine, he will have to route through a medical college.
These medical colleges are the instruments to attain the qualification.
If, therefore, what is discharged by the educational institution, is a public duty that requires to act fairly."
After considering all the earlier decisions of the Supreme Court which dealt with the scope of Article 226 of Constitution of India in paragraph 82 of the said judgment.
Their Lordships observed :  "The term `authority' used in Article 226, the context must receive a liberal meaning unlike the term in Article 12.
Article 12 is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights under Art. 32.
Article 226 confers power on the High Courts to issue writs for enforcement of the fundamental rights as well as non- fundamental rights.
The words `any person or authority' used in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant.
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owned by the person or authority to the affected party.
No matter by what means the duty is imposed, if a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied."
The next decision of the Supreme Court was reported in AIR 1998 SC 295.
In this case in paragraph 4 it is held as follows :  "......when an element of public interest is created and the institution is catering to that element, the teacher, the arm of the institution is also entitled to avail of the remedy provided under Article 226, the jurisdiction part is very wide.
It would be different position, if remedy is private......" The aforesaid decision has been followed by the Learned Single Judge of this Court in the recent two decisions reported in 2004(2) SLR 72 and 2004(2) SLR 76.
17.
Thus, the test laid down by the Supreme Court in recent decision reported in (2003) 10 SCC 733 (Federal Bank Ltd v. Sagar Tomas) for maintaining writ petition satisfied (see paragraphs 18 & 31 of the judgment.)
18.
The decision of the Division Bench as quoted above cited by Mr. Mitra has not considered the question of discharging public duty, but proceeded only on the question of the amenability of the writ jurisdiction of a school on the ground of receipt of dearness allowance.
The said Division Bench judgment then is not the authority to hold that the school despite having discharged the public duty by imparting education whether run by the Government or individual body is not "other authority" within the meaning of Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Evidently there is great difference between the provision of Article 32 and Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The scope of Article 226 is much wider than Article 32.
In case of Article 32 the writ lies against the State as defined in the Article 12, whereas under Article 226 the writ lies against "other authority" other than "State" as defined under Article 12.
"Other authority" may constitute private individual or body of individuals or may be a limited company but only test is whether it discharges or performs any duty of public character.
19.
So I, without any hesitation, overrule the contention of Mr. Mitra and hold that the writ petition is maintainable.
20.
Now, coming to the merit of the case I find that the disciplinary authority viz. punishing authority has not applied its mind independently and they have accepted and relied on the report of Enquiry Officer blindly.
Mr. Bandyapodhya is right in saying that no reason has been spelt out while passing the order of dismissal.
One of the facets of natural justice is that the person inflicted with the punishment having civil and evil consequences must be informed with the reasons as to why such punishment is inflicted.
Moreover, the respondent authority has not considered the question of proportion of the punishment as the charges of misconduct is pulling of ears.
It is true that according to theory of proportionally one has to judge the mind- set of the employer and it is its perception as rightly contended by Mr. Mitra.
But the same cannot ignore the principle of reasonableness.
Whether in a given facts and circumstances a man having ordinary and reasonable prudence will be reaching shockingly one is subjected to the punishment or not, is the test.
I think any reasonable prudent man will be and for that matter this Court is shocked to read the order of punishment where a student is not reported to have suffered any permanent injury nor has lost hearing power.
From the evidence recorded it appears that even the alleged injury was not grievous otherwise the boy would have been immediately sent to a doctor or nursing home for treatment.
From the records it prevails that the boy was treated on a subsequent date and there is no further report of any damage.
If the allegations are accepted to be true and correct, then it could be a mere accident.
A teacher having no record of similar kind of incident and/or misconduct should not visit extreme punishment for the first occurrence.
The teacher concerned should have been given a chance to mend her conduct while dealing with the pupils by inflicting a lesser punishment.
I think even minor punishment to a teacher in an educational institution is psychologically more deterrent than the punishment of dismissal, as she will be undermined by all concerned including the tender aged students who will always be fingering at her about her misconduct.
21.
On that ground I could have remanded the matter for reconsideration to the disciplinary authority after setting aside the order of dismissal, but that would be gross injustice keeping the report of the Enquiry Officer untouched and upholding legality and validity of the same.
22.
While I read the report of the Enquiry Officer I find to my utter surprise that there has been no evidence of what have been said.
He has accepted blindly and mechanically the report of the preliminary investigation in which the petitioner participated and the victim boy was alleged to be present there.
The Principal prepared the report and he of course has come before the Enquiry Officer to say that the report was prepared by him.
He also said that the boy was alleged to have complained to him.
But in my view the evidence of this Principal is absolutely hearsay as he did not watch the incident by himself.
It is true in a domestic proceeding provision of Evidence Act does not apply, but that does not mean that absolutely hearsay evidence will be accepted to record guilt.
The victim boy was not present.
He did not come forward to say anything before the Enquiry Officer.
Conducting of preliminary report is not substitute of domestic proceedings.
The preliminary enquiry was conducted by the Principal who is the interested person and how the said report could be accepted ?
No other student or teacher who is alleged to have seen such incident came forward before the Enquiry Officer as a witness.
23.
So, I am constrained to hold that the finding of the Enquiry Officer is based on no evidence.
As such I set aside the same.
Therefore, this writ petition succeeds with costs.
The petitioner shall be reinstated forthwith.
She shall be paid 50% of the back wages.
Petition allowed.