Rajiv Sharma, J - Heard Sri MP Rao for the petitioner as well as Sri VK Bajpai for the opposite parties Nos. 2 and 3 and learned Standing Counsel for the opposite party No. 1.
2.
With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, this writ petition is disposed of finally at the admission stage.
3.
It has been stated in the writ petition that the petitioner was appointed as Assistant Teacher on 14-12-1867 (sic) in Primary School, Balsinghpur Pahla, District Sitapur and worked as such in different institutions.
In December, 2000, an FIR was lodged, on the basis of which a criminal case was registered, which was numbered as case Crime No 222 of 2000 under Sections 498A/304B, IPC and 3/4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, Rampur Khurd, Sitapur.
Thereafter, the petitioner was placed under suspension by District Basic Shiksha Adhikari, Sitapur vide order dated 21-7-2001 where it has been stated that the petitioner was suspended on the ground of absence on 8-12-2000 from duty and also he was in jail from 8-1-2001 to 16-6-2001.
It has also been provided in the order of suspension that during the period of suspension, the petitioner shall be allowed to payment of subsistence allowance and the period during which he remained in jail, the same will be deemed as presence before BRC where he was directed to be attached during the period of suspension.
It was also provided that the Basic Shiksha Adhikari has been appointed as an Inquiry Officer.
On 17-4-2003, the learned Sessions Judge (FTC), Sitapur, in Sessions' Trial No. 149 of 2001 (The State v. Nageshwar and others) convicted and sentenced the petitioner vide order dated 17-4-2003.
Being aggrieved thereof, the petitioner has preferred an appeal before this Court, which was numbered as Criminal Appeal No. 974 of 2003 and the same was admitted and this Court, by means of order dated 13-6-2003, has been pleased to suspend the sentence as well as the fine imposed till the disposal of the appeal and further provided that the petitioner be released on bail after furnishing two sureties and a personal bond of the like amount to the satisfaction of the CJM concerned.
In pursuance thereof, the petitioner was released on bail and also submitted a representation before opposite party No. 3 for his reinstatement on 15-10-2003 and thereafter, a reminder on 9-9-2004 annexing therewith a copy of the order of this Court dated 13-6-2003 but no heed was paid on the said representation by the opposite parties and as such the petitioner filed the instant writ petition praying for quashing the order of suspension dated 21-7-2001 passed by the opposite party No. 2.
4.
In support of the aforesaid relief, the petitioner has placed reliance on the judgment passed by Full Bench of this Court in the case of Chandra Shekhar Saxena and etc. v. Director of Education (Basic), UP Lucknow, reported in 1997(3) SCT 309 (Allahabad) : (1997 All LJ 963).
The Full Bench of this Court, while dealing with the provisions of Rule 49-A of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930, proceeded to hold as under :-  "We have considered all the cases cited by the learned counsel for the parties.
However, we do not find anything on which basis the view we have expressed above may be doubted or shaken.
Our conclusions and answer to the questions referred to us are as under : (A) Sub-clause (a) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 49-A of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930, as applicable in Uttar Pradesh, is not violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India as held in case of Jagjit Singh v. State of UP reported in 1995(2) SCT 560 (Allahabad) : 1995(1) ESC 329 (All), and the judgment is hereby overruled.
(B) The legal fiction envisaged under sub-rule (2)(a) and (b) of Rule 49-A shall come into play and a deemed suspension by an order of the appointing authority shall come into existence if the Government servant is detained in custody for more than forty-eight hours even in absence of any order in writing passed by the appointing authority.
(C) The deemed suspension provided under sub-rule (2) of Rule 49-A shall be confined to the period of detention in custody and not beyond that.
(D) The deemed suspension by an order of the appointing authority under the legal fiction provided in sub-rule (2) may be continued after release by the appointing authority by passing an express order taking into account the guidelines provided in other sub-rule of Rule 49-A according to the facts and circumstances of the case.
(E) The deemed suspension under sub-rule (2) of the Rule 49-A may be modified or revoked by the appointing authority on a representation made by the Government servant which shall be considered and decided taking into consideration the guidelines provided in sub-rules (1) and (1-A) of Rule 49- A."
5.
The principle of law laid down in the aforesaid Full Court judgment was followed by this Court Judgment in Writ Petition No. 3748 (SS) of 2004 (Ram Nath v. State of UP), which was decided on 22-7-2004 and held as under :  "In view of the above and the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court, it shall always be incumbent upon the parties to pass fresh orders for continuation of suspension in the light of provisions contained in Rule 4 of UP Government Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999 as reproduced hereinabove.
An order of suspension has been passed without considering the conditions provided under Rule 4 shall be an arbitrary act and also will be violative of mandate of Full Bench Judgment of this Court."
6.
On the other hand, learned Standing Counsel appearing for the State submits that the order of suspension cannot be revoked automatically until and unless the same is modified or revoked.
He further states that in the decision passed in writ petition No. 3748 (SS) of 2004, reliance has been placed by Hon'ble Judge of Full Court on judgment rendered in the case of Chandra Shekhar Saxena and etc. v. Director of Education (Basic), UP Lucknow (reported in 1997(3) SCT 3 (Allahabad) : (1997) All LJ 963)), has been overruled by Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of Union of India v. Rajiv Kumar (reported in 2003(3) SCT 704 : 2003(21) LCD 1396)).
7.
In order to resolve the controversy, it would be appropriate to reproduce the relevant provision of  Rule 49-A of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930 :-  "49-A(1) A Government servant against whose conduct an inquiry is contemplated, or is proceeding may be placed under suspension pending the conclusion of the inquiry in the discretion of the appointing authority : Provided that in the case of any Government servant or class of Government servants, not belonging to a State Service, the appointing authority may delegate its power under the sub-rule to the next lower authority : Provided further that any authority empowered by the Governor by general or special order in this behalf, may place a Government servant under suspension under this sub-rule : Provided also that in the case of a member of a judicial service (within the meaning of Article 236 of the Constitution), the Governor may delegate his powers under this sub-rule of the High Court.
(1-A) A Government servant in respect of, or against, whom an investigation, inquiry or trial relating to a criminal charge is pending may, at the discretion of the appointing authority under whom he is serving be placed under suspension until the termination of all proceedings relating to the charge, if the charge is connected with his position as a Government servant or is likely to embarrass him in the discharge of his duties or involves moral turpitude.
(2) A Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed or as the case may be, continued to be placed under suspension by an order of the appointing authority : (a) with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether the detention is on criminal charge or otherwise for a period exceeding forty eight hours; and (b) with effect from the date of his conviction, if in the event of a conviction for an offence, he is sentenced to term of imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and is not forthwith dismissed or removed consequent to such conviction.
Explanation.
- The period of forty-eight hours referred to in clause (b) of this sub-rule shall be computed from the commencement of the imprisonment after the conviction and for this purpose, intermittent periods of imprisonment, if any, shall be taken into account.
(3) where a penalty of dismissal or removal from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside in appeal or on review under these rules and the case is remitted for further inquiry or action or with any other directions - (a) if he was under suspension immediately before the penalty was awarded to him, the order of his suspension shall, subject to any such directions as aforesaid, be deemed to have continued in force on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal; (b) if he was not under suspension, he shall if so directed by the appellate or reviewing authority be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an order of the appointing authority on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal : Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall be construed as affecting the power of the competent authority, in a case where a penalty of dismissal or removal from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside in appeal or on review under these Rules on grounds other than the merits or the allegations on which the said penalty was imposed, but the case is not remitted for further inquiry or action or with any other directions, to pass to an order of suspension pending further inquiry against him on those allegations, so however, that any such suspension shall not have retrospective effect.
(4) Where a penalty of dismissal or removal from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside or declared or rendered void in consequence of or by decision of a Court of law and the appointing authority, on a consideration of the circumstances of the case, decides to hold a further inquiry against him on the allegations on which the penalty of dismissal or removal was originally imposed, whether the allegations remain in their original form or are clarified or their particulars better specified or any part thereof a minor nature omitted - (a) if he was under suspension immediately before the penalty was awarded to him, the order of his suspension shall, subject to any direction of the appointing authority, be deemed to have continued in force on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal; (b) if he was not under such suspension, he shall, if so directed by the appointing authority, be, deemed to have been placed under suspension by an order of the competent authority on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal.
(5)(a) Any suspension ordered or deemed to have been ordered or to have continued in force under this rule shall continue to remain in force until it is modified or revoked by any authority specified in sub-rule (1).
(b) Where a Government servant is suspended or is deemed to have been suspended (whether in connection with any disciplinary proceeding or otherwise), or any other disciplinary proceeding is commenced against him during the continuance of that suspension, the authority competent to place him under suspension may, for reasons to be recorded by him in writing, direct that the Government servant shall continue to be under suspension till the termination of all or any of such proceeding.
(6) Subsidiary Rule 199 Financial Handbook, Volume II, Parts II to IV, shall cease to apply to Government servants governed by this rule."
8.
Rule 10 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1947 is reproduced as under :  "Rule 10 : Suspension (1) The appointing authority or any authority to which it is subordinate or the disciplinary authority or any other authorities empowered in that behalf by the President, by general or special order, may place a government servant under suspension - (a) where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending; or (aa) where, in the opinion of the authority aforesaid, he has engaged himself in activities prejudicial to the interest of the security of the State; or (b) where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation inquiry or trial : Provided that, except in the case of an order of suspension made by the Comptroller and Auditor General in regard to a member of the Indian Audit and Accounts Services and in regard to an Assistant Accountant-General or equivalent (other than a regular member of the Indian Audit and Accounts Services), where the order of suspension is made by an authority lower than the appointing authority such authority shall forthwith report to the appointing authority the circumstances in which the order was made.
(2) A Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an order of appointing authority - (a) with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether on a criminal charge or otherwise, for a period exceeding forty eight hours; (b) with effect from the date of his conviction, if, in the event of a conviction for an offence, he is sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and is not forthwith dismissed or removed or compulsorily retired consequent to such conviction.
Explanation.
- The period of forty-eight hours referred to in clause (b) of this sub-rule shall be computed from the commencement of the imprisonment after the conviction and for this purpose, intermittent periods of imprisonment, if any, shall be taken into account.
(3) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service imposed upon a Government servant under suspension is set aside in appeal or on review under these rules and the case is remitted for further inquiry or action or with any other directions, the order of his suspension shall be deemed to have continued in force and from the date of the original order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement and shall remain in force until `further orders.
(4) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside or declared or rendered void in consequence of or by a decision of a Court of Law and the disciplinary authority.
On a consideration of the circumstances of the case, decides to hold a further inquiry against him on the allegations on which the penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement was originally imposed, the Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by the appointing authority from the date of the original order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement and shall continue to remain under suspension until further orders : Provided that no such further inquiry shall be ordered unless it is intended to meet a situation where the Court has passed an order purely on technical grounds without going into the merits of the case.
(5)(a) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been made under this rule shall continue to remain in force until it is modified or revoked by the authority competent to do so.
(5)(b) Where a Government servant is suspended or is deemed to have been suspended (whether in connection with any disciplinary proceeding or otherwise) and any other disciplinary proceeding is commenced against him during the continuance of that suspension the authority competent to place him under suspension may, for reasons to be recorded by him in writing direct that the Government servant shall continue to be under suspension until the termination of all or any of such proceedings.
(5)(c) an order of suspension made or deemed to have been made under this rule may at any time be modified or revoked by the authority which made or is deemed to have made the order or by any authority to which that authority is subordinate."
9.
Rule 4 of Uttar Pradesh Government Servant (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999 is reproduced as under :  "Suspension.
- (1) A Government servant against whose conduct an inquiry is contemplated, or is proceeding may be placed under suspension pending the conclusion of the inquiry in the discretion of the appointing authority : Provided further that concerned head of the Department empowered by the Governor by an order in this behalf may place a Government servant or class of Government servants belonging to Groups `A' and `B' posts under suspension under this rule :  Provided also that in the case of any Government servant or class of Government servants, belonging to Groups `C' and `D' posts, the appointing authority may delegate its power under this rule to the next lower authority.
(2) A Government servant in respect of, or against whom an investigation, inquiry or trial relating to a criminal charge, which is connected with his position as a Government servant or which is likely to embarrass him in the discharge of his duties or which involves moral turpitude pending, may, at the discretion of the appointing authority or the authority to whom the power of suspension has been delegated under these rules, be placed under suspension until the termination of all proceedings relating to that charge.
(3)(a) A Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed or, as the case may be, continued to be placed under suspension by an order of the authority competent to suspend, with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether the detention is on criminal charge or otherwise, for a period exceeding forty eight hours.
(b) The aforesaid Government servant shall, after the release from the custody, inform in writing to the competent authority about his detention and may also make representation against the deemed suspension.
The competent authority shall, after considering the representation in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case as well as the provisions contained in this rule, pass appropriate order continuing the deemed suspension from the date of release from custody or revoking or modifying it.
(4) Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed or as the case may be, continued to be placed under suspension by an order of the authority competent to suspend under these rules, with effect from the date of his conviction if in the event of a conviction for an offence he is sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and is not forthwith dismissed, removed consequent to such conviction.
Explanation - A period of forty-eight hours referred to in sub-rule (11) be computed from the commencement of the imprisonment after the conviction and for this purpose intermittent period of imprisonment shall be taken into account.
(5) Where a penalty of dismissal or removal from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside in appeal or on review under these rules or under rules rescinded by these rules and the case is remitted for further inquiry or action or with any other directions : (a) if he was under suspension immediately before the penalty was awarded to him, the order of his suspension shall, subject to any such directions as aforesaid, be deemed to have continued in force on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal; (b) if he was not under suspension, he shall, if so directed by the appellate or reviewing authority be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an order of the appointing authority on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal : Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall be construed as affecting the power of the disciplinary authority in a case where a penalty of dismissal or removal in service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside in appeal or on review under these rules grounds other than the merits of the allegations which the said penalty was imposed but the case is remitted for further inquiry or action or with any other directions to pass an order of suspension being further inquiry against him on those allegations so, however, that any such suspension shall not have retrospective effect.
(6) Where penalty of dismissal or removal from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside or declared or rendered void in consequence of or by a decision of a Court of law and the appointing authority on a consideration of the circumstances of the case decides to hold a further inquiry against him on the allegations on which the penalty of dismissal or removal was originally imposed, whether the allegations remain in their original form or are clarified or their particulars better specified or any part thereof of a minor nature omitted : (a) if he was under suspension immediately before the penalty was awarded to him the order of his suspension shall subject to any direction of the appointing authority, be deemed to have continued in force on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal; (b) if he was not under such suspension he shall, if so directed by the appointing authority be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an order of the Competent authority on and from the date of the original order of dismissal or removal.
(7) Where a Government servant is suspended or is deemed to have been suspended (whether in connection with any disciplinary proceeding or otherwise) and any other disciplinary proceeding is commenced against him during the continuance of that suspension, the authority competent to place him under suspension may for reasons to be recorded by him in writing, direct that the Government servant shall continue to be under suspension till the termination of all or any of such proceedings.
(8) Any suspension ordered or deemed to have been ordered or to have continued in force under this rule shall continue to remain in force until it is modified or removed by the competent authority.
(9) A Government servant placed under suspension or deemed to have been placed under suspension under this rule shall be entitled to subsistence allowance in accordance with the provisions of Fundamental Rule 53 of the Finance Hand Book, Volume II, Parts II to IV."
10.
On perusal of the provisions of Rule 49A of Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930, Rule 10 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1947 and Rule 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Government Servant (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999, it will be clear that the same are analogous to each other.
11.
The petitioner was placed under suspension under the provisions of Rule 4(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Government Servant (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999, which is a deemed provision and creates a legal fiction.
A bare reading of the provision shows that an actual order is not required to be passed.
That is deemed to have been passed by operation of the legal fiction.
It has as much efficacy force and operation as an order otherwise specifically passed under other provisions.
It does not speak of any period of its effectiveness.
Rules 4(3), 4(4) operate conceptually in different situations and need specific provisions separately on account of interpretation of an order of Court of law or an order passed by the appellate or reviewing authority and the natural consequence inevitably flowing from such orders.
Great emphasis is laid on the expressions `until further orders' in the said sub-rules to emphasize that such a prescription is missing in sub-rule (2).
Therefore, it is urged that the order is effective for the period of detention alone.
The plea is clearly without any substance because of sub-rules (5)(a) and (5)(c) of Rule 4.
The said provisions refer to an order of suspension made or deemed to have been made.
Obviously, the only order which is even initially deemed to have been made under Rule 4 is one contemplated under sub-rule (2).
The said provision under Rule 4(5)(A) makes it crystal clear that the order continues to remain in force until it is modified or revoked by an authority competent to do so while Rule 4(5)(c) empowers the competent authority to modify or revoke also.
No exception is made relating to an order under Rule 4(2) and 4(5)(a).
On the contrary, specifically it encompasses an order under Rule 4(2).
If the order deemed to have been made under Rule 4(2) is to lose effectiveness automatically after the period of detention envisaged comes to an end, there would be no scope for the same being modified as contended by the respondents and there was no need to make such provisions as are engrafted in Rule 4(5)(a) and (c) and instead an equally deeming provision to bring an end to the duration of the deemed order would by itself suffice for the purpose.
12.
Thus, it is clear that the order of suspension does not lose its efficacy and is not automatically terminated the moment the detention comes to an end and the person is set at large.
It could be modified and revoked by another order as envisaged under Rule 4(5)(c) and until that order is made, the same continues by the operation of Rule 4(5)(a) and the employee has no right to be reinstated to service.
This position was also highlighted in Balvantral Ratilal Patel v. State of Maharashtra, (AIR 1968 SC 800) Indication of expression "pending further order" in the order of suspension was the basis for aforesaid view.
13.
Reference has been made to sub-rule (5)(b) of Rule 4.
According to the High Court the same appears to have been made "ex majore cautela".
Conceptually sub-rules (5)(a) and (5)(b) operate in different fields and for different purposes, i.e. when more than one disciplinary proceedings come to be initiated to cover all such situations.
Both the provisions have to be read harmoniously.
Otherwise, sub-rule (5)(A) would become meaningless and sub-rule (5)(c) purposeless and both provisions would be rendered otiose and superfluous.
14.
Thus, the Court cannot read anything into a statutory provision or rewrite a provision which is plain and unambiguous.
A statute is an edict of the Legislature.
The language employed in a statute or any statutory provision is the determinative factor of legislative intent of policy makers.
15.
On perusal of the aforesaid Rules as well as law laid down by Hon'ble the Apex Court, it is crystal clear that the order of suspension cannot be revoked automatically until and unless the same is modified or revoked.
Thus, no interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is called for in the order of suspension dated 21-7-2001.
16.
At this stage, learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the petitioner has already moved a representation on 15-2-2003 before the authorities concerned, which is pending yet.
He prays that a direction be issued to the authorities concerned to dispose of the representation of the petitioner expeditiously, to which learned counsel for the opposite parties has no objection.
17.
Under the above facts and circumstances, writ petition is disposed of finally with a direction to the opposite parties to consider and dispose of the representation of the petitioner dated 15-2-2003, expeditiously, say, within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before them in accordance with the rules.
Order accordingly.