T Vaiphel, J - This is an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India filed by the petitioner seeking a writ of Mandamus for directing the State-Respondents to consider his case for promotion to the vacant un-reserved post of Deputy Director in the Information, Cultural and Tourism Department, Government of Tripura and for not filling up the said post by any reserved category officers junior to him including the private respondent.
2.
The material facts are not in dispute.
The petitioner was appointed as Sub-Divisional Public Relations Officer on 26.11.1982.
He was again promoted to the post of Information Officer on 2121982 and was further promoted to the post of Information Officer on 26111987.
Thereafter, he was again promoted to the post of Assistant Director on 29101987.
The private respondent was appointed to the post of Forum Supervisor on 791979 and was promoted to the post of S.D.P.R.O.
on 23.11.1982.
He was thereafter, redesignated as Junior Information Officer on 16101987 and was again promoted to the post of Assistant Information Officer on 1381991.
He was subsequently promoted to the post of Assistant Director on 29101997.
The petitioner belongs to unreserved category officer while the private respondent belongs to SC category.
The Directorate of Information, Cultural and Tourism Department published the inter se seniority list for the Assistant Director (Group B Gazetted) on 2992002 wherein the petitioner is placed at Sl.
No. 2 while the private respondent is placed at Sl.
No. 3.
It may be noted that one Shri Aswathama Jamatia who is placed at Sl.
No.l in the said seniority list has already retired from service and, as such, the petitioner is admittedly the senior most Assistant Director in the said Department.
3.
It is an admitted position that there are altogether 5 posts of Deputy Director/Chief of News Bureau (Group A Gazetted) in the said Department and in terns of the Recruitment Rules published in 1997, these posts are to be filled up by promotion from the posts of Assistant Director, failing which by direct recruitment and that the posts are Selection posts.
At the time of filing of this writ petition out of the aforesaid 5 posts, one post was occupied by a ST officer while one post was held by a SC officer.
The remaining one post was occupied-by one officer belonging to unreserved category.
Out of the remaining 2 posts one post was held by one officer belonging to unreserved category who has superannuated in February, 2004.
Consequently, one post of Deputy Director/Chief of News Bureau is lying vacant to be filled up from unreserved category.
It is the case of the petitioner that as he belongs to unreserved category and being the senior most Assistant Director, he has the legitimate expectation to be promoted to the said post.
It is also contended by the petitioner that the private respondent who belongs to Scheduled Caste Officer, has no right to be considered for the post earmarked for unreserved category.
The petitioner states that the State respondents have decided to promote the private respondent to the said post of Deputy Director either by illegally treating it to be a vacancy reserved for SC Category or by showing the private respondent to be more meritorious than the petitioner for extraneous reasons.
According to the petitioner, he has better service record than the private respondent as reflected in the A.C. Rs. Apprehending that the private respondent will be illegally promoted by superseding the petitioner, he made a representation on 3032004 to the Secretary, U.C.A.T.
Department, Govt. of Tripura for consideration of his case.
But instead of considering his case favourably, the respondent are trying to hurriedly promote the private respondent to the said post.
It is submitted by the petitioner that if the private respondent is promoted to that post, he would suffer substantial loss and prejudice thereby violating his rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In resisting the writ petition, the State- respondents and the private respondent filed their separate counter-affidavit.
It is the case of the Staterespondents that they have already furnished to the Departmental Promotion Committee the A.C. Rs and service records of all eligible candidates for consideration of their promotion to the post of Deputy Director and that the petitioner and the private respondent, among others, were in the zone of consideration.
The Departmental Promotion Committee (for short the `DPC') after considering the cases of all eligible candidates including that of the petitioner found the private respondent suitable for promotion to that post and accordingly recommended his name to the Government for such promotion.
The State-respondent have accepted the recommendation of the DPC and the appointment has been stalled due to the interim order passed by his court.
The State-respondents further contended that though the petitioner is admittedly senior to the private respondent, the private respondent, who belongs to a reserve category candidate is not bar from consideration for promotion to the unreserved category post, if he is otherwise found suitable.
According to the State-respondent the post of Deputy Director being a Selection post, merit and not seniority is the main criteria for consideration.
It is further pointed out by the State-respondents that the petitioner did not have good service record as claimed by him since he invited many complaints by doing things in a wrong manner.
The State respondents have also made available to this court the minutes of the DPC held on 722004.
5.
The private respondent in his counter-affidavit supports the stand taken by the State-respondents, and as such, it is unnecessry to reproduce the same.
6.
After the filing of the counter-affidavit by the State- respondents and the private respondent, the petitioner filed two additional affidavits in reply to the counter-affidavit of the State-respondents and private respondents.
In his affidavit dated 1462004, which is in the nature of a reply to the counter- affidavit of the State-respondents, the petition questioned the validity of the DPC proceedings and urged this Court to call for the service records and ACRs of all the candidates.
In particular, he points out that even though Shri Bhudeb Bhattacharjee was given as over all grading of "Outstanding", the private respondent who was given over all grading of "Good" was recommended for promotion.
So, according to the petitioner, this plainly shows that the DPC has not acted in good faith, but arbitrarily and contrary to law.
He also submits that the overall grading given to him as "Satisfactory" by the DPC is not in conformity with the rules governing Department Promotion Committee.
According to him, the grading "Satisfactory" is not prescribed by law, and the permissible grading should necessarily be in the form of "Outstanding".
"Very Good", "Good", "Average" and can never be "Satisfactory".
In support of his submission, he draws my attention to the Memo dated 2752004 on the subject of ACR writing of Government Officials.
It is thus contended by the petitioner that by giving him the overall grading of "Satisfactory", much prejudice has been caused to him which resulted in denying the promotion legitimately due to him.
7.
From the pleading of the parties, the first point for determination in this writ petition is whether a candidate belonging to a reserved category can be considered for promotion to an unreserved post.
It is urged by Mr. AK Bhowmik, the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that a person belonging to SC or for that matter, any one belonging to reserved category cannot be considered for promotion to an unreserved post.
In other words, it is the contention of the learned senior counsel that in a post earmarked for unreserved category, only a person belonging to unreserved category will be eligible for consideration to such post.
On he other hand, Mr. UB Saha, the learned senior Advocate in drawing my attention to the case of RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab and others, reported in (1995) 2 SCC 745 (at page 750) has forcefully contended that a SC candidate can certainly be considered for promotion to an unreserved post.
There is considerable force in the submission of the learned senior Advocate.
In the aforecited case the Apex Court has categorically held that the reserved category candidates can compete for the non-reserved post and in the event of their appointment to the said posts, their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
In view of the law laid down by the Apex Court this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner has lost much of its relevance and is, therefore rejected.
8.
In so far as the validity of the DPC proceeding is concerned, the grievance of the petitioner with respect to the non-recommendation of Shri Bhudeb Bhattacharjee by the DPC when he was given an overall grading of "Outstanding" is not worthy of consideration.
The non-recommendation of the case of said Shri Bhudeb Bhattacharjee does not in any way affect the right of the petitioner.
It is the said Bhudeb Bhattacharjee alone and no one else who can challenge or ultimately question the act of the DPC in not recommending his case.
In other words, the petitioner has no locus standi to make such grievance on behalf of a third party who has chosen not to come forward before this court for challenging the proceedings of the DPC.
On the question of not recommending his case for promotion, the Petitioner was awarded an overall grading of `satisfactory' while the private respondent was given an overall grading of `Good'.
9.
A cursory look of the Memo dated 962004 shows that this guideline for ACR writing of Government officials is applicable, as the subject indicates only to grading to be given by superior officers in the ACRs, which has nothing to do with the overall grading to be given by superior officers in the ACRs, which has nothing to do with the overall grading to be given by the DPC.
The office Memo dated 1031989 on the procedure to be observed by the DPC prescribes that each Departmental Committee should decide its own method and procedure for objective assessment of the suitability of the candidates.
It further makes clear that the DPC enjoys full discretion to devise their own method and procedure for objective assessment of the suitability of the candidates who are to be considered by them.
Then, clause 2.2.1 (e) of the said Memo further provides that the DPC should not be guided merely by the overall grading, if any, that may be recorded in the CR but should make its own assessment on the basis of entries in the C. R. because it has beer noticed that sometimes the overall grading in a CR may be inconsistent with the grading under various parameter or attributes.
The aforesaid guideline undoubtedly makes clear that the Overall grading of `Satisfactory' given to the petitioner does not in any manner contravene provisions of said memo.
In the absence of any evidence of mala fide or other illegalities manifest from the proceeding of the DPC, this court in exercise of its power of judicial review cannot interfere with the promotion process of the private respondent.
Moreover, there is one aspect in the pleadings of the petitioner which cannot be ignored by this court.
In the writ petition, the reliefs claimed by the petitioner are:-  "It is therefore, humbly prayed that your Lordships would graciously be pleased to issue Rule upon the Respondents to show cause as to why the Respondents should not transmit all records relating to the case of the petitioner;  And As to why the vacant post of Deputy Director in the ICAT Department Government of Tripura, Agartala should not be treated as a vacancy in the unreserved category.
And  As to why respondents 1 and 2 should not be directed to consider promotion of the petitioner to the said post of Deputy Director and not to promote the Respondent No. 3 to the said post superseding the petitioner.
And  In the meantime be pleased to direct the respondents not to fill up the vacant post of Deputy Director in the ICAT Department, Government of Tripura till disposal of the writ petition."
10.
In the first place, it needs to be pointed out that his prayer for considering him for promotion to the post of Deputy Director has been infructuous since the minutes of the DPC clearly shows that his case has been duly considered along with the case of other eligible candidates including that of the private respondent.
The other prayer for not promoting the respondent No. 3 to the said post superseding him is, ipso facto, equally infructuous.
No attempt was made by the petitioner for amending his writ petition incorporating the subsequent development or for challenging the DPC proceeding against which he claims to have serious grievance.
11.
In Ramrao v. All India Backward Class Bank Employees Welfare Association, 2004 AIR SCW 404 (at page 412), the Apex Court has held that "It is true that the High Court is entitled to take into consideration the subsequent events, but the same can only be a relevant factor for the purpose of moulding the reliefs.
But while moulding such relief the High Court could neither have considered grant of relief wherefor no factual foundation existed was laid in the pleadings of the parties."
In that view of the matter, this writ petition does not deserve serious consideration.
12.
For what has been stated above, this writ petition is devoid of merit and is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.
The interim order dated 752004 stands vacated.
Petition dismissed.