Amitava Lala, J - Grievance under the writ petition has been made by the Bank of Baroda Employees' Association and its General Secretary on the representative capacity to protect the interest of Head Peons occupying the accommodation given by the Bank in the various branches and/or offices.
According to them, there was a clear understanding that if anybody is selected for the post of Head Peon he would have to stay within the branch/office premises in the accommodation provided by the respondent Bank.
Such accommodation continued uninterruptedly for decades and became conditions of service of the workmen under item no. 8 of the 4th Schedule read with 9A of the Industrial Disputes Act to hold such accommodation as a `customary concession' and/or a `privilege' and/or a 'usage'.
Whosoever earlier secured accommodation on rental basis have given up the same after being selected for the post of Head Peons as the accommodation is given to them.
In July 2003, the Bank started issuing eviction orders directing them to vacate such accommodation within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of such notice.
The petitioner no.1 felt it is unwarranted, arbitrary, unjustified and whimsical and served notice under Section 22(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to go on strike.
The petitioners contended that strike was not there at the time of conciliation but before the same.
Upon receipt of such notice the Assistant Labour Commissioner (Central) being the Conciliation Officer wanted to conciliate in the dispute and as such the eviction order was not enforced and status quo was continued.
Such Conciliation ended in failure.
Central Government declined to make reference of the dispute for adjudication by the appropriate Court/Tribunal for following reasons : -  "It is a fact that the Head Peons are entitled for House Rent Allowance irrespective of the fact whether they are allotted living space within the bank premises.
The union failed to establish that the management has violated any of the provisions of the settlement by their action.
It is further noted that the conditions of service of the workmen are not adversely affected by the management's decision.
Hence, the demand for adjudication of the dispute raised by the union is found to be not maintainable."
2.
The petitioners contended that although the conciliation failed but the dispute cannot be resolved without proper adjudication by the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal.
But the administrative authority under Government of India, Ministry of Labour thought it fit that the dispute does not require consideration by the process of adjudication as aforesaid with reasons stated therein.
According to the Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners such dispute cannot be decided by any authority under administrative capacity.
The reasons are to be proved and established by satisfactory evidences to come to a definite finding by such judicial authority.
The reasoning which has been incorporated in the letter dated 18th March, 2004 being "P-6" in the writ petition is the judicial reasoning by an administrative authority.
Therefore, the same cannot be sustainable.
Particularly, in accordance with law, when a strike notice has been issued by the employees to the employer prior to conciliation it is desirable that the matter should be referred to an appropriate Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal for the purpose of adjudication.
In AIR 1989 SC 1565 (Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh & Anr. v. State of Bihar & Ors.) it was held that in exercising power under Section 10(1) of the Act, the appropriate Government is discharging an administrative function but not the judicial or quasi judicial function and that in performing administrative function the Government cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take 'upon itself the determination of the lis, which would certainly be in excess of the power conferred on it by the Act.
It is true that in considering such question the Government is entitled to form an opinion as to whether an industrial dispute `exists or is apprehended'.
But the formation of opinion as to whether an industrial dispute `exits or is apprehended' is not the same thing as to adjudicate the dispute itself on its merits.
There the dispute was whether the persons raising the dispute were workmen or not.
In deciding the question the ratio of AIR 1985 SC 860 (The M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of MP & Anr.) and AIR 1985 SC 915 (Ram Avtar Sharma & Ors. v. State of Haryana & Anr. with another matter) were followed which have been referred hereunder.
Therefore, there is no justiciability to reiterate such contentions once again.
3.
In 1975 (2) LLJ 319 (SC) (Management of Indian Oil Corporation Limited v. Its Workmen) four Judges Bench of the Supreme Court held that in respect of withdrawal of payment of compensatory allowance is an occasion of interference with the implied conditions of service.
As such same cannot be done unilaterally.
By showing such factual aspect of the matter the Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners wanted to establish that giving accommodation to the petitioner is also similarly placed condition of service, which cannot be withdrawn unilaterally.
As a result whereof that adjudication of dispute by the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal is obvious.
AIR 1987 SC 695 (V Veerarajan & Ors. v. Government of TN & Ors.) and 1983 (1) LLJ 406 (Mad.)
(Sankari Cement Alai Thozhilalar Munnetra Sangam v. Government of Tamilnadu & Anr. with another matter) are speaking about the power of the Court to direct the Government to refer the dispute for adjudication.
In 1993 (3) LLJ (supple.)
855 (SC) (Abad Dairy Dudh Vitran Kendra Sanchalak Mandal v. Abad Dairy & Ors.) it was also held that whether the employees are workmen or not that has to be determined by the Tribunal on a proper reference.
In AIR 1987 SC 1490 (TN Joint Action Council & Textile Trade Union v. Government of TN & Ors. with another matter) the court held that when there is an industry-wise dispute the mills should have also been included in the reference and it should have been left to the managements of the mills to object to the reference before the Tribunal.
4.
Although several judgments are cited before this Court but the subject matter of the dispute is crystallized in AIR 1989 SC 1565 (supra) where it has been categorically stated that what is the extent of the administrative function and what is the extent of the judiciary function in respect of the reference of industrial dispute.
5.
Ultimately the submission was concluded by the Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners by saying that when a doubt and difficulty arises in respect of the interpretation of any provision of any award for settlement it may refer to such Court/Tribunal etc. as it may think fit.
If this case is read with item VII of the Fourth Schedule under Section 9A of the Act it will be seen that conditions of service includes withdrawal of any customary concession or privilege or change in usage.
Therefore, such determination cannot be finalized unless and until it is decided by the Labour Court or Industrial Tribunal.
6.
Mr. LK Gupta, Learned Counsel appearing for the respondent contended that as per the ratio of AIR 1964 SC 1617 (Bombay Union of Journalists & Ors. v. The State of Bombay & Anr.) if the dispute raises the questions of law the appropriate Government should not purport to reach a final decision on the basis of the said questions of law, because it would normally lie within the jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal.
Similarly, on disputes of questions of fact, the appropriate Government cannot purport to reach final conclusions, for that again would be the province of the Industrial Tribunal.
But it would not be possible to accept the plea that the appropriate Government is precluded from considering even prima facie the merits of the dispute when it decides the question as to whether its power to make a reference should be exercised under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5), or not.
If the claim made is patently frivolous or is clearly belated, the appropriate Government may refuse to make a reference.
Likewise, if the impact of the claim on the general relations between the employer and employees in the region is likely to be adverse, the appropriate Government may take that into account in deciding whether a reference should be made or not.
It must, therefore, be held that a prima facie examination of the merits cannot be said to be foreign to the enquiry which the appropriate Government is entitled to make in dealing with a dispute under Section 10(1).
7.
According to him, the similar view is also taken by the Supreme Court in AIR 2000 SC 915 (Secretary, Indian Tea Association v. Ajit Kumar Barat & Ors.).
There the Supreme Court held that the appropriate Government would not be justified in making a reference under Section 10 of the Act without satisfying itself on the facts and circumstances brought to its notice that an industrial dispute exists or apprehended and if such a reference is made it is desirable wherever possible, for the Government to indicate the nature of dispute in the order of reference.
Before making a reference under Section 10 of the Act the appropriate Government has to form an opinion.
Incidentally, by such judgment, appropriate Authority was entrusted with the power to verify whether an employee is a workman or not.
In this particular case, I am only concerned with the fact whether the appropriate Government can form an opinion about referability of the dispute or not.
Therefore, with the interpretation the Government can form such opinion.
In AIR 1952 Bombay 293 (Ramchandra Abaji Pawar v. The State of Bombay) it was held by a Division Bench of that Court that in case of public utility service, Government is the best judge of the question whether the dispute could be referred to adjudication by the Court/Tribunal or not.
In 1968 Lab.
IC 1534 (The Tirupathi Motor Transport Workers Union & Ors. v. Venkateswara Bus Union Tirupati) Andhra Pradesh High Court held that second proviso to Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 makes it clear that there is no such inescapable obligation resting on the State Government.
Therefore, by and large the scope of forming opinion is very much pertinent and inbuilt in the process of reference.
8.
Factually, it is contended that in a letter dated 21st July, 2003 the Bank informed the Assistant Labour Commissioner that it is pertinent to note that there is no provision either in the Bank level settlement or industrial level bipartite settlement which stipulates that the Head Peons are to be provided with living space in the branch/office premises.
However, certain branches or offices provide space for keeping their personal belongings for staying overnight.
Such overnight stay is allowed for facilitating timely opening and cleaning the branch/office premises.
Inspite of such overnight stay the Head Peons were provided with normal house rent allowance as per the provisions of Sastri Award/bipartite settlement.
Of late it is observed that in many cases Head Peons' family members and also their relatives are frequently visiting and staying with them overnight unauthorized, causing serious security threat to such branches/offices.
It is also observed that such family members, apart from using branches' toilets etc., lie in the bank hall/office premises during office hours causing undue hindrance to the banks' working and adversely affecting the banks' image.
Incidentally, it may be mentioned that in a few branches, even though the concerned Head Peons are not staying overnight in the living space allotted to them, they keep such space under their possession and under lock and key.
It has been observed that such persons are cooking their food staffs inside the premises causing serious threat of fire hazards to the various sophisticated machines/computers/system installed at the branches etc.
In modern day, high tech banking scenario is intending to use the available space for location of various departments with better layout for catering to the needs of the customers effectively.
After examining the entire matter, specially the business and securities angle, the Bank has decided to discontinue the arrangement of allowing Head Peons to stay overnight at certain branches/ office premises.
Accordingly, they were asked to vacate the living space.
This action is totally in conformity with the subsisting provision of paragraph 159 of the Sastri Award which is as follows :  "Certain banks have been providing free accommodation to some of the employees, especially of the subordinate cadre, some of whom have been allowed to sleep on the bank's premise.
Such concessions or amenities which are voluntarily granted by the banks should not be taken as conferring right on the workmen.
This amenity also serves as a kind of arrangement for the safety of the premises and the property of the banks.
We think that even where such amenities are given, the house rent allowance also must be given, as the employees must have facilities for housing their families at the places of their employment.
We direct accordingly."
Therefore, it is clear that there is no right conferred upon the Head Peons to continue with the occupation of this space.
Therefore, it cannot be construed as a condition of service in terms of Clause VIII of Fourth Schedule to the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as regards customary concession/privilege/usage.
It will not be, in any fact, the service condition of the Head Peons.
Therefore, the strike for a day on 23rd July, 2003 is unjustified and uncalled for which undue hardship caused to the customers of the bank in particular and harassment to the public at large.
9.
In reply, Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners contended that Sastri Award was not the part and parcel of the settlement.
The allegation of the Bank regarding stay of Head Peons with their friends and relatives as not safe and other allegation regarding maintenance of the highly sophisticated machineries etc. cannot be accepted ground.
For an example, he contended that there are branches/ offices i.e. India Exchange Branch, Camac Street Branch and the so-called offices etc. where the living space provided to the Head Peons are not within the office premises but outside, albeit adjacent to the branch/office premises.
In such cases, the security and other conditions as alleged by the bank are wholly irrelevant and inapplicable.
Lastly he contended that Section 22(1) applies in respect of the case.
10.
Such submission was confronted by the Bank for saying that no challenge has been thrown in respect of the Sastri Award and the Bank employees are enjoying the benefit of the Sastri Award.
11.
Upon considering all pros and cons I am of the view that whether that Bank will keep the Head Peons in the respective branch or office is a matter of policy.
Bank is not debarred from taking such policy decision.
Such policy decision was taken and communicated to the employees.
The arrangements of keeping the Head Peons overnight in the branch or office is to protect the interest of such branch or office by such overnight stay.
The Head Peons have no authority to concert such arrangements to the family quarters.
Inspite of their stay they are getting the house rent allowance.
It is right to say that no challenge has been thrown in respect of Sastri Award and the bank employees are enjoying the benefit under the same.
It is categorical under paragraph 159 of such Award that Keeping of such personal belongings is a concession without conferring a right and without deduction of house rent allowance.
In such circumstances, conciliation failed.
Srike was withdrawn prior to reference for conciliation.
Law says that the appropriate Government can from an opinion.
The reasons as indicated under Annexure "P-6 " is nothing more than the reasons for not referring the dispute for adjudication In the reasons the appropriate Government observed that house rent allowance has not been deducted.
Therefore, no prejudice is caused.
The Union failed to establish that the management has violated any of the provisions of the settlement by their action.
12.
Therefore, there cannot be any existence of dispute.
Writ Court cannot allow the petitioners to reiterate the submissions before the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal which the have failed to establish before the Conciliation Officer.
No occasion arose on the part of the workmen to give up their house rent allowance as against their occupation of the premises in the respective branches of the bank.
Even if the ratio of AIR 1989 SC 1565 (supra) is taken into account yet it cannot be seen that the Court has taken away the right of administrative authority in forming any opinion regarding existence of industrial disputes or apprehension in connection thereto.
Moreover AIR 2000 SC 915(supra) is categorical on this point.
As a result whereof formation of the opinion by the administrative authority is obvious.
The impugned letter is no more than an opinion.
13.
Therefore, there is no reason to interfere with such letter under reference.
14.
Thus , the writ petition fails and accordingly dismissed.
Interim order, if any, stands vacated.
No order is passed as to costs.
Prayer for stay is made, considered and refused.
Let an urgent Xeroxed certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the Learned Advocates for the parties within two weeks from the date of putting the requisites.
Petition dismissed.