Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By this writ application the petitioners have impugned order dated 13th August, 2001 passed by the Commissioner, the Kolkata Municipal Corporation, being the respondent No. 2 whereby and whereunder he has in purported compliance of the two orders and judgments dated 23rd June, 1999 (passed in A.P.O.
No. 609 of 1997) and dated 22nd September, 2000 (passed in CC No. 17 of 2000), respectively refused to rectify or modify the final gradation list dated 26th November, 1998 and 25th June, 1999, and further prayed for substantive relief of rectification and/or modification of the final gradation list as above by determining and/or fixing the seniority, inter se , of the members of the petitioner No. 1 including petitioner nos. 2 to 6 and for other consequential benefits.
2.
The fact of this case which is relevant and material for the purpose of the writ petitions set out as follows :-  Respondent No. 1 on/or about 6th May, 1995 framed under Section 20 of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 1980, the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Services (Common Cadre) Regulations, 1994, while implementing the order of Hon'ble High Court for making gradation list of employees in the respondent No. 1.
After the aforesaid regulation was framed the respondent No. 1 prepared the gradation list of all the employees department wise and cadre wise and the same was made finally on or about 14th October, 1995 and 2nd November, 1995.
Being aggrieved by the said final gradation list which was published in two parts on two different dates as above the petitioners moved this Court by filing an application under Section 226 of the Constitution of India.
This application was disposed of by a judgment and order dated 3rd October, 1997 by the Hon'ble Justice Prabir Kumar Samanta, whereby His Lordship was pleased not to interfere with the gradation list, however, gave liberty to the petitioners to make proper representation pointing out anomalies and irregularities in the gradation list.
In the event such representation being made the respondents were directed to reconsider and rectify the irregularities.
The petitioners herein being aggrieved by the aforesaid order and judgment of the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Prabir Kumar Samanta preferred an appeal.
The said appeal was disposed of by an order dated 23rd June, 1999 by the Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Gupta and the Hon'ble Mr. Justice PK Sen (as their Lordships then were).
By this judgment and order Their Lordships did not interfere with the order of the learned trial judge.
However, their Lordships observed and further gave direction in the manner as follows :-  "....... We however wish to add that if the appellants/writ petitioners, either collectively or individually make representations to the competent authority in Calcutta Municipal Corporation pointing out any discrepancies, anomalies or irregularities in the fixation of their seniority inter se along with the others or otherwise after the coming into force of the 1994 Regulations, the competent authority in the Corporation shall consider and dispose of such representations and pass and communicate consequential orders within three months after these are received by the authority.
While considering the representations so made, the competent authority shall take into account the applicable law and the Rules on the subject of fixation of seniority, all Notifications and circulars of the Corporation applicable on the subject and the original seniority of the persons who constitute the common cadre after the coming into force of 1994 regulations.
We do wish to point out that such original seniority in the feeder service, relevant to the date of joining before the coming into force of 1994 Regulations would be a relevant factor in determining and fixing the final seniority in the common cadre constituted under 1994 Regulations."
Pursuant to the above order and reaction of the Hon'ble Division Bench, the Municipal Commissioner by his order dated 5th March, 2000 considered the matter and refused to correct and/or modify the gradation list as prayed for by the petitioners.
The petitioners being aggrieved by the above order of the Commissioner filed an application for contempt alleging that he has violated the order of Division Bench by ignoring the direction.
It was said that the Commissioner patently refused to take note of the original seniority of the feeder service relevant to the date of joining before the coming into force 1994 regulation.
It was also alleged that the Commissioner contrary to the direction of the Appeal Court held that the joining date is not relevant factor in determining and fixing the final seniority in the common cadre.
3.
The said contempt application was disposed of by Their Lordships, the Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Gupta and Hon'ble Mr. Justice PK Sen as their Lordships then were by an order dated 22nd September, 2000.
Their Lordships observed that the Commissioner failed to follow Their Lordships intention by implementing the earlier order in the matter of determination and fixation of the seniority in the common cadre constituted under the aforesaid 1994 regulation.
Accordingly, Their Lordships pleased to clarify Their Lordships' mind in the manner as follows :  "We hereby, while disposing of the contempt application, clarify that by our aforesaid directions we had clearly meant and intended that, all things being equal, the seniority in the feeding cadre shall be a decisive factor while determining the inter se seniority into the common cadre as per 1994 Regulations."
Pursuant to this last order of the Division Bench and further taking note of the earlier order of the same Bench the impugned order has been passed by the Municipal Commissioner.
By this impugned order he once again with detailed reasons has retained the earlier order and as a result whereof the petitioners are aggrieved.
The petitioners and each of them unsuccessfully challenged in an indirect way the last order by filing an application for contempt.
This subsequent application for contempt did not yield any favourable result in the disposal, as the Division Bench presided over by the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Tarun Chatterjee and the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jayanta Kumar Biswas by an order dated 8th March, 2002 dismissed the contempt application holding that there has been no Commission of contempt.
However, Their Lordships gave liberty to challenge the impugned order before the appropriate Forum.
4.
In the context as above, the present application has been made.
Mr. SK Dutta, Learned Advocate with Mr. AK Pramanick appearing for the petitioners, contend that the impugned order of the Commissioner is bad in law as he has failed to consider the representation of the petitioners in terms of the two previous orders of the Division Bench.
He has gone beyond the scope and ambit of the two orders by resorting to equation of posts of seniority at the time of promotion in feeder services etc, which are not only irrelevant but contrary to the directions of the Hon'ble Appeal Court.
He contends that judicial pronouncement does not permit to travel beyond the scope of the law or the guidelines laid down by the judicial orders.
Such an exercise is without jurisdiction and illegal and the same is not sustainable in law.
He has placed reliance on the Supreme Court decisions rendered in the case of Satyabrata Biswas & Ors. v. Kalyan Kumar Kisku & Ors. reported in 1994(2) SCC 266.
5.
He urges next that the Commissioner has erroneously understood the word "feeder service".
"Feeder service" means the service rendered by the petitioner in case of a promotion, in the post immediately before the promotion.
Here the feeder service is the post initially held by the petitioners and therefore date of joining is the relevant consideration for determining, inter se , seniority in the common cadre regulation, 1994.
To clarify the date of joining in the post of bailiffs in this case is the relevant factor.
He contends further that the Commissioner though being obliged, has failed to take note of the decision of the Mayor in Council contained in Annexure `P-9' pages (117-124) that the posts of Junior Assistant and Bailiff were treated at par (at page 120) by the proposed amendment of recruitment of rules by amending the same.
The proposal to include the posts junior assistant and bailiff in the promotional channel into the rank of manager on the basis of the seniority being counted from the date of appointment of promotion in the last cadre of these groups was accepted and implemented by the Mayor-in-Council subsequently.
Therefore, according to him, the seniority should have been determined taking note of the joining date of those persons who were appointed as bailiffs vis-a-vis the employees joined in the post of Junior Assistant.
6.
The administrative disturbance is of no consequence in this matter as the orders passed initially by this Court in the writ petition makes it clear that final gradation list or consequential steps pursuant thereto will abide by the result of writ petitions.
His next contention is that basically an employee has a right of his seniority being determined in accordance with the rules which remain in force at the time he was born in the cadre.
The right to get seniority determined as per rules of the force, all rules of the employment vests in an employee.
Seniority cannot be changed time and again when criteria changes.
In support of his contention he has relied on a decision of the Supreme Court judgment in case of P. Mohan Reddy v. E.A.A.
Charles & Ors. reported in AIR 2001 SC 1210.
He contends further that all the affected parties are not required to be added-as parties.
Only few of them can be brought for decision on this issue.
He has sought reliance on a decision of a Supreme Court judgment reported in 1984(4) SCC 251.
Inspite of the service done the respondent Nos. 4 to 6 have contested the matter.
7.
Mr. A Ghosh, Learned Advocate while opposing the writ application contends that in the seniority issue the union cannot have anything to say.
The nomenclature of the union makes it clear that it is of a particular department and the petitioners cannot remain as a member of a said union because of their successive promotions and postings in different departments.
The initial appointment of the petitioners was of the post of bailiff whereas the initial appointment of the private respondent was in the post of Junior Assistant.
Both the posts are not identical and the same in any respect.
The post of bailiff is inferior in all respects i.e. status, nature of service to the junior assistant.
Both the petitioners and private respondents were not holding respective same feeder posts at all material times.
The petitioners accepted the promotional scale given to them on the basis of final gradation list prepared from time to time and they have retired finally except the petitioner No. 3 whose seniority is not at all affected by the order of Municipal Commissioner under challenge.
Thus they and each of them is estopped from challenging the final gradation list as they have hand taken subsequently by the respondent No. 1.
Prior to framing of common cadre service regulations in 1994 and preparation of combined gradation list thereafter, all appointments and promotions used to be given department wise.
The common cadre service regulations and the combined gradation list on all Corporation posts came into force in view of judgment passed by the F.M.A.T.
No. 86 of 1998 with direction, inter alia, that the necessary position should be determined on the basis of the date of appointment/promotion.
8.
The Hon'ble Appeal Court by the said two orders clarified that all things being equal the seniority in the feeding cadres shall be a decisive factor while determining an inter se seniority in the common cadre as per 1994 regulations.
The petitioners were directed either by collectively or individually to submit fresh representation pointing out the discrepancies, anomalies or irregularities in the fixation of the seniority inter se along with others or otherwise after the coming into force of 1994 regulations.
They failed to point out any anomaly, discrepancy in their representation although the bailiffs and the junior assistants are not equal in grade, equal in status for fixation of seniority with effect from 1st March, 1996 when equal grades of scale of pay was provided for both the posts.
According to him, feeder service/post means the next below post held by the petitioners at the material point of time.
The petitioners have not stated what was their respective feeder posts prior to holding the posts as mentioned in the cause title.
It has also not been stated what was the respective seniority position in the posts held by them immediately before coming into force in the common cadre service regulation, 1994 vis-a-vis private respondents.
9.
On the questions of locus standi of the petitioners' union he has relied on a decision of the Mysore High Court reported in AIR 1962 SC 25.
He contends further that no scheme governing in the service matters can be fool proof and some Sections or other are bound to suffer.
The authority cannot satisfy the expectation of every employee.
In this context he has relied on a decision of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1982 SC 917.
Mathematical prediction cannot be expected in the matter of giving effect to the scheme and in harmonizing the claims of the officers belonging to different cadres and the adoption of a test of such accuracy with a view to ascertain whether Articles 14 and 16 are violated would not be appropriate.
He has placed reliance on a Supreme Court decision reported in AIR 1985 SC 781.
The Constitutionality of any service rule has to be adjudged by considering whether it is fair and reasonable and conducive to the majority of the employees and fortunes of some individuals is not to such stone.
He has drawn attention of this Court to a decision of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1986 SC 1830.
He contends that the seniority, inter se , shall be reckoned in promotional posts but not the seniority in the original posts.
He placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court judgment reported in AIR 1989 SC 261.
10.
Lastly, he urges that the Commissioner while passing impugned order, has followed direction of this Court and guidelines of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and recorded reasons.
On plain reading of an order of the reasons are not found to be absurd, the Writ Court cannot substitute his own reason or give its own interpretation.
Therefore, he contends that no relief should be granted.
11.
Having heard the respective contentions of the Learned Counsels and having gone through the orders passed by this Court I think only issue is whether the Municipal Commissioner has ignored direction and guidelines given by the Division Bench while disposing of the first contempt application, in the order dated 22nd September, 2000 or not.
It is pertinent to note that by the first order dated 23rd June, 1999 while disposing of the appeal, the Division Bench asked the Commissioner to consider and dispose of the representation, if made, taking the applicable law and the rules into account on the subject of the fixation of seniority, and also all the Notifications and circulars of the Corporation applicable on the subject and original seniority of the persons who constitute common cadre after the coming into force of 1994 regulations.
Their Lordships were pleased to observe that such original seniority in the feeder service, relevant to the date of joining before the coming into force of 1994 regulations would be a relevant factor in determining and fixing final seniority list in the common cadre.
The last portion of this order was clarified by Their Lordships observing that `all things being equal' the seniority in the feeder cadres shall be a decisive factor while determining inter se seniority into the common cadre.
In the context as aforesaid, the impugned order has to be examined whether the Commissioner has followed it or not.
From the grievance of the petitioners as I have been able to understand that the joining date in the post of the bailiff as well as in the post of the junior assistant should have been the criteria for fixation and determination of the seniority.
They claim so on the strength of the subsequent decision of the Mayor in Council of merging the two posts of bailiff and Junior Assistant and thus both the cadres are rendered equal.
In view of this decision the joining dates of each and every employee whether in the post of bailiff and in the post of junior assistant are the only basis for determination of seniority and this has been asked by the Division Bench to be followed.
12.
I express my inability to accept the contention of Mr. Dutta, the Learned Counsel for the petitioners, that the Division Bench order is to be construed in the manner and line as he has urged.
The Bench has clarified by the subsequent order with the words "all things being equal".
It is true that there has been merger of two posts but because of this merger the equality in the two posts before merger in all respects cannot be accepted.
From the words "all things being equal" in the order of the Court it is clear to suggest that equal in all respects meaning thereby the nature of works being done, salary being drawn and scale of pay before merger.
Admittedly the post of the bailiff was not same as that of the junior assistant and it is further admitted that the pay scale of junior assistant is higher than that of bailiff.
The higher pay scale is fixed for superior services being rendered.
13.
The Municipal Commissioner explained in detail in his order that in Order to achieve equality the bailiff had to reach pay scale of the junior assistant after they had rendered services for sometimes.
All the bailiffs who are aggrieved with being placed in the gradation list below those Junior Assistant who joined later, reached the pay scale of junior assistant on Ist March, 1996.
According to me, as rightly contended by Mr. Ghosh that feeder post has to be considered after achieving unification and common gradation of the two posts on and from 1st March, 1996.
The Court never thinks while passing any order, of irrationally or inequality.
The Commissioner has taken a very rational approach while taking into consideration of all the facts and circumstances of the case.
The junior assistant carrying higher scale of pay and getting higher salary cannot be expected to be placed below the bailiffs who were in the lower scale of pay.
Thus, I am of the view that the Commissioner has correctly carried out the Division Bench order after he found that all things are equals.
14.
The decision cited by Mr. Dutta in my opinion, has no application as the Commissioner has not exceeded his power or jurisdiction.
In other words he had not travelled beyond the scope of the aforesaid two orders of the Division Bench.
The decisions rendered by the Supreme Court in case of Satyabrata Biswas & Ors. v. Kalyan Kumar Kisku & Ors. reported in 1994 (2) SCC 266 was rendered on the facts that the Court below while exercising the contempt jurisdiction were found to have exceeded their power given as a Court of contempt.
It is true as rightly contended by Mr. Dutta following the general principle of law that seniority has to be fixed from the date of appointment but this Rule is applicable in case of the employees who are equally placed.
In the case in hand, the fixation of seniority has to be taken from and amongst the two unequal cadres carrying unequal pay scales and involving different nature of works.
In a situation of this nature the balance has to be struck and while doing so I cannot conceive of any other measure as has been rationally adopted by the Commissioner.
According to me, the decision rendered in case of P. Mohan Reddy v. E.A.A.
Charles reported in AIR 2001 SC 1210 has no manner of application.
15.
I am unable to entertain the technical objection raised by Mr. Ghosh that the writ petitioner No. 1 has no locus standi because of the subsequent development that the petitioners are no longer belonging to the writ petitioner No. 1 because of their promotion.
The writ petitioner No. 1 has come forward with a collective grievance qua members as the bailiffs not officers.
16.
Under these circumstances, I am of the view that no interference is called for.
The order has been passed rightly by the Commissioner following the two Division Bench judgments.
The writ petition is, thus, dismissed.
No order is passed as to costs.
Petition dismissed.