C.A.V.
On 24.8.2005 Pronounced on : 31.8.2005.
Tapen Sen, J - This Writ Petition filed by the Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited seeks to challenge the Award passed on 31101988 by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda in Reference Case No. 206/88 (instituted on 1461988) whereby and whereunder, he answered the Reference in favour of the workman and held that he was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages.
He was also directed to report for duty within 30 days from the date of publication of the Award.
2.
From the facts pleaded, it appears that the Respondent No. 2 Workman (hereinafter referred to for the sake of brevity as, `the concerned Workman') was engaged on daily wages as a Typist on 211986 in the district officer of the petitioner, Management at Faridkot.
He worked upto 1041987 with a number of breaks as has been stated in Paragraph 3 which is to be read with Annexure P-1.
According to the petitioner, the concerned Workman never turned up from 1141987 till he served a demand notice on 2271987.
In order to cope up with the work, the post was filled up through Employment Exchange by holding a test and one Mr. Darshan Rani was appointed as Steno-typist.
The concerned Workman did not appear for interview or test independently or through the Employment Exchange.
He neither reported for duty nor did he get his name sponsored through the Employment Exchange.
No order at any stage was passed for terminating his services as he was being paid on daily basis and he had himself voluntarily stayed away/abandoned his work.
It was only through his letter dated 2271987 that he "surprised" the Management by serving a notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to for the sake of brevity as, `the Act').
Prior thereto i.e. between 1041987 and 2271987, he had never made any request for being allowed to resume duty nor had he sent any intimation in that regard.
Being a daily wage employee and coupled with the fact that he was absent without any intimation, the Management had no option but to appoint a suitable substitute in his place and accordingly, they had appointed Ms. Darshna Rani, who had been sponsored by the Employment Exchange along with others.
3.
Upon an appropriate reference having been made to the Labour Court, the impugned Award was passed ordering reinstatement with back wages as stated above.
4.
Mr. Govind Goel, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner raised a very short point.
He submitted that after the writ petition was filed, this Court had stayed the operation of the same by Order dated 3051989.
The order dated 3051989 reads as follows :-  "Reply to the CM along with the affidavit has been filed that the workman was not gainfully employed.
Written statement has also been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
In view of the reply filed, the operation of the impugned award is stayed subject to the provisions of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Since the affidavit has been filed, the workman will be paid last wages drawn by him."
(SIC) It is thus evident that while staying the operation of the impugned Award, this Court observed that the same was subject to the provisions of Section 17-B of the Act.
Mr. Goel submits that after the aforementioned Order was passed, the Management decided to offer employment to him by Order dated 461993.
For the sake of convenience, the Order dated 461993 is necessary to be quoted and the same is being extracted from page 10 of the Additional affidavit appended to CM No. 8898 of 2005 filed in this case and it reads as follows :-  "Shri Sat Pal Sharma working as Typist on daily wage basis was terminated from service of the Markfed on 2041987.
He raised an Industrial Disputes and the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bathinda ordered his re-instatement with continuity of service and full back wages vide award dated 31101988.
A Civil Writ Petition No. 2693 of 1989 was filed by the Markfed in the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court and the same was admitted with the stay of operation of the award subject to the provision of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act.
As Shri Sat Pal Sharma in being paid the wages at revised DC Rates under the Act, ibid without taking any work, it has been decided to take work from him and accordingly, he is taken back in service of the Markfed with immediate effect at the rates of wages already being paid to him subject to the final decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 2693 of 1989 pending in the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court.
On re-instatement, Sh.
Sat Paul Sharma, is posted in the office of DM, Markfed, Gurdaspur.
Sd/-  Managing Director Markfed" [SIC]  5.
Mr. Govind Goel submitted that instead of taking the employment as was offered by the Managing Director vide his Order dated 461993, the concerned Workman chose to challenge the same by way of a civil miscellaneous application filed in this case and which was registered as CM No. 6045 of 1993.
6.
Upon persual of the aforementioned CM No. 6045 of 1993 which was filed in this case, the concerned Workman prayed for stay of the aforementioned Order dated 461993 which he termed to be an Order transferring him from Faridkot to Gurdaspur.
In that application, he had stated that the petitioner Management became annoyed and prejudiced against him because of the Order dated 3051989 which was passed by this Court staying the operation of the impugned Award subject to the provisions of Section 17-B of the Act and therefore, in order to harass and humiliate him, they passed the Order on 461993 wherein, in the garb of taking work from him, they posted him from Faridkot to Gurdaspur which was situated at a distance of 300 kilometers from his present place of posting.
According to the concerned Workman, said Order was illegal, mala fide and could not have been passed in view of the fact that the concerned Workman was a daily wage employee who was not subject to transfer and that such transfers were an incidence of service qua regular employees and not daily wagers.
7.
On 2071993, the aforementioned CM No. 6045 of 1993 was taken up before this Court but on that day, Mr. AK Chopra, learned Counsel appearing for the concerned Workman sought permission to withdraw the said application so as to enable his client to agitate the matter on the writ side.
Order was accordingly passed.
The Order dated 2071993 reads thus :-  "Learned counsel appearing for the applicant seeks to withdraw the application enabling his client to agitate the mattee on the writ side.
Order accordingly."
[SIC] 8.
Mr. Govind Goel submits that thus it is evident that the concerned Workman not only refused to accept the offer given to him on 461993, but he also himself chose to abandon his challenge made thereto on 2071993 when he withdrew CM No. 6045 of 1993 and therefore, he will not be entitled to reinstatement with full back wages even if there be a violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
He further submits that for not joining pursuant to the Order dated 461993, the concerned Workman has made himself liable to be proceeded against departmentally and in any event, his failure to join shows that he is not interested in the service at all.
Mr. Goel also submits that the failure of the concerned Workman to join service after 461993 is itself a factor in favour of the Management because such a conduct on the part of the concerned Workman cannot be allowed to create a burden on the State Exchequer by way of back wages.
He finally submits that in view of his short span of service with the Management w.e.f.
January 1986 to April 1987, it would not be in the interests of industrial peace to order or to compel reinstatement and that too, after a gap of 18 years.
9.
Mr. Goel's entire argument is based on the conduct of the concerned Workman post 461993.
His entire argument is based on the fact that since the concerned Workman did not join after 461993 in spite of the offer of employment, he is not entitled to any relief, far less the relief of reinstatement in service.
Mr. Goel relies upon a Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Employees, Management of Central P&D Inst.
Ltd. v. Union of India and another, 2005(1) SCT 476 (SC) : AIR 2005 SC 633 in support of the contention that when an employee is not interested in continuing with the job even after reinstatement, it is neither necessary for the Court nor mandatory to order for his reinstatement even if there is a violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
10.
The aforementioned judgment will not help the case of Mr. Goel because in that case, it has been recorded in Paragraph 7 that "it was clear that the employee had not joined as directed by the Industrial Tribunal probably because she was otherwise settled in some other job".
In the instant case, there are two civil miscellaneous applications which were filed by the Management itself and they are CM No. 3155 of 1989 and CM No. 6536 of 1989.
CM No. 3155 of 1989 was for staying the operation of the impugned Award and in Paragraph 2 the Management had stated as follows :-  "2.
That in pursuance to the illegal award, respondent No. 2 is keen to resume work with the management.
In case he joins the duties, the present writ will become infructuous."
11.
In CM No. 6536 of 1989, the same was again filed by the Management under Section 151 CPC wherein they had once again prayed for stay of the operation of the impugned Award and in paragraph 2, they stated as follows :-  "2.
That in pursuance to the order, dated 31101988 the respondent No. 2 is pressing for duty."
The aforementioned two statements made by the petitioner/Management go to show that the concerned Workman was very much keen to join duties.
It was not a case where he was not at all interested in joining the duties.
In that view of the matter, the Judgment cited by Mr. Govind Goel does not improve nor help the case of the petitioner.
12.
When the aforementioned CM No. 6536 of 1989 was placed on 3051989 and when the concerned Workman filed an affidavit stating that he was not gainfully employed, this Court stayed the operation of the impugned Award subject to the provisions of Section 17-B of Act.
This Order was passed on 3051989.
It is evident, upon perusal of the statements made in the additional affidavit appended to CM No. 8898 of 2005 filed in this case, that after publication of the Award on 1311989, the concerned Workman had submitted his joining report on 2811989.
It is evident that thereafter the Management filed the aforementioned two applications for stay so as to prevent the concerned Workman from getting the benefit of the Award.
On 3051989, the Award was stayed in the manner stated above.
It has been stated in paragraph 6 of the aforementioned additional affidavit that pursuant to the Order dated 3051989, the payment of Rs. 18,260/- was made to the concerned Workman but later on the petitioner Management demanded a refund of Rs. 13,99575 alleging that the same has been paid in excess on the ground that wages were to be paid only from the date of publication of the award till pendency of the writ petition.
It was in that context that thereafter the concerned workman filed CM No. 5937 of 1990 in this case and after hearing, an order was passed on 791990 by Hon'ble the Chief Justice staying recovery after making the following observations which are necessary to be quoted and which read as follows :-  "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, it is directed that the workman will be paid salary according to the revised pay scale.
Moreover, according to the workman, he has not been paid the salary from 1st August, 1989, which shall be paid to him within one month.
As regards the recovery, it is made clear that at this stage no recovery can be made.
If there is any, the same will be made by the petitioner in case the writ petition is ultimately allowed.
Consequently, the recovery proceedings are stayed meanwhile."
[SIC] It is further evident that thereafter the petitioner Management had no alternative but to go on making payment as per the Order dated 791990 till they took a decision on 461993.
13.
Upon a perusal of the aforementioned Order dated 461993 quoted above, it is evident that the Managing Director decided to take back the respondent No. 1 in service subject to the final decision of this writ petition and observed that on reinstatement, he would be posted in the office of the DM, Markfed at Gurdaspur.
14.
According to the concerned Workman, this was an order which was mala fide in nature and amounted to an Order of transfer posting him 300 kilometers away.
He could not accept this Order for the simple reason that he was a daily wager and therefore, he could not be posted beyond a reasonable distance from the place of his appointment and the reasonable distance should be where such a daily wager can reach by an ordinary mode of conveyance and can go back home.
The concerned Workman further stated that he was a poor daily-wage employee drawing Rs. 1,179/- per month as salary and this being a meager sum, it was difficult for him to serve at a long distance away from home.
The concerned Workman had also stated in the aforementioned CM No. 6045 that he was the father of three daughters, out of which, two were school going and one was an infant.
With such a meager salary, it was difficult for him to join at Gurdaspur.
15.
In paragraph 8 of the aforementioned civil miscellaneous application, the concerned Workman had stated unequivocally that he would have no objection to being posted out provided he was regularized and given a regular scale of pay which is given to a Steno-typist.
He also stated that otherwise he was ready and willing to work in the place of his appointment.
16.
In the backdrop of the aforementioned statements made by the concerned Workman in CM No. 6045, this Court does not find any fault with him if he firstly withdrew CM No. 6045 of 1993 for challenging the Order dated 461993 on the writ side and thereafter, chose not to do so for want/paucity of funds, as submitted by the learned Counsel for the concerned Workman.
17.
It is evident that the concerned Workman was a low paid employee.
A Court of Equity exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, will reach out to undo injustice wherever such injustice is found to have been meted out.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court finds that gross miscarriage of justice and/or injustice was meted out to the concerned Workman.
When he was keen to join duty, the Management prayed for stay and when this Court granted stay, they paid him a certain sum of money but later on wanted to recover a major chunk out of it.
It was then that this Court had to step in staying recovery proceedings.
Thereafter the Management, having realized that there was no way out, sought to use the weapon of transfer upon such a poor paid employee who had two school going daughters and one infant to look after and maintain.
The concerned Workman was already facing the rigours of litigation which included lawyers' fees, expenses etc. Having found no option, he came to us complaining about the Order dated 461993 and gave very good and substantial reasons for doing so but perhaps due to technicalities or want of funds, he withdrew so that he could file a separate writ petition.
18.
Should a Court of equity close its doors to seekers of justice merely because a person, for financial constraints, could not undertake the rigours of a fresh round of litigation which includes, amongst others, the engagement of a professional Lawyer, meeting the expenses including fees for such professional Lawyer ?
This Court is inclined to accept the explanation given by the learned Counsel appearing for the concerned Workman to the effect that financial constraints did not permit him to file another writ petition.
19.
In that background, this Court is firmly of the view that such a technical objection should not be allowed to be taken so as to close the doors of this Court to seekers of justice.
On the contrary, while exercising powers of judicial review and being a Court of equity and justice under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, every attempt must be made to prevent miscarriage of justice and while doing so, sometimes to even, mould the relief.
20.
This Court has already held that gross injustice had been caused to the concerned Workman.
Therefore, merely because he did not accept the offer of employer made on 461993 and merely because he withdrew Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 6045 of 1993, these by themselves do not become a ground for the Management to say that even if there be violation of Section 25 of the Act, the concerned Workman would still not be entitled to be reinstated in service.
21.
For the same reason, it does not also allow the petitioner Management to say that after so many years, the benefit of back wages would be heavy on the State Exchequer.
The petitioner Management should have acted like a model employer instead of like a pavement boxer fighting de hors the rules.
The manner in which they have dealt with the concerned Workman goes to show that they have been extremely unfair and unjust to him.
22.
Let to be recorded that the learned Counsel for the petitioner was not able to demonstrate or argue any other point qua the impugned Award dated 30101988 so as to enable this Court to come to a conclusion that the same was per se illegal and/or perverse.
On the contrary, this Court has very carefully gone through the impugned Award which is contained in Annexure P-2.
It is no doubt a short Award but the reasons for passing the Order of reinstatement are very apt and correctly given.
The reasons are based on facts and they are also based on the evidence of Mehar Singh, a Senior Assistant, who appeared for the petitioner Management.
He produced Ex. M/2 which proved that the concerned Workman had worked continuously for more than 300 days during the calendar months immediately preceding the termination of his service.
Consequently, the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court correctly came to the conclusion that this cannot be done contrary to the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
He also noticed that the concerned Workman had been retrenched without notice and without payment of retrenchment compensation, as provided under Section 25-F of the Act, and therefore, the termination was ab initio void.
23.
This Court is clearly of the view that the reasoning of the learned Presiding Officer was correct and therefore, this Court is not at all inclined to interfere with the findings of fact and also with the conclusion arrived at by the said Labour Court.
Since the Award does not suffer from an perversity and since it is neither illegal nor arbitrary, this Court is not inclined to interfere with the same.
24.
So far as the arguments of Mr. Govind Goel is concerned, the same being based on events which took place after 461993, this Court has already held that the concerned Workman was absolutely justified in refusing to accept the offer of employment.
In fact, this Court proceeds to hold that the action of the Management in transferring the concerned Workman, in the garb of an offer of employment, was really intended to be used as a weapon in their hands to harass him.
25.
This Court was inclined to take a very serious view against the petitioner Management and was considering the imposition of very heavy costs upon them for harassing and causing mental agony to the concerned Workman but taking into consideration that upon dismissal of this writ petition, the effect would be reinstatement, continuity in service and payment of back wages to the concerned Workman strictly in terms of the impugned Award, this Court therefore, did not proceed to do so and let the matter rest at that.
26.
This therefore, calls for dismissal of the writ petition and therefore, dis-entitles the petitioner Management from the relief prayed for by them in the writ petition.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.