Hemant Gupta, J - The present writ petition though filed on behalf of World Human Rights Protection Council, is in fact a petition on behalf of its Chairman, an Advocate of this Court.
In the writ petition, the constitution of World Human Rights Protection Council is not disclosed but in para No. 1 of the writ petition it is averred that the petitioner is a resident of Chandigarh and is a citizen of India; hence competent to invoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court.
It is, thus, apparent that it is a writ petition by an individual.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that against a principal of a school in Chandigarh, two FIRs have been registered for sexual harassment and therefore, an effective Complaints Committee be constituted by the State Authorities as well as by the School Management to deal with sexual harassment cases at work place and that the Principal of the School should be either suspended or be directed to proceed on long leave.
The petitioner has also sought a direction against the School Management to produce the accounts of the Parents-Teacher Association Funds, Public Donation Fund, Private Building fund and Private Stationery fund and the money given to the Principal in view of the fact that the Principal has spent the money out of such funds to defend two criminal cases registered against him.
Thus, an inquiry is sought to be conducted regarding the misappropriation of the Parents-Teacher Association fund and for registration of criminal case against the guilty persons.
3.
It is alleged that in a Daily Newspaper dated 662004, a news has appeared with the heading "Principal held on Sexual Harassment Charge".
As per the said report a lady teacher was sexually harassed by the Principal of the school and the School Management, instead of taking action against the Principal on the basis of the complaint, the complainant was given a warning on 3152004 and placed under suspension.
Reference is made to another newspaper report of sexual harassment in respect of another teacher in the school.
It is further mentioned that the FIR has been registered against the Principal on the basis of complaint filed by one lady teacher M and another FIR on the basis of the complaint of another lady teacher R on 5.6.2003.
It has been further pleaded that the school, whose Principal is charged of sexual harassment, is a co- education School but still he is allowed to function as Head of the School Reference is made to certain payments made viz. Rs. 44,000/- from PTA fund vide cheque No. 143214, dated 19.1.2004, Rs. 20,000/- from Private Stationery fund vide cheque No. 161409; Rs. 5,000/- from PTA fund vide cheque No. 143211 dated 29112003; Rs. 50,000/- from PTA fund vide cheque No. 143206 dated 1992003; Rs. 35,000/- from PTA fund in September, 2004; Rs. 50,000/- from PTA fund vide cheque No. 161229; Rs. 11,000/- from Private Stationery fund vide cheque No. 161416 dated 20.5.2004 and Rs. 8,000/- from Private Stationery fund vide cheque No. 161405.
The School Management has also spent more than Rs. 10 lacs out of PTA fund for the construction of private public school.
4.
A joint written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 and another written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 5.
The allegations levelled by the petitioner have been denied.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 it has been pleaded that the writ petition is not in public interest but is a vindictive litigation at the behest of M, a Social Study Mistress of the School It has been pointed out that the Principal of the School has called number of explanations of M for creating indiscipline in the Institute.
In order to save her skin, she invented a novel method and levelled false allegations of sexual harassment.
The Principal is with the Institute for the last about 30 years and he is heading the Institute for the last about 2 decades.
It has further been alleged that M has levelled allegations against the Chairman of the Institute who is more than 80 years of age and Manager of the Institute who is about 65-70 years of age and even though the members of the School are connected with religious affairs of Gurdwara.
Apart from teacher M, the Principal of the Institute has also called explanation from her two colleagues and these three teachers have formed a clique in the school and have started creating indiscipline in the school for their selfish ends.
Teacher M was suspended on 3152003 and thereafter she levelled false allegations of sexual harassment against the Principal.
Almost all teachers of the institute of their own gave a communication in writing in July, 2003 that the Principal is a man of character and integrity but M has made a complaint of sexual harassment in a revengeful manner.
It has further been pointed out that sexual harassment criminal case at the instance of M is being intentionally delayed by her in as much as her part statement was recorded more than one and half years back but thereafter she has not given further statement.
She has not even appeared before the Sexual Harassment Committee constituted by the School Management Committee.
Another teacher R whose services were terminated when on probation made a complaint on 19122003 regarding the alleged harassment although she is signatory of a communication made by the staff members in July, 2003 in respect of character and conduct of the Principal.
It is further pointed out that teacher M has filed 5-6 writ petitions before this Court when a charge- sheet of misconduct was issued against her.
M has not only filed an application for the cancellation of bail of the Principal before the Court but also filed a contempt petition alleging violation of the orders of the High Court.
She had made a number of complaints and also was instrumental in publishing news of sexual harassment against the Principal after termination of teacher R In respect of expenses it was pleaded that all the expenses have been made with due sanction of the competent authorities.
5.
In the written statement filed by President, Parent Teacher Association, it has been alleged that the Advocate who has filed the present petition has no interest whatsoever except to help private individuals who are playing havoc with the School Management, students and indirectly with the parents of the student.
It has been pleaded that teacher M and some other teachers have dragged the School Management in unnecessary litigation by levelling false allegations and has filed three writ petitions which are pending before this Court.
The present writ petitioner is acting on the instructions of teacher M who has supplied the particulars to the writ petitioner.
Teacher M is wife of an Advocate and so is another teacher.
It has been pleaded that the petitioner wants to gain private benefit for harassing the Principal at the instance of teacher M. It has been pleaded that the Association has donated a sum of Rs. 7 lacs for the construction of building of the school being happy with the result of the School when as many as 5 students had obtained more than 90 per cent marks after passing the resolution on 1942002.
Similarly Parents Teacher Association has passed a resolution in an emergent meeting on 762003 condemning the conduct of teacher M.  6.
When the writ petition came up for hearing before this Court on 1472005, learned counsel for the petitioner prayed for a short adjournment to satisfy the Court about the maintainability of the present petition in public interest.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length on the said question and are of the opinion that the present writ petition is not in public interest but has been filed in private interest.
7.
Resume of the facts mentioned above would show that the grievance is made in respect of allegations of sexual harassment against teachers M and R FIR by teacher M was got recorded on 5.6.2003 after she was suspended on 3152003.
In respect of teacher R reference is made to the newspaper report Annexure P-2, which is again after termination of her services on 18122003.
8.
Since, the trial is pending in respect of the allegations levelled by teacher M, without commenting upon the merits of the controversy so as to prejudice the trial in any manner, it is apparent that the present writ petition is by a person who is total stranger to the controversy.
Neither teacher M and R belong to that section of society which cannot take steps for the protection or enforcement of their rights.
9.
The petitioner has sought disciplinary action against the Principal of the institute during the pendency of criminal trial.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ranjit Prasad v. Union of India and others, 2000(9) Supreme Court Cases 313 has held that a mere busybody who has no interest cannot invoke the jurisdiction of the Court in respect of departmental proceedings which are initiated or sought to be initiated by the Government against its employees.
Disciplinary action against an employee is taken by the Government for various reasons principally for "misconduct" on the part of the employee.
It is essentially a matter between the employer and the employee, and a stranger, much less a practising advocate, cannot be said to have any interest in those proceedings.
Public interest of general importance is not involved in disciplinary proceedings.
It has been thus concluded that if such petitions are entertained at the instance of persons who are not connected with those proceedings, it would amount to an abuse of the process of Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held to the following effect :  "But a mere busybody who has no interest cannot invoke the jurisdiction of the Court.
In respect of departmental proceedings which are initiated or sought to be initiated by the Government against its employees, a person who is not even remotely connected with those proceedings cannot challenge any aspect of the departmental proceedings or action by filing a writ petition in the High Court or in this Court.
Disciplinary action against an employee is taken by the Government for various reasons, principally for "misconduct" on the part of the employee.
It is essentially a matter between the employer and the employee, and a stranger, much less a practising advocate, cannot be said to have any interest in those proceedings.
Public interest of general importance is not involved in disciplinary proceedings.
In fact, if such petitions are entertained at the instance of persons who are not connected with those proceedings, it would amount to an abuse of the process of Court."
10.
Herein in the present case, the petitioner has claimed initiation of disciplinary proceedings against a Principal of an institute.
The petitioner is in fact a practising Advocate.
The matter is between employer and the employee as to what action should be taken by the Management against the Principal.
It if is decided by the Management not to initiate any action though criminal trial is pending, the petitioner in public interest cannot seek a direction from the Court that some disciplinary action be taken against the employer by the Management.
11.
In Ashok Kumar Pandey v. State of Punjab, 2003(4) RC.R(Criminal) 940 : 2004(1) Apex Criminal 678 : 2004(3) Supreme Court Cases 349, it has been held that when a petition is styled in public interest, litigation is nothing but a camouflage to foster personal disputes, the said petition is to be thrown out.
The jurisdiction of the Court in public interest cannot be invoked by a person or by a body of persons to further his or their personal causes or satisfy his or their personal grudge and enmity.
The writ petitioner who comes to the Court for relief in public interest must come into only with clean hands like any other writ petitioner but also with a clean heart, clean mind and clean objective.
12.
The said view was reiterated in Dr. B Singh v. Union of India and others, 2004(3) Supreme Court Cases (sic) wherein it was held to the following effect :  "11.
It is depressing to note that on account of such trumpery proceedings initiated before the Courts, innumerable days are wasted, which time otherwise could have been spent for the disposal of cases of the genuine litigants.
Though we spare no efforts in fostering and developing the laudable concept of PIL and extending our long arm of sympathy to the poor, the ignorant, the oppressed and the needy whose fundamental rights are infringed and violated and whose grievances go unnoticed, unrepresented and unheard; yet we cannot avoid but express our opinion that while genuine litigants with legitimate grievances relating to civil matters involving properties worth hundreds of millions of rupees and substantial rights and criminal cases in which persons sentenced to death facing the gallows under untold agony and persons sentenced to life imprisonment and kept in incarceration for long years, persons suffering from undue delay in service matters - government or private, persons awaiting the disposal of tax cases wherein huge amounts of public revenue or unauthorized collection of tax amounts are locked up, detenus expecting their release from the detention orders etc. etc. are all standing in a long serpentine queue for years with the fond hope of getting into the Courts and having their grievances redressed, the busybodies, meddlesome interlopers, wafarers or officious interveners having absolutely no real public interest except for personal gain or private profit either of themselves or as a proxy of others or for any other extraneous motivation or for glare of publicity, break the queue muffling their faces by wearing the mask of public interest litigation and get into the Courts by filing vexatious and frivolous petitions of luxury litigants who have nothing to lose but trying to gain for nothing and thus criminally waste the valuable time of the Courts and as a result of which the queue standing outside the doors or the Courts never moves, which piquant situation creates frustration in the minds of the genuine litigants.
12.
Public interest litigation is a weapon which has to be used with great care and circumspection and the judiciary has to be extremely careful to see that behind the beautiful veil of public interest an ugly private malice, vested interest and/or publicity-seeking is not lurking.
It is to be used as an effective weapon in the armoury of law for delivering social justice to the citizens.
The attractive brand name of public interest litigation should not be allowed to be used for suspicious products of mischief.
It should be aimed at redressal of genuine public wrong or public injury and not publicity- oriented or founded on personal vendetta.
As indicated above, Courts must be careful to see that a body of persons or member of public, who approaches the Court is acting bona fide and not for personal gain or private motive or political motivation or other oblique consideration.
The Court must not allow its process to be abused for oblique considerations by masked phantoms who monitor at times from behind.
Some persons with vested interest indulge in the pastime of meddling with judicial process either by force of habit or from improper motives and try to bargain for a good deal as well to enrich themselves.
Often they are actuated by a desire to win notoriety or cheap popularity.
The petitions of such busybodies deserve to be thrown out by rejection at the threshold, and in appropriate cases with exemplary costs".
13.
Still later in R&M Trust v. Koramangala Residents Vigilance Group and others, 2005(3) Supreme Court Cases 91 wherein it has been held that public interest jurisdiction is meant for the purpose of coming to the rescue of the downtrodden and not for the purpose of serving private ends.
This sacrosanct jurisdiction of public interest litigation should be invoked very sparingly and in favour of vigilant litigant and not for the persons who invoke this jurisdiction for the sake of publicity or for the purpose of serving their private ends.
It has been so held as follows :-  "24.
Public interest litigation is no doubt a very useful handle for redressing the grievances of the people but unfortunately it has been abused by some interested persons and it has brought a very bad name.
Courts should be very very slow in entertaining petitions involving public interest, in very rare cases where the public at large stand to suffer.
This jurisdiction is meant for the purpose of coming to the rescue of the downtrodden and not for the purpose of serving private ends.
It has now become common for unscrupulous people to serve their private ends and jeopardise the rights of innocent people so as to wreak vengeance for their personal ends.
This has become very handy to the developers and in matters of public contracts.
In order to serve their professional rivalry they utilise the service of the innocent people or organization in filing public interest litigation."
14.
In the said case Hon'ble Supreme Court has referred the parameters laid down in earlier decision of the Court in Balco Employees Union (Regd.)
v. Union of India, 2002(2) SCT 12 (SC) : 2002(2) SCC 333.
Relevant observations are reproduced as under :  "80.
PIL is not a pill or a panacea for all wrongs.
It was essentially meant to protect basic human rights of the weak and the disadvantaged and was procedure which was innovated where a public spirited person files a petition effect on behalf of such persons who on account of poverty, helplessness or economic and social disabilities could not approach the Court for relief.
There have been in recent times, increasingly instances of abuse of PIL.
Therefore, there is a need to re-emphasise the parameters within which PIL can be resorted to by a petitioner and entertained by the Court.
This aspect has come up for consideration before this Court and all we need to do is to recapitulate and re-emphasise the same."
15.
Apart from the allegations of sexual harassment, the allegations have been made against the Parents Teacher Association of misappropriation of funds.
The petitioner is not a parent of any student of the school.
Nor it is the case set up that parents of the children going to that school belong to the private section of society who cannot seek enforcement of their rights.
The petitioner is totally unconnected with the running of the school.
The allegations levelled by the petitioner have been controverted by the respondents.
The petitioner has not disclosed the source from whom he got the information regarding withdrawal of money including the cheque numbers.
Obviously, the petitioner has lent his name and has initiated a proxy litigation.
The petition, thus, lacks bona fide.
The petitioner has not come with clean mind, clean heart and clean objective, as referred to by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Pandey's case (supra).
16.
Consequently, we find that the present litigation is, in fact, an abuse of the process of law.
Therefore, we dismiss present writ petition with costs of Rs. 10,000/- which shall be deposited with the State Legal Service Authority, Chandigarh within a period of 2 weeks failing which the authority shall be free to take steps for the recovery of the costs of litigation.
Petition dismissed.