SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to consider and appoint the petitioner on the post of Taxation Inspector on compassionate grounds.
We may notice the relevant facts as pleaded by the parties.
The petitioner claims that his father who was working as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer in the State of Haryana died on 1092002 (hereinafter referred to as "the deceased").
At that time, the deceased had crossed the age of 55 years.
The petitioner is the eldest son.
He possesses qualification of BA The mother of the petitioner sent an application on 1622002 to respondent No. 3-Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Panchkula seeking appointment for the petitioner on compassionate grounds.
By letter dated 27.11.2002, the petitioner was informed by the respondents that since the post of Excise Inspector was not available, the petitioner could be offered the post of Taxation Inspector.
The offer of appointment sent by the respondents to the mother of the petitioner is attached as Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
The petitioner accepted the aforesaid offer by sending a communication dated 2122002.
Thereafter the petitioner has not been issued the order of appointment.
After waiting for some time, he again submitted a representation on 962003.
Ultimately, petitioner has received a cryptic letter dated 3062003, in which he has been informed that since his father was over 55 years of age at the time of his death, no relief can be granted to the petitioner and the matter has been closed.
Against the aforesaid decision, the petitioner again submitted a representation, but no response was received from the respondents.
At the same time, respondents have given appointments to respondent Nos. 5 to 12 in other departments.
Their cases are similar to the case of the petitioner.
Aggrieved by the arbitrary action of the respondents, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
2.
The respondents have filed the written statement.
It is stated that father of the petitioner died on 1092002 at the age of 55 years.
The claim of the petitioner was under consideration when the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules (hereinafter referred to as "the 2003 Rules"), were promulgated on 2822003.
Subsequently, the respondents had issued instructions on 3132003 in which it was provided that the 2003 Rules shall be applicable to those dependents of the deceased government employees, whose cases are pending as on the date of coming into force of these rules.
The cases already decided shall not be re-opened.
Since the claim of the petitioner was under consideration, the same had to be decided under the 2003 Rules.
However, even the 2003 Rules were amended by the Notification dated 1022004.
The Deceased Government Employees (Amendment) Rules, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as "the 2004 Rules") came into force w.e.f.
432003.
Under these Rules, it was provided as follows :-  "(c) ex gratia compassionate financial assistance to the family of the deceased government employee to be paid at the rate of Rs. 25 lacs in case the Government employee dies in harness at the age of 55 years or thereafter."
3.
The petitioner was entitled to receive a sum of Rs. 25 lacs as financial assistance under the aforesaid Clause (C).
He was, therefore, asked to give his option by letter dated 2562004.
The petitioner did not send any reply to the option.
It is further stated that in case the petitioner sends the necessary option, the necessary relief will be provided even now.
It is further stated in the written statement that in the instructions dated 3132003, it had been clearly mentioned that all pending cases will be decided as per new policy and earlier policy instructions regarding compassionate appointments had been repealed.
The operative part of the instructions is as follows :-  "These rules shall govern the compassionate assistance by way of ex gratia appointment on compassionate ground to members of the family of a deceased government employee who dies while in service and the following existing instructions issued by the Haryana Government from time to time in this regard have been repealed :- (1) Letter No. 16/5/95-6GS-II dated 851995 (2) Letter No. 16/5/95-6GS-II dated 3181995 (3) Letter No. 16/48/96-6GS-II dated 2281996 (4) Letter No. 16/29/97-5GS-II dated 25.9.1997 (5) Letter No. 16/5/95-5GS-II dated 1381998 (6) Letter No. 33/7/96-5GS-II dated 861999 (7) Letter No. 33/17/2000-6GS-II dated 722001 It is made clear here that an action taken under these Rules and instructions so repealed shall be deemed to have been taken under the corresponding provisions of these Rules.
These Rules shall also be applicable to those dependents of the deceased Govt. employee whose cases are pending as on the date of coming into force of these rules.
The cases already decided shall not be re-opened."
4.
The respondents have also stated that all retiral benefits of the deceased had been paid to the petitioner in time.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim that he is in dire need of financial assistance or that his family has been left without any means of livelihood.
5.
The petitioner has not filed replication to the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
6.
The respondent Nos. 5 and 12 have filed their affidavits.
They have stated that the respondents have been unnecessarily dragged into litigation as no relief is claimed against them.
They have also stated that their appointments have been made in the peculiar facts and circumstances of their cases which have no similarity to the case of the petitioner.
7.
We have heared the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
8.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the respondents had deliberately delayed in not issuing the order of appointment to the petitioner.
Had the claim of the petitioner been considered in time, he would have been entitled to be appointed in terms of the policy dated 851995 as modified on 3181995.
He submits that the claim of the petitioner is squarely covered by an earlier decision of this Court rendered in the case of Jai Ram v. U.H.B.V.N.
and another, 2004(4) SCT 664 (P&H) : 2004(5) SLR 851 in CWP No. 17896 of 2003 decided on 1792004.
He further submits that the claim of the petitioner could not have been rejected under the 2003 Rules.
Mere change in the policy was not a good enough ground for rejecting the claim of the petitioner as the claim of the petitioner was deliberately withheld to await the new policy.
Respondent Nos. 5 to 12 have been given the appointment in similar circumstances.
The action of the respondents is clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
Mr. Rathee, learned counsel for the respondents-State submits that in the written statement itself, the respondents have stated that the petitioner would be entitled to financial assistance in the sum of Rs. 25 lacs.
The petitioner has been given an option to receive the aforesaid amount.
He further submits that the claim of the petitioner has to be considered under the 2003 Rules as by virtue of instructions dated 3132003, all the earlier instructions with regard to appointment on compassionate grounds have been repealed.
He submits that the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner rendered in the case of Jai Ram (CWP No. 17896 of 2003 decided on 1792004) is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case, as in the aforesaid judgment this Court had only directed the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for compassionate appointment in place of his father within a period of three months from the date when the order dated 1792004 was passed.
The respondents therein had considered the claim of the petitioner i.e. Jai Ram and passed an order dated 15.12.2004 again rejecting the claim of the petitioner-Jai Ram.
Petitioner-Jai Ram again approached this Court by filing CWP No. 4497 of 2005.
The aforesaid CWP No. 4497 of 2005 has been dismissed by this Court on 21.3.2005 wherein it has been observed as under :-  "It is to be noticed that father of the petitioner passed away on August 24, 2002.
The family must have received the retirement benefits on account of the service rendered by the deceased.
As held by the Supreme Court, the purpose for making an exception to the general rules for appointment in public sector, by appointment on compassionate grounds, is to help the family to tide over the emergent situation caused by the untimely death of the only bread-winner.
The purpose is not to give a job to the dependent for the job which was held by the deceased employee.
Undoubtedly, the appointment on compassionate grounds can only be granted in exceptional circumstances of extreme hardship.
We are unable to accept the submission of Mr. Bhoop Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, that the family of the petitioner is so poverty stricken that the petitioner ought to be granted a job on compassionate grounds.
If the family can survive for a period of almost three years, it is indicative of the fact that the family is not without resources.
Dismissed."
10.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
A perusal of the various rules and instructions would show that various instructions have been issued by the State of Haryana with regard to appointment on compassionate grounds in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) Service Cases Today 174.
All the aforesaid instructions as quoted in the earlier part of the judgment have been repealed.
2003 Rules have been promulgated under Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Under Rule 4, it has been provided that the dependent of the deceased government employee shall give option within three years of the date of the death of the Government employee as under :-  "(a) ex gratia appointment on compassionate grounds to a member of the family who was "completely dependent" on the deceased employee and is in extreme financial distress due to the loss of the deceased, namely, the Government employee who dies in "service", or  (b) ex gratia compassionate financial assistance to the family of the deceased, over and above all other benefits like ex gratia grant due to his/her family, to be paid @ Rs. 25 lacs in the case of the family of the deceased not opting for ex gratia who dies in "service", or".
11.
Special provision has been made for the dependents of deceased employees, who were over 55 years of age at the time of their death.
Clause (C) has been added to Rule 4 as noticed earlier.
Under Rule 6, the competent authority is required to make a list of dependent indigent members of the family of the deceased to whom appointment may be given on compassionate grounds, strictly in accordance with the seniority to be maintained by the department.
The validity of the list shall lapse after three years.
If within three years, no job is given, a dependent of the deceased Government employee whose name is included in the seniority list, may exercise the option for the ex gratia payment under Rule 4(b) within a period of one month, after the expiry of the validity of list.
Under Rule 8, appointment on compassionate grounds can be granted only if the family is indigent and deserves immediate assistance for relief from financial destitution.
Rule 3(d)(iii) provides that "deceased government employee" means "a government employee who should not have crossed the age of 55 years".
However, this clause has been deleted by the amendment in the policy vide Notification dated 1022004 which came into force w.e.f.
432003.
But this is of no consequence.
After the promulgation of the 2003 Rules, the State of Haryana issued instructions on 3132003 by which numerous instructions issued on different dates between 851995 to 722001 were repleaded.
It was also provided that any action taken under the aforesaid instructions shall be deemed to have been taken under the new instructions dated 3132003.
Thereafter, the respondents by notification dated 1022004, amended the 2003 Rules which came into effect on 432003.
Under the 2004 Rules, Clause (C) was added to Rule 4 which has been reproduced above.
Under Clause (C), if a deceased Government employee was more than 55 years of age at the time of his death, the dependents are entitled only to the payment of the ex gratia amount of Rs. 25 lacs.
Necessary amendment to this effect has also been made in Rule 2 of 2003 Rules by adding Clause III which is as under :-  "(iii) ex gratia compassionate financial assistance to the family of the deceased government employee to be paid at the rate of Rs. 25 lacs, in case where the government employee dies in harness at the age of 55 years or thereafter."
12.
A conjoint reading of all the rules makes it abundantly clear that in the case of the dependents of a deceased employee who dies in harness at the age of 55 years or more, no appointment is to be offered on compassionate grounds.
The dependents are only entitled to the payment of ex gratia amount of Rs. 25 lacs.
A perusal of Rule 2 of the 2003 Rules makes it abundantly clear that the object of the rules is to assist the family of a deceased employee to tide over the emergent situation resulting from the loss of the bread-earner.
The object set out in the 2003 rules is in conformity with the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Nagpal (supra) in which it has been held as under :-  "The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
It is for these reasons that we have not been in a position to appreciate judgments of some of the High Courts which have justified and even directed compassionate employment either as a matter of course or in posts above Class III and IV.
We are also dismayed to find that the decision of this Court in Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others, 1989(4) SLR 327 has been misinterpreted to the point of distortion.
The decision does not justify compassionate employment either as a matter of course or in employment in posts above Class III and IV."
13.
The aforesaid observations make it abundantly clear that High Court would not be justified in directing the appointment on compassionate ground as a matter of course.
The Supreme Court has clearly laid down in Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra) that the Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis, that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
It has also been held that the provision for employment even on the lower post can only be justified in the form of relief against destitution.
It must also be noticed that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
Consideration for such employment is not a vested right.
The object of offering employment on compassionate grounds is only to enable the family to get over the financial crisis which it faces at the time of the death of the sole bread-earner.
In view of the clear enunciation of the law by the Supreme Court, it would not be possible to hold that the petitioner has been denied the appointment arbitrarily or unreasonably.
The law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal (supra) has been reiterated in the case of Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar and another, 1996(2) SCT 778 (SC) : 1996(8) SCC 23.
It has been reiterated that appointment on compassionate ground is an exception to the general rule of open recruitment, intended to solve the immediate financial problem being suffered by the members of the family of the deceased.
As noticed earlier the family of the deceased had been granted all the retiral benefits under the Rules.
The father of the petitioner passed away after attaining the age of 55 years.
As held by the Supreme Court, the purpose of making an exception to the general rule for appointment in public sector, by appointment on compassionate grounds, is to help the family to tide over the emergent situation caused by the untimely death of the only bread-earner.
The purpose is not to give a job to the dependent for the job which was held by the deceased employee.
Undoubtedly, the appointment on compassionate grounds can only be granted in exceptional circumstances of extreme hardship.
We are unable to accept the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the family of the petitioner is so poverty stricken that the petitioner ought to be granted a job on compassionate grounds.
14.
As is apparent from the extract reproduced above, even in the case of Jai Ram (supra), a Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (SS Nijjar, J) was a member, had rejected the claim of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds.
It was noticed that the father of the petitioner in that case had passed away on 2482002.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner therein to the effect that the family of the petitioner was poverty stricken, was not accepted as the family had received the retiral benefits on account of the service which had been rendered by the deceased.
In our opinion, the matter is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgment of the Division Bench.
We also do not find any substance in the submission made by the learned counsel that the action of the respondents is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner has failed to plead the relevant particulars to show that respondent Nos. 5 to 12 were similarly situated.
Respondent Nos. 5 and 12 have filed two separate written statements in which they have categorically stated that they had been given the appointments in the peculiar facts and circumstances of their case.
It is a settled proposition of law that any litigant who claims the relief on the basis of discrimination, has to plead and prove the same.
In the present case, neither does the petition contain the necessary averments nor any documentary material has been placed on the record to prove that the claim of the petitioner would be identical to the claim of respondent Nos. 5 to 12.
The claim of the petitioner under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India has, therefore, also to be rejected.
We are also of the considered opinion that a wrong benefit granted to respondent Nos. 5 to 12 cannot be permitted to be compounded by a direction of this Court.
The Courts cannot direct the grant of a benefit even if it causes hardship to a person, if it is initially granted contrary to the rules to some other persons.
This view of ours finds support from the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and others v. Rakesh Kumar, 2001(2) SCT 1085 (SC) : JT 2001(4) SC 306, wherein Shah, J has held as under :-  "20.....
Therefore, by erroneous interpretation of the rules, if pensionary benefits are granted to someone, it would not mean that the said mistake should be perpetuated by direction of the Court.
It would be unjustifiable to submit that by appropriate writ, the Court should direct something which is contrary to the statutory rules.
In such cases, there is no question of application of Article 14 of the Constitution.
No person can claim any right on the basis of decision which is de hors the statutory rules nor can there be any estoppel.
Further, in such cases, there cannot be any consideration on the ground of hardship...." In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.