Hemant Gupta, J - This judgment shall dispose of Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 138 and 139 of 2004 arising out of common judgment dated April 2, 2004 in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15371 of 2000 and 4579 of 2002.
2.
Before adverting to the issues arising out for decision in the present appeals, it would be advantageous to notice facts in brief.
The appellant is respondent No. 4 in the writ petition.
For facility of reference, the appellant is referred to as "college", whereas respondent No. 1 is referred to as "writ petitioner".
3.
The Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India, framed a scheme for establishment of Entrepreneurship Development Cell (hereinafter to be referred as "EDC") with a view to develop considerable cross-section of science and technology community (scientists, technologists or engineers) to choose entrepreneurship as their vocation rather than merely assuming positions as Managers in various industrial units.
A number of Entrepreneurship Development Programmes were sponsored in various parts of the country through which science and technology persons are trained in different behavioural and managerial skills essential for turning them into successful entrepreneurs.
The said scheme contemplated establishment of Entrepreneurship Development Cells as part and parcel of parent institution for all administrative purposes.
4.
The core staff contemplated to be provided in such EDC included a Chief Project Coordinator in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2000 and a Senior Project Leader in the pay-scale of Rs. 1200-1900.
The education qualifications and experience for such posts were contemplated under the said scheme.
The financial support was to be given by the Department of Science and Technology on yearly basis upto the end of 7th Plan period or three years after establishment whichever was earlier.
It was the responsibility of the parent institution to continue the Cell thereafter and to arrange funds for the same.
In fact, EDCs should merge into the normal stream of the institution for running on a continuing basis and the expenditure was contemplated to be met from usual sources or from the income generated by the Cells through consultancy etc.
It was contemplated that the Department of Science and Technology will not have any commitment on continuance of financial assistance to the institutions for the EDCs established.
The said scheme contemplated a certificate to be furnished by the institute with the proposal to the effect that the college/university will absorb the EDC established along with its faculty and staff, in the usual academic stream of the college/university, after expiry of the period of assistance from Department of Science and Technology.
5.
In pursuance of such scheme, the appellant, in advertisement dated 141989 invited applications for the post of Chief Project Coordinator.
The petitioner applied for appointment to the post of Chief Project Coordinator but was selected as Senior Project Leader.
Appointment letter dated 981989 was issued for the said post in the pay-scale of Rs. 1200-1900 (unrevised) with basic pay of Rs. 1600/- with nature of appointment as temporary.
In pursuance of such letter of appointment, the writ petitioner communicated his acceptance and joined his duties on 16.2.1990.
The EDC continued to receive financial assistance through the Ministry but the Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India, vide letter dated 1791999 communicated to continue financial assistance to EDC established upto 3132002 and advised to take all necessary steps to ensure the continuation of EDC beyond 3122002 when financial assistance from Govt. of India was to be finally stopped.
It is the case of the appellants that a Committee was constituted by the Principal of the college with regard to the continuation of EDC and its merger with the host institution.
The Committee submitted its report dated 2592000 recommending merger of EDC with the institution but the Board of Governors of the appellant in its 94th meeting held on 19112001 did not agree to merge EDC with the college and advised that efforts be made to get some scheme/project sponsored from All India Council of Technical Education so that the writ petitioner could be associated with that scheme project/cell.
Thus, it was the case of the appellant that financial assistance to the EDC was stopped w.e.f.
3132002.
Since the Board of Governors of the college has not agreed to merge the EDC with the college and, therefore, the services of the writ petitioner have been terminated w.e.f.
3132002.
The order of termination dated 2822002 is subject-matter so challenge in Civil Writ Petition No. 4579 of 2002.
6.
It was the case of the writ petitioner that the Principal of the college was greatly prejudiced against the writ petitioner and he started taking steps to wind up EDC.
Reference was made to allotment of House No. BB-4 in the campus to another Assistant Professor, seven years junior to the writ petitioner, as well as non-payment of salary w.e.f 162001.
Still further, it was pointed out that one Prem Kumar was appointed as Steno-typist in the EDC on consolidated salary vide order dated 1551989 but absorbed in the main stream of the college on 121991.
Similarly, Smt. Shashi Bala was appointed as Steno-typist in EDC vide letter dated 781995 but has been absorbed in the institution.
Still further, one Devinder Singh was initially appointed as Stenographer in EDC vide letter dated 1141997 and he has been regularly appointed in the college.
It is also pleaded that the writ petitioner was given teaching load of the regular academic courses since his joining in the college equivalent to that of an Assistant Professor.
7.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 15371 of 2000, the writ petitioner claimed release of revised pay-scale of Rs. 12,000-420-18,300 with basic pay of Rs. 14,940/- w.e.f.
1.1.1996 at par with Assistant Professors of Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, and also claimed arrears on account of pay revision along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum from 1121999.
The writ petitioner also sought a direction to confirm the writ petitioner as Assistant Professor as he has completed three years probationary period in terms of Bye-laws 11 of the Bye-laws framed by the appellant.
The writ petitioner claimed the pay-scale of Assistant Professor on the basis of communication dated 5111999 issued by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Technical Education Department, regarding revision of pay-scale of teachers in Engineering Colleges and other degree level Technical Institutions in the State of Haryana wherein pay-scale of Assistant Professor was revised from Rs. 3700-125-4950-150-5700 to Rs. 12,000-420-18,300 and that the pay was to be fixed at Rs. 14,940/- on completion of 5 years of service in the grade.
It is the case of the writ petitioner that though other similarly situated Assistant Professors have been granted the pay-scale w.e.f.
1121999, but the writ petitioner has not been granted such pay-scale.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the Board of Governors of the appellant in its 77th meeting held on 2321991 changed the Entrepreneurship Development Cell into the Centre for Industrial Liaison & Technical Development and also resolved to approve the staff structure of the said Centre and the pay-scales.
The post and the pay-scale of Senior Project Coordinator in the EDC to which the writ petitioner was appointed was resolved to be redesignated as Assistant Professor, Industrial Liaison & Technical Development in the pay-scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
8.
It was the stand of the appellant in the written statement that the Board of Governors of the appellant approved the budgetary provisions of Rs. 3,50,000/- sanctioned by the Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India, for the year 1988-89, while establishing the EDC, in its 72nd meeting held on 4111988.
The funds for the EDC come from the Government of India.
It was pointed out that the writ petitioner was never appointed as Assistant Professor but was appointed as Senior Project Leader in the EDC which was established with a view to promote entrepreneurship and also to strengthen industries and institutions interaction.
The staff of EDC was being paid salary not by the college but entirely from the funds being received from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India.
Still further, it has been pointed out that the appellant referred the case of the petitioner for grant of revised pay-scale of Assistant Professor to the Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India, but on 17102000, Government of India declined to grant the revised pay-scale to the petitioner on the ground that the EDC scheme was being promoted by the department in a Project mode.
It was pointed out that EDC was established in the year 1987-88 but there is no record available in the college showing any certificate as enclosed Appendix A with the guide-lines framed by the department of Science and Technology was filed by the college.
9.
It was stated by the Principal that he has nothing personal against the writ petitioner and it is the decision of the Board of Governors not to merge EDC with the regular establishment of the college.
Since the writ petitioner was never appointed with the regular establishment of the college, so there is no question of classification of houses so far his status is concerned.
As per decision of the Board of Governors in its meeting held on 9121999, a house belonging to the category of Assistant Professor was allotted to the writ petitioner.
It is also pointed out that the salary of the writ petitioner was being paid out of the financial assistance received from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India.
It is also pointed out that Prem Kumar was never absorbed in the regular staff cadre of the college.
In fact, the college has issued Advertisement No. 15/90 to fill two posts of Steno- typists on regular basis.
56 applications including that of Prem Kumar were received.
Prem Kumar was recommended by the Junior Staff Selection Committee on 5119991 and was appointed as Steno-typist vide appointment letter dated 121991.
It was pointed out that Smt. Shashi Bala was already holding the substantive post of Clerk in the college when she was posted in EDC to cope up with the administrative work of EDC.
Subsequently, she was reverted back to her regular post of Clerk.
Shri Devinder Singh was initially appointed in EDC as Stenographer on consolidated wages.
The post of Clerk in the college fell vacant for which request was sent to the Employment Exchange.
He was selected by the Junior Staff Selection Committee for the post of Clerk and he joined as such on 24121998.
The benefit of past service has not been given to any of the employee of EDC before being selected in the college.
10.
The learned Single Judge, inter alia, held that respondent No. 4 (present appellant) is under an obligation to merge the EDC with the college.
It was held that financial support was provided by the Department of Science and Technology on yearly basis and thereafter the financial responsibility was to shift on the Regional Engineering Colleges for running the EDCs and to absorb the members of the faculty/staff in the main stream of the college/ University after the period for financial assistance has expired.
It was held that a certificate/affidavit in the form of Appendix "A" has been furnished by the appellant undertaking that after the financial assistance from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, was stopped, the faculty members of the ED Cell along with staff were to be adjusted in the institution/college to become part of the main stream and that once the appellant has taken the benefit of an undertaking, it is impermissible to shun its responsibility and that the appellant is estopped to go back from its obligation.
11.
Still further, learned Single Judge found that there was mis-statement in the determination of the issue by the Board of Governors.
The agenda recited that two posts i.e.
Junior Stenographer and Peon in the EDC were never filled up whereas Shri Prem Kumar was appointed on 15.9.1988 as Steno-typist.
Subsequently, Smt. Shashi Bala was also appointed in EDC on 781995 as Steno-typist and Shri Devinder Singh was appointed as Junior Scale Stenographer on 1141997.
Thus, it was found that the Board of Governors was wrongly informed.
12.
The learned Single Judge also found that pay-scale of Rs. 3700-5700 has been revised to Rs. 12,000-18,300 and the said pay-scale has been given to Assistant Professor w.e.f.
1121999 and there is no reason to deny the same pay-scale to the petitioner in view of the decision of the Board of Governors in its meeting held on 2321991 redesignating the post of Senior Project Leader as Assistant Professor.
The learned Single Judge found that though the afore-mentioned recommendations were not implemented but the post was declared equivalent to that of "Assistant Professor" and that itself is sufficient to conclude that the petitioner is entitled to the pay-scale of Assistant Professor.
Consequently, both the writ petitions were allowed.
13.
Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently argued that the undertaking as contemplated in Appendix "A" to the guide-lines issued by the Department of Science and Technology was never furnished.
It is argued that such averment in the written statement has not been controverted and, therefore, the finding that it is impermissible for the appellant to merge EDC with the college is not sustainable.
It is also argued that even if an undertaking is deemed to be given, the Board of Governors of the appellant were within its jurisdiction to take a decision whether EDC is to be merged with the college or not.
Such decision is required to be taken on the basis of requirement of the college by taking into consideration its financial condition.
Reliance is placed upon the decision of the Supreme Court reported as K Shekar v. Indiramma and others, 2002(2) SCT 381 (SC) : AIR 2002 SC 1230 and MD, U.P.
Land Dev.
Corpn.
and another v. Amar Singh and others, 2003(2) SCT 968 (SC) : AIR 2003 SC 2357.
It was contended that the appointment of the writ petitioner was under a scheme.
The said scheme has come to an end, thus, the writ petition has to go along with the scheme.
Still further, it is argued that the writ petitioner cannot claim any vested right to claim absorption in the college as even regular post can be abolished on account of non- availability of work.
The Board of Governors, the competent authority, has decided not to merge EDC with the college and, therefore, the writ petitioner cannot claim any declaration that he is entitled to be absorbed in the college in regular pay-scale even though the college has not made any appointment against the post of Assistant Professor.
It is further argued that the writ petitioner is not entitled to pay-scale of Assistant Professor as he was appointed as a Senior Project Leader in a scheme.
The request for grant of pay-scale of Assistant Professor was declined by the Central Government and, thus, the writ petitioner is not entitled to pay-scale of Assistant Professor merely on the basis of re-designation of the post by the Board of Governors when even such decision to re-designate the post of Senior Project Leader in EDC was not implemented.
14.
The writ petitioner controverted the said stand of the appellant.
Reliance was placed upon clause 4 of Appendix "A" i.e. certificate to be enclosed with the proposal on establishment of EDC.
As per said clause, it is the responsibility of the college to absorb the EDC establishment along with its faculty and staff, in the usual academic stream of the college, after expiry of the period of assistance.
Thus, it is argued that the writ petitioner had legitimate expectation to be absorbed as Assistant Professor and the appellant is estopped to deny merger.
Clause 4 of Appendix "A" reads as under :-  "4.
It will be the responsibility of the college/university to absorb the EDC established along with its faculty and staff, in the usual academic stream of the college/university, after expiry of the period of assistance from DST (which will be at the sole discretion of DST)."
Still further, reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Raj Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1975(3) Supreme Court Cases 458.
15.
We have gone through the record of the case and considered carefully the contentions of the parties.
The argument raised by learned counsel for the appellant that the undertaking as contemplated in Appendix "A" of the Scheme was not furnished cannot be accepted at this stage of the proceedings.
The Committee constituted by the Principal of the college to consider the feasibility of merger of EDC with the college has made recommendation on the basis of such undertaking given by the college.
It is so apparent from the document Annexure P-12 attached with the writ petition.
Therefore, we proceed to examine the respective contentions of the parties on the basis of assumption that such undertaking was given by the college.
16.
The question which arises is whether EDC is bound to be merged with the college or it is open to the management to take a decision keeping in view its requirements and financial condition whether or not to merge EDC with the college.
The undisputed facts are that EDC was established in pursuance of a scheme framed by the Central Government for which necessary funds were allocated year after year till 3132002.
The funds would not be available after 3132002 was made known to the college on 1791999 when the financial assistance was regulated at the rate of 75% during 2000-2001 and 50% during 2001-2002.
The recommendations of the Advisory Committee were considered by the Board of Governors who have decided not to merge EDC with the college.
The said decision reads as under :-  "The Board did not agree to merge the Entrepreneurship Development Cell with the college.
The Board advised that efforts may be made to get some scheme/project (such as Industrial Institution Partnership Cell) sponsored for the college from the AICTE as referred to by Dr. PN Razdan, representative of the AICTE and Sh. G Lal can be associated with that scheme/project/cell, in view of the fact that financial assistance to the EDC will be available upto 3132002 only."
17.
In pursuance of such decision of Board of Governors, the services of the writ petitioner were ordered to be terminated vide letter dated 2822002 w.e.f.
3132002 i.e. till the time financial assistance was provided by the Central Government.
18.
Once the appointment of the writ petitioner was under a scheme and the said scheme has come to an end on 3122002, the writ petitioner cannot claim right to be absorbed with the appellant.
The management has a right to consider the merger of such EDC with the college keeping in view its requirement.
It is well settled that even regular posts can be abolished in view of the requirement of the employer.
In Amar Singh's case (supra), Supreme Court followed the earlier judgment reported as State of Himachal Pradesh v. Nodha Ram, AIR 1997 SC 1445, holding that the appointments of the employees were temporary under the `Million Well Scheme'.
When the work of the scheme had come to an end, the petitioners are not entitled to claim regularisation of their services.
It was concluded to the following effect :-  "11.
In clear and certain terms it is stated that when the project comes to close, the employees who are working in the project will not get any vested right.
In other words, once the project comes to an end, services of the employees also come to an end.
The other decisions cited by the learned counsel more or less are to the same effect."
19.
In K Shekar's case (supra), the question arose was whether the appellant, initially appointed as a Lecturer, is entitled to continue as Additional Professor in the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences.
It was found that the appellant was appointed in pursuance of advertisement to fill the Research Project posts in the Centre.
The said project was for a period of three years.
The appellant though applied for the post of Assistant Professor, the post advertised, but was appointed as Lecturer in Psychiatric Social Work.
The learned Single Judge found that the appointment of the appellant as Lecturer pursuant to the advertisement issued on 28th September, 1986 was invalid because the post of Lecturer was not advertised.
The Selection Committee was not entitled to create a new post which has not been advertised.
The learned Single Judge, thus, set aside the appointment of the appellant.
In appeal before the Supreme Court after the dismissal of appeal by the Division Bench, it was found that there can be no doubt that the appointment of the appellant as Lecturer was not in terms of the advertisement.
Before any appointment could be made to the post of Lecturer, the post should have been advertised.
The absence of an advertisement necessarily deprived persons who could have applied for the post, of the opportunity of applying for the post.
It was also held that though the post advertised was temporary yet by virtue of the Corrigendum, the post was made permanent.
It was found that the post should have been re-advertised after the same was made permanent so as to give fair notice to all prospective candidates regarding the nature of the vacancy to the filled.
In view of the said judgment, in the present case, the post advertised was that of Chief Project Coordinator whereas the writ petitioner was appointed as Senior Project Leader on temporary basis in EDC without any advertisement.
The appointment of the petitioner as Senior Project Leader cannot and does not confer any right for absorption as Assistant Professor, a regular post with the college which can be filled only after giving an opportunity to all eligible candidates to apply for the said post.
20.
Reference may be made to Karnataka State Coop.
Apex Bank Ltd v. YS Shetty and others, (2000)10 Supreme Court Cases 179, wherein it has been held that terms and conditions of service is governed by the letters of appointment and the agreement entered into by them at the time of their appointment.
It was held to the following effect :-  "8.
The narrow question is whether on account of the original resolution passed by the appellant Bank on 781985, the respondents can claim that their appointments are on a permanent basis.
The terms and conditions of appointment of the respondents are governed, not by the resolution, but by the letters of appointment and the agreements entered into by them with the appellant Bank at the time of their appointment.
Since the document clearly shows the appointments to be temporary and for the purposes of NCDC III Project, which Project has come to an end, the respondents cannot claim any right to a permanent post in the appellant Bank.
9.
This Court has held that when the posts are created for the purpose of the project, and the project is completed, no directions can be issued for the continuation of the posts.
(See in this connection judgment in Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya v. Bal Kishan Soni, (1977)5 SCC 86 and State of HP v. Nodha Ram, AIR 1997 SC 1445 (supra))."
Similarly, in Mahendra L Jain and others v. Indore Development Authority and others, 2005(1) SCT 146 (SC) : (2005)1 Supreme Court Cases 639, it has been held that the employees employed for the purpose of the scheme do not acquire any vested right to continue after the project is over.
Thus, it is held that since the writ petitioner was appointed in a scheme, therefore, the writ petitioner cannot claim absorption as Assistant Professor in the college i.e. the post which was never advertised.
21.
The question which now requires to be determined whether is the plea of estoppel can be raised against the appellant to force merger of EDC with the college.
As held in YS Shetty's case (supra), the terms and conditions of appointment given to the respondent alone are relevant.
There is no representation in the said letter of appointment that the services of the writ petitioner shall be absorbed in the college.
Still further, the management of the college has the inherent right to consider the justiciability of continuation of any post or work keeping in view the requirement of the institution.
The competent authority having considered all the relevant factors including the recommendations of the Advisory Committee, it cannot be said that the said decision is without jurisdiction.
The management has not only a right to create a post but also to abolish any post.
Therefore, the plea of legitimate expectation or estoppel cannot bind the management to merge EDC with the college after financial assistance is stopped by the Central Government.
22.
The finding that the Board of Governors was not correctly apprised of the facts is not sufficient which may vitiate the decision taken by the Board of Governors.
Shri Prem Kumar and Shri Devinder Singh were, no doubt, appointed in EDC on consolidated salary at one point of time but subsequently they were absorbed against direct recruitment posts advertised by the college.
Smt. Shashi Bala was a regular appointee of the college.
When the matter was put up for consideration by the Board of Governors, the writ petitioner alone was working in the EDC.
May be, the agenda for consideration of Board of Governors was required to be prepared by giving complete history and background but the fact remains that the post of Junior Stenographer and Peon in the EDC was not occupied by any person on the date when the Board of Governors considered the said agenda.
23.
Reliance of the respondent on Raj Kumar's case (supra) is, in fact, misleading.
The said judgment has, in fact, been superseded in another judgment reported as Raj Kumar v. Union of India and others, (1975)4 Supreme Court Cases 13, although it has not been expressly so mentioned.
Civil Appeal No. 1730 of 1972 against the judgment and order dated December 6, 1971 of the Delhi High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1261 of 1971 was decided on March 19, 1975, wherein the judgment referred to by the respondent was decided on 7101994 arising out of the same judgment and order passed by the Delhi High Court.
In the subsequent judgment, it has been held that non-payment of pay and allowances at the same time as the service of order of termination of service and order does not vitiate the termination as relevant service rules have been amended retrospectively.
The Court was seized of Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965.
The issue raised in the said judgment is not an issue in the present case.
The service conditions of the writ petitioner are governed by the terms and conditions of his letter of appointment.
His services have been terminated after giving him one month notice in terms of condition No. 11 of letter of appointment.
The scheme under which the writ petitioner was appointed is not receiving financial assistance from the Central Government after 3132002.
The competent authority of the appellant has taken a decision not to merge the said EDC with the college.
Thus, it is permissible for the college to decide whether EDC should merge with the college and to absorb the members of the staff in the main stream.
In exercise of such power, the Board of Governors have decided not to merge the EDC with college and such decision cannot be said to be suffering from any patent illegality which may warrant interference in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
24.
Still further, the post of Assistant Professor in respect of which the writ petitioner is claiming absorption is required to be filled up only after opportunity is given to all the eligible candidates to apply for consideration of appointment against the said post.
The writ petitioner is not entitled to absorption against a post on the strength of college only on the basis of his engagement under a scheme which has come to an end.
25.
The other question which requires to be determined is whether the writ petitioner is entitled to raise of salary in the pay-scale of Rs. 12,000-420- 18,300 in view of the instructions of the State Government revising pay-scale of Assistant Professors working in the Technical Institutes and Colleges.
The writ petitioner has also based his claim for the grant of pay-scale of Assistant Professor on the basis of decision of Board of Governors in its 77th meeting wherein the post and pay-scale of Senior Project Coordinator was resolved to be redesignated as Assistant Professor, Industrial Liaison & Technical Development in the pay-scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
It is the stand of the appellant in the written statement that the post so decided to be created could not be materialised due to paucity of funds and the writ petitioner was never offered the post of Assistant Professor.
In fact, that is the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge as well that the decision to create the post of Assistant Professor was never implemented.
Therefore, the writ petitioner cannot claim the pay-scale of the post of Assistant Professor on the basis of unimplemented resolution of Board of Governors and when there was no change in the status or nature of work being discharged by the writ petitioner.
The argument that the writ petitioner has been performing all the functions and the duties of the college and that he has been associated with the Electrical Engineering Department of the college and, therefore, entitled to revised pay-scale of Rs. 12,000-420-18,300.
In response to the said averment, it has been pleaded by the appellant that the writ petitioner has been given some teaching load considering his request to keep him abreast of the teaching as part of EDC.
The writ petitioner was appointed under a scheme and, therefore, he is not entitled to the salary of a regular post of Assistant Professor, the post against which the writ petitioner was never appointed.
26.
We are, thus, of the opinion that the impugned judgment passed by the learned Single Judge allowing Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15371 of 2000 and 4579 of 2002 is not sustainable in law.
Both the appeals are, thus, allowed and while setting aside the impugned judgment, the aforementioned writ petitions are dismissed.
27.
However, it may be noticed that the writ petitioner has worked with the college for more than 13 years.
Though we have held that the writ petitioner cannot seek merger of EDC with the college but it is considered appropriate if a direction is issued to the appellant to grant relaxation in age to the writ petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor as and when such post is advertised so that the writ petitioner, who has put in his valuable years of his life with the college, is able to compete with other eligible candidates to seek appointment on regular basis.
With the aforesaid directions, both the appeals stand allowed.
Appeals allowed.