Tapen Sen, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, widow of Havildar Channan Singh has prayed for quashing the Order dated 1332001 as contained in Annexure P-8 issued by the Defence Pension Disbursing Officer, Respondent No. 3 herein (hereinafter to be referred for the sake of brevity as `the DPDO'), whereby and whereunder the petitioner was informed that a sum of Rs. 1,64,803/- had not been deposited by her and therefore, she was requested to deposit the same in favour of the CDA (PD) Meerut Cantt, payable at Bathinda.
The petitioner has also prayed for quashing the Order dated 2352001 issued by the said DPDO being in the nature of reply to a legal notice sent by the petitioner transmitting to her lawyer the calculation sheet in respect of the petitioner's pension account showing that she had overdrawn the sum of Rs. 1,64,803/-.
The petitioner is also aggrieved by the action resorted to by the said DPOO in attempting to recover the aforesaid amount of Rs. 1,64,803/- and submits that said action is illegal, unlawful and without jurisdiction and that it has been passed without giving any opportunity of hearing to her.
The petitioner also makes a prayer that the DPDO be directed to continue to pay the ordinary pension to the her with effect from 192000 and continue paying the same and to release the said pension from the side of the Army, which according to the petitioner, has been illegally stopped by him.
2.
From the facts pleaded, this Court could gather that the husband of the petitioner had served the Indian Army and in the year, 1947 he was discharged whereafter he was paid pension.
3.
Mr. Bhim Sen Sehgal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner states, on the basis of the discharge certificate that was available with him, that the petitioner's husband was enrolled in the Army on 281933 and he was discharged on 12.9.1947.
4.
According to the petitioner, after having been discharged from the Indian Army, he was enrolled in the Department of Police in the Government of Punjab.
He retired from there on 2791965 and for the service rendered, he was granted civil pension, as per rules applicable in the State of Punjab.
Thus, what the petitioner contends in paragraph 4 of the writ petition is, that her husband, as on 2891965, was drawing two pensions i.e. one from the Army and the other from the Government of Punjab and that he was entitled to draw both the pensions.
The husband of the petitioner, received the aforementioned two pensions till his death on 811983 and even at the time of his death, he was receiving two pensions in the manner stated above.
To be more precise, the military pension was paid to him through the DPDO and the second civil pension was released to him through the Treasury Officer, Budhlada in the District of Mansa.
After the death of her husband, the petitioner also continued receiving two family pensions up to 3182000.
5.
All of a sudden on 1192000, the DPDO sent a letter (Annexure P-1) to the Treasury Officer, Budhlada informing that the petitioner could not have drawn two pensions at the same time and that she was required to exercise an option for either of the two pensions.
He further informed that a considerable amount on account of two pensions had already been paid to her and therefore, he was advised to obtain the option of the petitioner as to whether she desired to receive the military pension or the civil pension.
As a sequel of the aforementioned letter, the Treasury Officer took follow up action and by his letter dated 2592000, wrote to the petitioner wherein while referring to the letter of the DPDO, requested that she should send her option as to which of the two pensions, she would like to receive.
This is Annexure P-2/1.
6.
By Annexure P-3, the DPDO, by his letter dated 21112000, wrote to the Treasury Officer, Budhlada informing inter alia, that since the petitioner had given an indication that she was interested in drawing family pension from the Punjab Police, a sum of Rs. 1,64,803/- had therefore been calculated as being over payment of pension drawn from the office of the DPDO being in the nature of army pension.
He accordingly advised that the petitioner should be instructed to deposit the said amount through bank draft in favour of the CDA (PD) Meerut Cantt payable at Bathinda.
By a subsequent letter dated 922001, the Treasury Officer, Budhlada informed the petitioner that since the DPDO had raised the question of recovery of the aforementioned sum, she should therefore, settle the score with him.
It was thereafter that on 2322001 the petitioner sent a legal notice addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, as also to the DPDO as well as to the Principal Controller Defence Accounts (P), Allahabad wherein a demand was made for a complete statement of accounts of the alleged payment said to have been over- drawn by the petitioner.
In the said notice, a clear indication was given to the effect that the action of the DPDO was illegal and unless remedical measures were taken, the petitioner would file a writ petition before this Court.
This legal notice was followed by a second legal notice of the same date in which another demand relating to family pension was made.
The Treasury Officer by his letter dated 2322001 (Annexure P-7) replied to the legal notice, clearly stating that the pension of the petitioner had not been stopped by him and that he had only asked her to give her option for either of the two pensions.
He also informed that the petitioner had given her option preferring the civil pension from the office of the Treasury Officer but she did not attend his office to-get her monthly pension.
7.
The DPDO, on the other hand, sent another letter dated 1332001 addressed to the petitioner vide Annexure P-8 wherein he reiterated his earlier demand to the effect that she should deposit the aforementioned sum of Rs. 1,64,803/-.
This is the first impugned Order in this writ petition.
8.
In reply to the legal notice, the DPDO also wrote to the lawyer of the petitioner wherein, while giving parawise comments, he advised that before taking any action in a Court of law, the genuineness of the claim should be ascertained in all respects particularly keeping in view that the petitioner was not at all entitled to two family pensions and that she had been drawing two family pensions fraudulently by concealing material facts etc.
This reply is Annexure P-9.
By Annexure P-10, the DPDO transmitted the calculation sheet as stated above showing that a sum of Rs. 1,64,803/- had been over-drawn by the petitioner.
9.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that in view of the judgment rendered in the case of Sushila Devi Rawat v. Union of India, passed by an Hon'ble single Judge of this Court in CWP 9526 of 1998, the petitioner is entitled to receive both the pensions, one from the State of Punjab and the other from the army.
He submits that in the case of Sushila Devi Rawat, her husband was also in the army and had served for about 16 years, whereafter he was discharged on 3111980.
Thereafter, he had joined the National Fertilizer Ltd Nangal on 811982 and he died on 881991.
In that case, the question as to whether Sushila Devi Rawat was entitled to claim two family pensions was answered in the affirmative and the writ petition was allowed and therefore, applying the ratio decided in the said case, the learned counsel submits, that it should also be held that the petitioner is entitled to two family pensions and that the action of the DPDO in threatening the recover a sum of Rs. 1,64,803/- is wholly un-called for.
He also relied on the judgment of a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in Union of India and others v. Smt. K Visalakshy, 1998(6) SLR 679, in which a similar point fell for consideration and ultimately their Lordships of the said High Court held that the concerned pensioner therein was entitled to the pension sanctioned by the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad.
The learned counsel also submits that similar view was taken by another Hon'ble single Judge of this Court in Kuldip Singh v. Union of India and others (C.W.P.
No. 15161 of 1991), decided on 772004, wherein it was held that the petitioner of that case including the petitioners of other analogous cases were entitled to separate pensions and that they were all also entitled to both the pensions.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also submits that the DPDO has passed the order independently and since he is not the Competent Authority, his Order is wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
Before I proceed to deal with the issues and/or the points argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is relevant to mention that on 2791965, the petitioner retired from the Department of Police, Government of Punjab.
11.
Prior to his retirement on 2791965, the Governor of Punjab in exercise of his powers conferred under him under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and all other powers enabling him in that behalf, framed the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
They came into force "at once" and it was circulated by a Notification issued by the Home Department, General Services, vide Notification No. GSR 160/Const./Art.309/65.
By reason of Rule 4(iii), it was provided therein that the period of military service mentioned in Clause (1) of the said Rule 4 shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :-  (1) The person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question.
12.
For better appreciation, only the relevant portions of the aforementioned Notification dated 20.7.1965 is reproduced as under and those which are necessary for this case are highlighted in bold letters :-  "HOME DEPARTMENT GENERAL SERVICES Notification The 20th July, 1965 No. G.S.R.
160/Const./Art.
309/65.
- In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, and all other powers enabling him in this behalf, the Governor of Punjab is pleased to make the following rules :- 1.
Short title, commencement and application.
- 1.
(a) These rules may be called the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
(2) They shall come into force at once.
(3) They shall apply to all classes of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab except Medical and Health services.
2.
Definitions.
- For the purposes of these rules, the expression `military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including service as a warrant officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the Porclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962, or such other service as may hereafter he declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service.
................................................................... 4.
Increments, seniority and pension.
- Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under :- (i) Increment.
- The period spent by a person on military service, after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in rules 39, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority - The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii) Pension.
- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :- (1) the person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question ..................." Thus, on the day when the petitioner's husband superannuated on 2791965, the aforementioned notification was already brought into force by his Excellency, the Governor of Punjab in exercise of his powers conferred upon him under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The facts pleaded show that after discharge from the Army on 12.9.1947, the husband of the petitioner, till his death on 811983, was a recipient of pension under the military rules in respect of the military service rendered by him for the period 281933 to 12.9.1947.
Under the provisions of Rule 4(iii)(1) of the aforementioned Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, the petitioner's husband was entitled to have the period of military service counted subject to the condition that he had not earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question.
Here, he had not only earned military pension, but contrary to the aforementioned clause of Rule 4, he had continued to draw two pensions, one being from the Army and the other from the Government.
13.
That apart, Regulation 219 of the "Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961" specifically lays down that a relative of a deceased individual shall be eligible for grant of family pension provided he or she is not in receipt of another pension from the Government.
The aforementioned Regulation is Annexure R-1 appended to the counter affidavit (referred as the written statement in this Court) filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
14.
In the context of the provisions of Regulation 219 of the "Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961" read with the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, I am afraid, none of the judgments cited or points canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioner can be said to apply in the present facts and circumstances of this case.
It is also necessary to mention that neither of the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner takes note of the aforementioned provisions of Regulation 219 or of Rule 4 (iii)(1) of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
15.
For the foregoing, reasons, this Court is unable to apply the ratio of the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner and holds that the petitioner should not have drawn two pensions simultaneously in the face of the aforementioned Regulation and the Rule.
In that view of the matter, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner to the effect that Army Instructions No. 2 S-3/S dated 1441964 should be deemed to be applicable upon the petitioner is rejected as being fully mis-conceived.
16.
That apart, this Court is veritably astounded to note the nonchalant manner in which the petitioner has attempted to press home her claim irrespective of her conduct indicating events totally and completely contrary to what she has to say in this writ petition.
17.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned Central Government counsel drew attention of this Court not only to Regulation 219 referred to above which he has brought on record vide Annexure R-I but also to an affidavit sworn by the petitioner on 6111986 vide Annexure R-II wherein she has given a declaration that she is not in receipt of any pension except the pension which had been sanctioned by the CDA (P) Allahabad.
This affidavit was filed and/or prepared by the petitioner obviously with the intention of mis-leading the civil authorities so that they were deprived of having the knowledge to the effect that she was already drawing pension from the Army right from the date her husband had been discharged as has been pleaded by herself in the writ petition.
The other document is Annexure R-IV appended to the counter affidavit (referred to as written statement in this Court) wherein the petitioner herself, while writing a letter to the DPDO on 2992000, stated in unequivocal terms that she was drawing two family pensions due to ignorance.
She also went a step further and requested that her family pension from the army side may kindly be stopped immediately and recovery to this effect may also be calculated and intimated to her, as also to the concerned Treasury Officer for further necessary action.
18.
These two documents are such that the facade of legitimate claims created by the petitioner falls to the ground like a pack of cards.
Her own admission and her own request coupled with Regulation 219 and Rule 4(iii)(1) referred to above not only destroys her case totally and completely but puts her in the category of a person who has come to this Court after having suppressed material facts and/or information thereby preventing this Court from granting relief to the petitioner following the principle of suppressio veri suggestio falsi.
This Court would have proceeded to initiate action against the petitioner, but taking into consideration her old age, leaves it at that.
Since the petitioner herself had requested vide Annexure R-IV that the amount to be recovered be calculated and intimated to her, the same was duly complied with by the DPDO vide Annexure P-10, she cannot now complain that the statement to the effect that she had overdrawn, is incorrect.
19.
The Writ Petition is accordingly disposed of but in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and in order to meet the ends of justice, it will be sufficient to state that after so many years, it will not be proper to impose recovery upon the petitioner specially when it was the husband of the petitioner who should have disclosed the fact that he was drawing pension from the Army in terms of Rule 4(iii)(1) of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
It was his responsibility, therefore, to have made the disclosure.
20.
This Court takes note of the fact that the petitioner's husband retired as an ordinary Havildar.
Almost 58 years have gone by since the time her husband was discharged from the Army in 1947 and almost 40 years have also gone by from the date her husband superannuated from the Department of Police, Government of Punjab in 1965.
The petitioner, therefore, is obviously an old individual and whatever pension that she may have received was not such a big amount.
Thus, in the facts and circumstances of this case and taking a lenient view, it would therefore, be sufficient ex debito justitiae to dispose off this Writ Petition with an observation that the authorities will not recover the amount that has already been paid to the petitioner.
Order accordingly.