MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 5731 and 5919 of 1989.
Both the petitions have been filed against the award dated 14121988.
The first petition is by the workman and the other one is by the company.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda has found that the workman was guilty of one of the three charges, namely mis-behaviour with reeling and winding incharge and the enquiry held by the company to that extent was fair and proper.
However, the Labour Court has awarded milder punishment holding that the termination of the services of the workman was not justified and reinstated the workman without back wages by exercising jurisdiction under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for brevity `the Act').
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the workman had been working with the company-petitioner as a Weigher and his services were terminated by the company on 10101985 after holding an enquiry into the charges that he incited his fellow workers in the Building Department of the Company to resort to go slow tactics and thereby reduced the production.
He was charge-sheeted and according to the Certified Standing Orders applicable to the establishment of the company the act of inciting other workers to go slow was a serious mis-conduct.
He is also alleged to have mis-behaved with his superiors.
The following three charges were framed against the workman :  "i) that you alongwith several other workmen of your section have been inciting other workmen to slow-down the production, ii) that you were yourself working slow and have been making lesser number of bundles than the fixed number.
iii) that on 15th November, 1984 when the reeling and winding incharge asked you and others to work in a regular manner, you misbehaved with him and heatedly said "Aap Ko Jo Karna Hai Kar Lena, Mein to aise he kam karoonga aur anya karigar bhi aise he kam karenge" (Do what you please.
I and other workers shall go on working in the same manner)."
3.
In the domestic enquiry held by the company the workman was found guilty of all the three charges and the report of the Enquiry Officer was accepted by the competent authority.
Consequently, the company dismissed the workman from service w.e.f.
10101985.
4.
The workman raised an industrial dispute and challenged his termination by serving demand notice on the company under Section 2-A of the Act which was endorsed to the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, Moga for intervention which went all in vain.
Thereafter, the dispute was referred to the Labour Court vide reference order dated 11.2.1988 (Annexure-3).
5.
The Labour Court found that charges No. 1 and 2 were vague and in any case the company failed to produce the production register which was a direct evidence revealing production of bundles that could have proved whether the workman was working slow and was making lesser number of bundles than the fixed number.
Despite the demand raised by the workman on 171985, the production register was not produced.
The Labour Court after referring to evidence concluded as under in respect of first and second charges :-  "The first contention of the representative of the workman is that the charges on which the enquiry proceeded were vague with the result that the proceedings, findings of the enquiry officer and punishment awarded on such charges were vitiated.
There is a considerable force in this submission on the first two charges.
As to the charge of inciting others to go slow it was necessary to inform the workman of the identity of the workman he was supposed to have incited to set upon misconduct.
It was also necessary to inform him of the precise nature of incitement and its date.
It was then and then alone that the workman could meet the charges effectively in defence.
The charge as to the workman himself going slow is far more vague.
It does not inform the workman what was the fixed number of bundles he was supposed to make and what was the shortfall and when or over what period.
Apart from the vagueness of the second charge, the management did not produce the production register in the enquiry even when it was demanded by the workman to support it with proper proof.
Nor did the management lead any other evidence to show that the workman's out turn was less than before.
The findings of the enquiry officer on this charge are, therefore, perverse."
It was further concluded that the company was given option to prove the misconduct in respect of first two charges before the Labour Court but the company preferred to adhere to the charges framed by the enquiry officer and did not request for framing of precise charges in its written statement.
Holding further that the workman was prejudiced in his defence in the same manner as in the enquiry on account of vagueness of the charges, the Labour Court found that the company had failed to prove the charges against workmen going slow with production and inciting others to go slow even before the Labour Court.
However, in respect of third charge, namely, mis-behaviour with reeling and winding incharge on 15111984, the Labour Court opined that the same could not be termed as vague and it was supported by unquestionable evidence.
The Labour Court also found that the findings of the enquiry officer appointed by the company on third charge were well founded and the enquiry was absolutely fair and proper.
The view of the Labour Court in respect of third charge is as under :-  "As I have said above, so far as the charge of misbehaviour goes the workman did not challenge the evidence of the management's witnesses although they were cross-examined at length, did not offer himself for his own cross- examination by the management in the enquiry and examined no witnesses in defence.
The findings of the enquiry officer on this charge are well founded and the enquiry is absolutely fair and proper to that extent.
The issue is decided accordingly."
6.
Shri Gulshan Sharma, appearing for the workman has made an attempt to persuade me to set aside the finding of the Labour Court holding that the workman was guilty of mis-conduct by inducing his co-workers to go slow because no production chart had been produced by the company giving the production before the alleged date of inducement on 15111984.
According to the learned counsel in the absence of any such evidence no finding could be recorded by the Labour Court that no inducement was given to the co-workers by the workman to resort to go slow tactics.
The learned counsel has further argued that the workman was entitled to be awarded full back wages once no charge is proved against him.
7.
No one has put in appearance on behalf of the company.
8.
I have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel and do not feel persuaded to accept the same.
The finding of misbehaviour on 15111984 by the workman is supported by the evidence on record.
In this regard a reference may be made to the statement of Jagan Nath who was reeling and building incharge.
Jagan Nath had deposed that the workman along with other workmen was resorting to `go slow' tactics and instigating others to do so since 9/10.11.1984.
He further deposed that when he along with Jobber and Supervisor advised these workmen against such a misconduct, they did not pay any heed and said that `Jab tak harama 2/10 ka faisla nahin ho Jata tab tak kam aise he chaalega', when in fact the rate of 2/10 had already been increased.
This witness further testified that on 15111984, the workman continued instigating other workmen to `go slow' and when he advised the workmen told him that they would work slow as they were doing and he could do whatever pleased him.
Similar is the statement made by Ram Kishan and Mohan Jobber.
All the witnesses were cross-examined at length by the representative of the workman.
However, the workman did not appear before the enquiry officer on 1141984.
On 171985 he appeared and demanded the production register.
Despite opportunity granted to the workman to produce his witnesses, he did not produce any of his witnesses and also slipped away to avoid his own cross-examination.
Even registered mail sent to him by the enquiry officer could not procure his presence.
9.
After referring to these circumstances, the Labour Court held that the third charge has been duly proved before the enquiry officer in which fair opportunity was afforded to the workman.
However, the Labour Court by exercising jurisdiction under Section 11-A of the Act found that the punishment of termination was disproportionate to the misconduct committed by the workmen.
It has reinstated him with continuity of service, without granting any back wages.
In somewhat similar circumstances, the Supreme Court expressed the view that extreme penalty of dismissal of a not so serious charge of misconduct may be disproportionately excessive.
While setting aside the dismissal and ordering reinstatement of the workman, it was directed that no back wages were payable.
In this regard reliance may be placed on judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kanhaiyalal Agrawal and others v. Factory Manager, Gwalior Sugar Company Ltd, 2001(4) SCT 428 (SC) : (2001)9 SCC 609, There is no rule of law to the effect that whenever Labour Court has found the punishment on the basis of a misconduct as disproportionate, then while reinstating, the back wages are liable to be awarded.
When misconduct has been proved, the claim of the workman for reinstatement with back wages cannot be sustained.
In this regard reference may be made to the views of the Supreme Court in M/s. Mukund Engineering Woks v. Bansi Purshottam, 1994 Supp (2) SCC 725.
Therefore, the award of the Labour Court does not suffer from any legal infirmity warranting interference of this Court.
10.
The argument of the learned counsel for the workman that the misconduct as alleged in charge No. 3 has not been proved, has failed to impress me because there is ample evidence on record to that effect.
This Court cannot while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution sit as a Court of Appeal on the findings recorded by the enquiry officer which have been duly scrutinized by the Labour Court.
It is trite to mention that re-appreciation of evidence in certiorari jurisdiction is impermissible.
Reference, however, be made to the judgments of the Supreme Court in rendered in the cases of Sub-Divisional Officer, Konch v. Maharaj Singh, 2004(1) SCT 490 (SC) : (2003)9 SCC 191; Bank of India and another v. Degala Suryanarayana, 1999(3) SCT 669 (SC) : (1999)5 SCC 762; Union of India v. HC Goel, AIR 1964 SC 364 and Commandant, TN Special Police, 9th Battalion and another v. D Paul, 1999 SCC (L&S) 789.
A reference may also be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Apparel Export Pro.
Co. v. AK Chopra, 1999(1) SCT 642 (SC) : (1999)1 SCC 759, wherein it has been observed that the High Court is not an appellate forum and findings can be interfered with only in case of no evidence or when the findings are absolutely perverse or legally untenable.
It is also well settled that even if another view is possible, the High Court is not to interfere in the findings of facts by substituting its own view in preference to the one taken by the enquiry officer.
In this regard reliance may be placed on Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. KS Gandhi and others, (1991)2 SCC 716.
Therefore, I have no hesitation to reject the argument raised.
For the aforementioned reasons and in the facts and circumstances of this case.
I find no merit in these cases and the same are dismissed.
Petition dismissed.