Mehtab S Gill, J - This is an appeal against the order dated 2091989 of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar.
2.
Appellant was posted as Jail Warder vide appointment letter dated 1261985.
One of the conditions mentioned in the appointment letter was that his character would be verified from the District Magistrate and if anything was found against the appellant, his services would be terminated without any notice.
Appellate joined on 271985.
The District Magistrate at a later date, sent a report that appellant had been convicted and sentenced to undergo RI under Section 307 IPC, and also to pay a fine.
Sentence awarded to the appellant by the trial Court was RI for 4 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-.
Appellant was removed from service vide order dated 18.2.1986.
This order is under challenge.
3.
Learned counsel for the appellant has stated that order passed by the respondent terminating services of the appellant was passed without giving an opportunity of hearing.
Appellant served the Department till 18.2.1986 honestly and faithfully.
No complaint was made against him.
Appellant filed reply dated 14.2.1986 to the Show Cause Notice and prayed for time to produce documentary evidence.
An appeal was filed against the order/judgment dated 1101977 of the Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar before this High Court.
Conviction of the appellant was converted from Section 307 IPC to conviction under Section 326 IPC Sentence was reduced to already undergone.
Appellant had undergone only 19 days imprisonment.
Conviction and sentence was passed not during tenure of the appellant with the respondent- Department, but before he joined the service.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon a judgment of this Court in Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(1) R.R.R.
332 : 1992(1) Recent Services Judgments 175, wherein this Court has held that offence under Section 294 IPC does not fall within the purview of offence which constituted moral turpitude.
Services of the petitioner were wrongly terminated.
The impugned order under challenge was set aside.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated that appellant was never removed from service as a matter of punishment.
His services were terminated after his character verification was done.
He was given full opportunity to explain his position.
Against the order of respondent No. 2, appeal was filed with the IG Prisons, Punjab.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the judgments of the Courts below and also perused the record.
7.
The only controversy involved in this case is as to "whether the services of the plaintiff/appellant could be terminated because of his conviction and sentence under Section 326 IPC ?"
8.
The admitted case of the parties is that appellant joined the Department on 271985.
He remained in service till 18.2.1986.
Vide memo dated 1221986, he was asked to explain his position as to why his services should not be terminated because of his conviction under Sections 307/325 IPC The Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar vide his judgment dated 1101977 awarded the sentence of 4 years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-.
Appellant filed an appeal, Conviction of the appellant was converted from Section 307 IPC to conviction under Section 326 IPC and sentence of the appellant was reduced from the one awarded by the trial Court to the period already undergone.
Appellant had undergone 19 days of imprisonment.
Learned counsel for the appellant has laid much stress on the fact that sentence of the appellant was converted from 4 years RI to already undergone.
9.
In Karam Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1996(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 692 : 1996(1) Recent Services Judgments 900, the petitioner was convicted under Sections 302/324 IPC by the trial Court.
In appeal, the conviction under Sections 302/324 IPC was converted to conviction under Section 323 IPC The Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under :-  "It is to be remembered that conviction is one part of it and release on probation is another.
Later part only enables the delinquent not to undergo the sentence on showing his good conduct during the period for which probation was granted.
Suppose during the period of probation, he commits another offence, then his probation gets terminated and he would be liable to undergo the sentence.
When a civil servant is convicted for an offence, it is his misconduct that led to the dismissal.
The conviction in this case is on the ground of his participation in causing the death and causing injury to one person.
Though he was acquitted of the offence of murder, he being Constable at the relevant time and being a disciplined member of the force, he was not expected to participate in the commisison of crime instead, he was expected to prevent the commission.
In Shankar Das's case (supra), it was held that since opportunity was not given before taking the decision, the removal from service was held not valid in law."
10.
In the present appeal also, appellant is a member of Disciplined Force.
He was inducted as Jail Warder.
11.
In Union of India and others v. Bakshi Ram, 1990(3) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 133 : 1999(1) Recent Services Judgments 597, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under :-  "In criminal trial the conviction is one thing and sentence is another.
The departmental punishment for misconduct is yet a third one.
The Court while invoking the provisions of Section 3 or 4 of the Act does not deal with conviction; it only deals with the sentence which the offender has to undergo.
Instead of sentencing the offender, the Court releases him on probation of good conduct.
The conviction, however, remains untouched and the stigma of conviction is not obliterated.
In the departmental proceedings the delinquent could be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge."
12.
The judgments in Union of India and others v. Bakshi Ram (supra) and Karam Singh v. State of Punjab and another (supra) squarely cover the case in hand.
13.
In the case cited by the learned counsel for the appellant, i.e. in Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana and others (supra), the respondent-State issued policy instructions which were attached as Annexure P-4.
A list of offences which constituted as moral turpitude under various Sections of the I.P.C., were reproduced in these policy instructions.
Section 294 IPC did not amount to moral turpitude as per instructions Ex. P-4.
14.
I do not find any infirmity in the judgment dated 2091989 of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar.
Findings of the Ist Appellate Court are affirmed holding that the services of the plaintiff/appellant herein were rightly terminated by the respondents.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.