Nirmal Yadav, J - The petitioner has challenged the order of his dismissal dated 3051990 passed by Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power Annexure P-1 as also the order passed by the Under Secretary, Irrigation & Power dated 22101991, Annexure P-2 rejecting his review petition against the order of dismissal, mainly on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice on account of non-supply of certain documents to the petitioner during the course of the enquiry proceedings and the enquiry report.
2.
The brief facts of the present case are that the petitioner was working as Registrar.
Punjab Irrigation Department.
A civil suit bearing No. 26 of 1986, titled as Sikandar Singh and others v. State of Punjab was filed before the Sub Judge Ist Class, Chandigarh praying for a decree of declaration to the effect that the plaintiff was entitled to arrears to salary consequent upon refixation of his seniority in terms of a judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4356 of 1986.
No reply was filed on behalf of the department in the said suit and the suit was decreed.
The Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh vide Memo dated 511988 served charge-sheet upon the petitioner under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970, wherein the following charges were framed against the petitioner.
"(i) Not taking proper interest in the discharge of his official duties.
(ii) Supervisory lapses in not defending the civil suit titled as Sikander Singh & others v. State of Punjab and others which was decreed on 1921987 in favour of the plaintiffs.
(iii) Not taking action to file the appeal when the suit was decreed.
(iv) Not informing the Government about the decision of the Court which was in his knowledge.
(v) Not preparing and filing of Written Statement in the said Civil Suit even when the heavy costs were awarded by the Court.
(vi) Causing loss of about Rs. 2100 lacs to the Department by performing supervisory duties negligently."
3.
On the basis of the aforesaid charges, an enquiry was conducted against the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer found charge Nos. (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) to be substantiated, whereas, charge Nos. (iii) and (vi) were found to be not proved.
However, the Disciplinary Authority did not agree with the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer on charge Nos. (ii) and (vi) on the ground that petitioner's failure to perform his duties amounts to betrayal of trust of the Government and conspiracy against the interests of the State, thus, held the petitioner to be guilty of said charges also and imposed the penalty of dismissal vide order dated 3051990 (Annexure P-1).
The review petition filed against the said order was also rejected vide order dated 22101991.
4.
The petitioner has, inter alia, pleaded that he was not afforded proper opportunity to defend himself during the course of the enquiry by not supplying the statement of witnesses recorded during the preliminary enquiry proceedings.
He was not allowed to engage a legal practitioner for the purpose of his defence during the course of the enquiry.
As complicated legal propositions were involved, therefore, he should have been allowed to engage a legal practitioner.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that neither any show- cause notice was served on the petitioner nor any enquiry report was supplied to him before passing of the impugned order and therefore, the respondents have violated the principles of natural justice.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondent contested the pleas taken by the petitioner.
It is contended that the relevant portions of the enquiry report concerning the charges were supplied to him on the advice of the Punjab Public Service Commission vide registered letter dated 2961990.
It was further contended that the petitioner while working as Registrar did not defend the Court case titled Sikandar Singh and another v. State of Punjab relating to the establishment though he was the controlling officer.
Since the case remained undefended, it was decided ex parte and further due to the inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner, the appeal could not be admitted in any judicial Court, which caused a great financial loss to the State exchequer.
7.
The basic issues which arise for consideration in the present case are :- (i) Whether non-supply of enquiry report to the delinquent officer would vitiate the termination order ?
and (ii) whether the employee had been given reasonable opportunity to defend himself during the course of the enquiry or there has been violation of principles of natural justice prejudicing the interests of the delinquent ?
8.
A perusal of the enquiry report would show that during the course of the enquiry, Sadhu Ram and others had requested in writing for summoning some witnesses for cross-examination.
However, their request was turned down.
They had also requested to engage some legal practitioner to defend themselves during the enquiry proceedings.
However, this request was rightly not allowed on the ground that the Presenting Officer was also not a legal practitioner.
The facts of the case further reveal that along with the charge-sheet, the list of witnesses was not supplied and, therefore, it was not disclosed to the delinquent as to what evidence would be relied upon against him.
In this situation, it is apparent that there was denial of reasonable opportunity to the delinquent.
It is well settled that the authorities must disclose evidence to be relied upon against the delinquent so that he could effectively prepare his case to cross-examine the witnesses during the enquiry proceedings.
9.
The main thrust of argument of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the report of the enquiry officer was not supplied to the petitioner before passing the impugned order terminating his services.
In the case in hand, the enquiry report was an adverse material as the enquiry officer has recorded the finding of guilt and the delinquent has been deprived of the material used against him.
In support, the learned counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 471, a judgment of the Rajasthan High Court reported as Shri Ram Yadav v. The Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation, Jaipur, 1995(2) SCT 216 and a judgment of this court in State of Punjab through Collector, Ferozepur v. Kuldip Singh, 1997(1) SCT 693.
10.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent contended that the ratio of law laid down in Md Ramzan's case (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case as it has to be applied prospectively and not retrospectively.
The argument of the learned counsel does not survive in view of observations made in the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, reported as 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC).
In para 20 of the said judgment, the Supreme Court has held as under :-  "In Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra), the question squarely fell for consideration before a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court viz. that although on account of the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, it was no longer necessary to issue a notice to the delinquent employee to show-cause against the punishment proposed and, therefore, to furnish a copy of the inquiry officer's report along with the notice to make representation against the penalty, whether it was still necessary to furnish a copy of the report to him to enable him to make representation against the findings recorded against him in the report before the disciplinary authority took its own decision with regard to the guilt or otherwise of the employee by taking into consideration the said report.
The court held that whenever the Inquiry Officer is other than the disciplinary authority and the report of the Inquiry Officer holds the employee guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any punishment or not, the delinquent employee is entitled to a copy of the report to enable him to make a representation to the disciplinary authority against it and the non-furnishing of the report amounts to a violation of the rules of natural justice.
However, after taking this view, the court directed that the law laid down there shall have prospective application and the punishment which is already imposed shall not be open to challenge on that ground.
Unfortunately, the court by mistake allowed all the appeals which were before it and thus set aside the disciplinary action in every case by failing to notice that the actions in those cases were prior to the said decision.
This anomaly was noticed at the later stage but before that final order could be reviewed and rectified, the present reference was already made, as stated above, by a Bench of three learned Judges.
The anomaly has thus lent another dimension to the question to be resolved in the present case."
11.
So far as the proposition of law is concerned, it must now be taken to be settled that furnishing of copy of enquiry report is a condition precedent and pre-requisite before passing the final order of punishment by the disciplinary authority.
The order of punishment which is already under challenge and has not become final, cannot be exempted on the theory of prospectivity.
To my mind, it would not be reasonable to apply this proposition against all those orders of punishment which have not attained finality.
If the intention of the Supreme Court had been to cover all those punishment orders which had been passed prior to the date of the judgment of the Supreme Court on the basis of prospectivity, the Supreme Court would not have interfered with the order passed in the case before it.
Therefore, the theory of prospectivity would apply only to those cases which have already become final and there is no challenge to the order of dismissal before any authority or any Court.
12.
It has been held in a catena of judgments that no material against the delinquent be withheld from him to enable him to make proper representation against the proposed punishment.
The object of supplying a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer is to enable the delinquent officer to satisfy the punishing authority that he is innocent of the charges framed against and even if the charges are held to have been proved, punishment unduly severe be not inflicted.
The delinquent is entitled to represent against the conclusion arrived at by the Enquiry Officer stating that all or some of the charges holding the delinquent guilty, are not established.
For doing away with the prejudice likely to be caused on account of non-supply of enquiry report or to confront the recommendations made in the enquiry report with regard to imposition of punishment, furnishing of enquiry report becomes essential as using some material at the back of the delinquent is certainly a position not countenanced by the principles of natural justice.
13.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that supply of copy of enquiry report along with recommendations, if any, in the matter of proposed punishment would certainly fall within the ambit of the principles of natural justice and the delinquent is entitled to get a copy of the report.
It is an admitted position in the present case that the punishing authority before passing the order of dismissal of the petitioner, had not supplied him a copy of the enquiry report.
It is also an admitted position that the copy of enquiry report was supplied to him only on the advice of the Punjab Public Service Commission and that too on 2961990 i.e. after passing of the impugned order on 3051990.
As such, there is a clear violation of principles of natural justice which prevented the petitioner from substantiating his defence properly and effectively.
14.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed to the extent that disciplinary action initiated against the petitioner is quashed.
I would further hasten to add that this decision would not preclude the disciplinary authority from reviving the proceedings and continuing with the same from the stage of supply of enquiry report to the petitioner, in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.