VK Bali, J - Dharam Singh, petitioner in the original lis and respondent No. 1 in the present Letters Patent Appeal through writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, successfully sought pensionary benefits with a condition that he shall refund the entire amount of employees contribution along with interest accrued thereon towards EPF in lump sum for crediting to the Board's account within two months and thereafter, the pensionary benefits shall be payable to him in accordance with letter, Annexure P-2, within two months.
It is against this judgment of learned Single Judge recorded in Civil Writ Petition No 11606 of 1997 dated 1622001 that the present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent.
Brief facts, on which the relief granted to the petitioner was sought to rest and the grounds on which the same was opposed by the appellant, need a necessary mention.
2.
Dharam Singh joined the services of erstwhile Punjab, PWD, Electricity Branch on 861957 as Assistant Lineman.
The Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as `the PSEB') came into being on 141959 and on re-organisation of the State of Punjab and creation of Haryana State, his services were placed at the disposal of Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') with effect from 1111966.
It has been the case of the petitioner that he was originally appointed by the then Punjab Electricity Department and he was entitled to pensionary benefits and his conditions of service could not be changed to his detriment.
The Board adopted a regulation in 1962 applicable to the erstwhile Government servants of the Electricity Department, including those on probation, who were first transferred to foreign services terms to the Board on the formation of the Board.
It is further his case that the Employees Provident Fund Scheme (in short `EPF Scheme') has been made applicable to work-charged employees of HSEB and not regular permanent employees, like him, as would be clear from letter dated 3111996, Annexure P-1 addressed by the Enforcement Officer, Employees Provident Fund Organisation, Labour Ministry, Government of India to Sanjeev Gupta, Advocate, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh.
Even though the petitioner was not covered by the EPF Scheme, he was made a member of the same, although he never opted for that and the same, thus, amounts to change in his service conditions.
He had been representing during his service period for the grant of pensionary benefits on the ground that he was entitled to the same under the original terms and conditions of service as an employee of the Electricity Department of erstwhile Punjab Government.
No action was taken on the representations aforesaid till such time he retired.
The HSEB vide memo dated 1211993, Annexure P1/1, desired the information in respect of the employees, who wanted to switch over from EPF to GPF Scheme.
No such information was even sought for from the petitioner by the concerned XEN, with the result, he could not exercise his right to switch over from his EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme at the relevant time.
The Board then framed a policy, contained in memo dated 681993 Annexure P-2, according to which, every employee of the Board, who was the member of the EPF and wanted to change over to the pension scheme, has to refund the entire amount of employer's contribution along with interest thereon towards his EFP in lump sum for crediting to the Board's account.
In this policy, the employees were also entitled to avail pensionary benefits instead of benefits of EPF Scheme.
Pursuant to the policy aforesaid, the petitioner opted for pension scheme vide his representation, Annexure P-3 and when he was not heard in the matter, he issued a notice of demand of justice dated 1271997, Annexure P-4, to which too no response came from the respondents.
It has also been the case of the petitioner that one Hans Raj, who retired as Foreman Grade-III and who was a member of the EPF Scheme since beginning of his service till the date of his retirement on 28.2.1990, claimed pensionary benefits, which were refused to him.
He then filed Civil Writ Petition No 10541 of 1991 for counting his work-charged service besides claiming pension.
Same was allowed by this Court on 24101991.
SLP filed against the order aforesaid was dismissed by Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The petitioner thereafter has been repeatedly making oral as well as written representations to allow him the pensionary benefits.
The petitioner further averred that Civil Writ Petition No 4174 of 1994 filed by Munshi Ram and Ram Lal, retired employees, was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court on 23.1.1996, Annexure P-5.
When the entreaties of the petitioner to grant him pensionary benefits brought no tangible result, the present writ petition, with the result already indicated above, was filed in this Court.
3.
Respondents 2 and 3 entered defence and contested the cause of the petitioner by, inter alia, pleading that the petitioner was trying to mislead this Court by making wrong reference to the instructions and by concealing the factual position and, therefore, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
On the creation of State of Haryana and consequent creation of HSEB with effect from 1111966, services of the petitioner were allocated to the HSEB as per his own option.
Since the petitioner was already a member of the EPF Scheme, therefore, he was allowed to be continued in the said scheme in absence of his option for switching over to the GPF Scheme.
He continued to avail the benefit of EPF Scheme during the entire period of his service without any protest and without any representation to this effect.
He even got all the benefits of the EPF Scheme encashed consequent upon his retirement on 3181991 on attaining the age of superannuation and now after a long period, for the first time, he made representation dated 1861997 (Annexure P-3) showing his willingness to deposit the entire amount of the EPF for switching over the scheme of GPF, which cannot be allowed at this belated stage.
It is then pleaded that the case of the petitioner is based upon instructions dated 1211992, Annexure P-1/1 and subsequent instructions dated 681993, Annexure P-3.
Insofar as, instructions dated 1211992 are concerned, it is averred that by the said instructions, option for switching over to the GPF scheme was sought from the existing employees only and not from the retirees, as would be amply clear on perusal of the said instructions.
Inasmuch as, the petitioner had already retired on 3181991, instructions dated 1211992 were not applicable to his case.
Insofar as, subsequent instructions dated 681993 are concerned, it is the case of the respondent-Board that the same relate for granting the benefit of work-charged services followed by the regular service, which too is not the case of the petitioner and, therefore, whole claim of the petitioner, based upon these instructions, is baseless and frivolous.
When petitioner failed to opt for the GPF Scheme at the time of allocation of his services to HSEB, he could not be allowed to switch over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme, especially when he already got the benefits of EPF Scheme and there was no such provision for allowing such switching over.
4.
Learned Single Judge, it is quite apparent from the reading of the impugned order, granted the desired relief to the petitioner, as noted above, on the basis of instructions, Annexure P-2, dated 681993, followed by letter dated 6101993, and in particular paragraph 3 of the said letter as also on the basis of judicial precedent in Munshi Ram and another versus State of Haryana and a judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No 10541 of 1991, SLP bearing No. 13558 of 1992 against which, was dismissed.
5.
It is quite apparent from the reading of the judgment that even though in the writ petition, Mr. AK Gayal, learned Assistant Advocate-General, Haryana, put in appearance on behalf of respondent No. 1-State no one had appeared on behalf of respondents 2 and 3, who were the contesting respondents.
6.
Mr. Girish Agnihotri, learned Additional Advocate-General, Haryana, who appears in support of this Letters Patent Appeal, vehemently contends that instructions dated 681993, followed by letter dated 6101993, are wholly inapplicable to the facts of the present case as the same pertain to the work-charge employees.
He further explains that once a Division Bench of this Court held that the services rendered by an employee on work-charge basis shall count towards pension, the instructions dated 681993, followed by letter dated 6101993, came into being only with regard to work-charge employees, as has specifically been mentioned in Annexure P-2 itself.
He further contends that the two judgments relied upon by learned Single Judge, while granting relief to the petitioner, as noted above, i.e., one in Munshi Ram's case (supra), which pertained once again to the work-charge employees, and the other in CWP No. 10541 of 1991, against which, SLP was also dismissed, pertaining to counting of the period spent by an employee on work-charge basis towards his pension are not applicable to the facts of the present case.
He further explains that the matter in hand is, in fact, covered by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Rishal Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another (CWP No. 6835 of 1997), dated 17121997.
7.
We have heard learned counsel representing the parties and with their assistance examined the records of this case.
At one stage, when the matter came up for hearing before us on 582004 and when it was urged before us on behalf of the appellant that instructions, Annexure P-2, relied upon by learned Single Judge pertained to work-charge employees, we directed the appellant to file an affidavit, giving information on the following points :-  "1.
Whether Annexure P-2 pertains only to work-charge employees or the same also applies to regular employees ?
2.
Whether the second paragraph 3 at page 52 of the paper book pertains to the work-charge employees who have already retired or the same pertains to regular employees who have already retired ?
3.
Whether the benefit as given to the work-charge employees vide Annexure P- 2, by separate order was given to regular employees in position or retired as well ?
4.
Whether the relief that has been granted to the petitioner by the learned Single Judge was granted by the appellants to the similarly situated persons like the petitioner ?"
8.
Additional affidavit, pursuant to the order, referred to above, dated 1982004 has been filed, wherein, it has, inter alia, been pleaded that the petitioner was appointed by Punjab Public Works Department as ALM on 861957 and after re-organisation, his services were allocated to HSEB.
He was a member of Contributory Provident Fund when he joined in Punjab Public Works Department and thereafter in PSEB.
While in PSEB, an opportunity was given to all the members of Contributory Provident Fund Scheme to opt for Pensionary Scheme upto 30.9.1965 but he chose to remain silent.
He came in HSEB as a regular employee and as per the provisions contained in Civil Services Rules, option once exercised is final.
However, there are instances in HSEB, wherein, regular employees being members of EPF were allowed to switch over from EPF to GPF.
This practice continued upto the year 1988.
The petitioner did not give any option to switch over under any of the instructions issued since 1966 till 1988.
However, on re-consideration of the matter, the Board issued instructions that no further switch over from EPF to GPF would be allowed.
These instructions were subject-matter of litigation in the High Court in the case filed by Rishal Singh and others wherein, sanctity of these instructions was upheld.
Insofar as, instructions dated 681993 are concerned, there relate to those employees, whose work-charge service was followed by regularisation.
These instructions were issued when Rule 31/A of Punjab CSR Vol. II was struck down by Full Bench of this Court in Kesar Chand's case.
The factual position, in pursuance of the instructions dated 681993, is that those, who had opted pensionary benefits within the stipulated period, they were allowed this benefit.
Pensionary benefits were admissible to those employees, who were initially appointed as work-charge and this work-charge service was followed by regularisation.
The benefit was extended to those, who were in service vide letter dated 1211993 and also to retirees vide instructions dated 681993.
It is then pleaded that the petitioner cannot take benefit of Annexure P-1.
After 1988, no decision/circular was issued allowing switch over from EPF to GPF to regular employees.
Benefit of instructions was applicable to those employees, who were appointed as work-charge and thereafter were made regular and also subject to the rider that they had exercised their option within the stipulated period.
Benefit of instructions was not applicable/available to those employees, who joined as regular and contained as regular employees till retirement.
Regular employees were governed by Rule 1.1(a) of Punjab CSR Vol.
I, Part 1, wherein, it is stipulated that option once exercised was final.
In the additional affidavit, Rule 1430 of Punjab CSR Volume II Chapter 14 has also been quoted.
It is then pleaded that no person similarly situated as the petitioner (those who have initially appointed on regular basis, did not exercise any option till 1988 and retired after 1988) has been given the benefit of pensionary benefits.
9.
The petitioner has also filed affidavit dated 292004 wherein, it has been averred that he was appointed as Assistant Lineman on work-charge basis on 3101956 in Panipat Division of Punjab Electricity Board and thereafter, his services were regularised.
He further averred that large number of other employees, similarly situated, have been granted benefits, which is being prayed for by him.
He has given example of Munshi Ram, Amar Singh, Dalip Singh, Shiv Dhan, Daryao Singh, Shiv Charan and Dharam Singh son of Mangat Ram.
10.
When the matter came up before us on 1112004, we recorded the following order :-  "Counsel for respondent No. 1, on the basis of the documents copies whereof have been handed over to the counsel for the appellant in this Court, states that in the matter of one Ravi Dutt Mehta who was similarly placed as the petitioner and had asked for same relief as the petitioner has asked for and in whose case the writ petition was allowed following the decision made in the present case giving rise to LPA, the Department has already decided to implement the judgment.
He states that the writ petition bearing No. 16434 of 1997 was allowed only on the basis of the decision rendered in C.W.P.
No. 11606 of 1997 which has been clearly recorded in the order itself.
He also contends that the Chairman has himself recommended to the Legal Remembrancer that the petitioner should be granted the relief asked for and the LPA should be withdrawn.
Mr. Bhardwaj seeks adjournment to verify the statement made by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 1.
List again on 8112004."
11.
From the records of the case, it appears to us that the defence projected by the respondents could not properly be gone into primarily for the reason that no one had appeared on their behalf before learned Single Judge at the time of arguments.
12.
We have heard learned counsel representing the parties and with their assistance, examined the records of the case.
There appears to be considerable merit in the contentions raised by Mr. Girish Agnihotri, learned Additional Advocate-General, Haryana, as noted above.
As mentioned above, learned Single Judge granted relief to the petitioner on the basis of instructions, Annexure P-2, dated 681993, followed by letter dated 6101993 and in particular, paragraph 3 thereof as also on the basis of judicial precedents in Munshi Ram's case (supra) and a judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No 10541 of 1991, against which, SLP has since been dismissed.
It is the case of the appellant that instructions, Annexure P-2, followed by letter dated 6101993, pertain to the work-charge employees, Annexure P-2 styled as instructions by the petitioner is a copy of Letter Memo No. Ch.
9/9 Pen/G-43 (93) dated 6893 from the Additional Secretary, HSEB, Panchkula, addressed to the General Manger/Plants, PTPS, HSEB, Panipat and all other concerned in HSEB.
Subject of Annexure P-2 is Amendment in Punjab CSR Vol. II Adoption of State Govt.
Notification.
The opening sentence of Annexure P-2 reads thus :-  "The Haryana State Electricity Board in its meeting held on 2361993 had approved the adoption of Haryana Govt.
Notification No. 1/2 (55)-88-2 EE-II dated 421992 (copy enclosed for ready reference) with regard to the counting of service rendered by the workers in the work-charged capacity towards pensionary benefits scheme.
"(emphasis supplied)."
13.
Paragraph 2 of Annexure P-2 states that on regularisation from work-charge to regular employee, the employee has to submit an option within a period of three months from the date of regularisation or from the date of issue of this circular, whichever is later as to whether he/she intends to count the period of work-charge service rendered by him/her towards pensionary benefits or intends to continue to be a member of E.P.F.
In view of paragraph 2, option once exercised shall be final and shall not be allowed to be changed in any circumstances.
Paragraph 3 of Annexure P-2 deals with those, who opt for pensionary benefits.
They have to refund the entire amount of employer's contribution along with interest thereon towards their E.P.F.
in lump sum for crediting towards the Board's account.
The other paragraph 3 of the instructions deals with similar benefits being available to the pensioners/recipients of family pension of the Board on the same terms and conditions with condition that they will have to deposit the amount contributed by the Board as Employee's Contribution towards E.P.F.
along with interest thereon in lump sum.
This paragraph 3 had been interpreted to mean that the benefit as available to the work-charge employees shall perhaps be available to regular employees as well.
This interpretation of paragraph 3 does not appear to be correct.
The letter deals with the work-charge employees only.
Paragraph 3 would also relate to work-charge employees, who might have retired.
Whereas, therefore, earlier part of instructions, Annexure P-2, deals with the employees in service, paragraph 3 deals with the retirees but those who were employed on work-charge basis and were later regularised.
Learned Single Judge observed that though nobody had appeared on behalf of respondents 2 and 3, yet in the written statement, they had taken a plea that the petitioner's case is not covered under letter, Annexure P-2, dated 6101993, because he had already retired from service in the year 1991.
Paragraph 3 of letter, Annexure P-2, was then reproduced and thereafter, it was observed that reading of the same would make it clear that the petitioner though retired earlier to the issuing of letter, Annexure P-2, yet he being the pensioner was entitled to the benefit as contained in the letter as the employees, who had already retired, were required to be intimated by the department concerned by issuing a copy of the letter for information and requiring them to exercise their option.
Learned Single Judge then observed that the petitioner was not intimated to exercise his option within the stipulated period and, thus, they cannot be allowed to take the benefit of their own wrong by taking a plea that the petitioner's claim cannot be accepted as he was unable to exercise option during his entire service or that he got the benefit of EPF Scheme encashed on 3181991, when he retired.
14.
The defence projected in the written statement is rather to the effect that the petitioner cannot take advantage of letter, Annexure P-2, dated 6101993 for the reason that the said letter pertains to work-charge employees and not that the letter had come into being at the time when the petitioner had already retired.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the petitioner was a regular employee, whereas, letter/instructions, Annexure P-2, only pertains to work-charge employees.
It is not in dispute during the course of arguments that Annexure P-2 came into being after this Court held that a work-charge employee, after regularisation of his services, was entitled to count his work-charge period towards the service for the purposes of pension.
Naturally, when instructions, Annexure P-2, came into being, in view of the judicial pronouncement holding the work-charge employees to be entitled to pension, they had to be given option to shift to pensionary benefits by surrendering the entire benefit that they had got towards Provident Fund etc.
In our considered view, no reliance can be placed upon the judgment of this Court rendered in CWP No. 4174 of 1994, Annexure P-5 either.
The short order recorded in the writ petition aforesaid on 23.1.1996 reads thus :-  "Learned counsel appearing for the respondents submits that the relief of pensionary benefits, as prayed for, shall be granted to the petitioners within a period of two months from today.
Learned counsel for the petitioners is satisfied.
The writ petition stands disposed of in terms of statement made by learned counsel for the respondents."
15.
Mr. Agnihotri states that the aforesaid judgment pertains to work-charge employees only and there is no reply forthcoming from the counsel representing the petitioner.
The fact that judgment, Annexure P-5, pertains to work-charge employees is not in dispute at this stage.
It is pertinent to mention that the pleadings made in the writ petition with regard to CWP No. 4174 of 1994 in paragraph 15 are only to the effect that the same pertain to retired employees of HSEB.
In reply to the said paragraph, it has been averred that the contents of para 15 of the writ petition are wrong and hence denied as the petitioner has failed to attach full extract of the judgment along with the writ petition supplied to the respondents.
Otherwise also, the case referred to in this para is not to the knowledge of the answering respondent.
Had the petitioner made full reference of that case in the para, the same would have been suitably replied.
Insofar as, reliance placed by learned Single Judge upon judicial precedent in Hans Raj's case (supra), against which, SLP was also dismissed, is concerned, it is interesting to note that in paragraph 11 of the writ petition, it has been averred by the petitioner himself that Hans Raj retired as Foreman Grade-III.
He was member of the EPF since the beginning of his service till the date of his retirement on 28.2.1990.
He claimed pensionary benefits, which were refused.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No 10541 of 1991 for counting his work-charge service and claiming pension and that writ petition was allowed.
Case of Hans Raj, as per the pleadings made in the writ petition, was entirely different, which, it is stated, was admittedly with regard to counting of work-charge service for claiming pension etc.
In our considered view, no reliance could be placed upon the decision recorded in CWP No. 10541 of 1991 against which, SLP was dismissed.
16.
What we find from the records of the case is a decision of Division Bench of this Court, annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-2.
Order in the aforesaid case, i.e., CWP No. 6865 of 1997, titled as Rishal Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, was recorded on 17121997.
The facts of the case aforesaid reveal that the petitioner had joined as LDC on 31101996 in the Department of Electricity in the State of Pepsu and thereafter shifted to Haryana State Electricity Board.
In January, 1963, Employees Provident Fund Scheme came into force and he opted for the same.
He pleaded that on 30111992, he applied for exemption from operation of EPF Scheme and for restoration of pensionary right under the GPF Scheme but no decision was taken by the respondents even till he retired from service.
After retirement, he sent a reminder to the Chief Auditor, Haryana State Electricity Board, Hissar, seeking switching over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme but no decision was taken.
He then filed Civil Writ Petition No 10251 of 1994 and the same was disposed of by this Court with a direction to the respondents to decide his representation by passing speaking order.
The respondents passed order dated 24101994, rejecting his claim.
The respondents contested the matter on the ground of delay and laches and the there was no policy of the Board vide which, options of the employees were called to switch over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme.
The Division Bench on the aforesaid pleadings held that instructions to switch over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme, issued vide Annexure R-1, were applicable only upto 711986, i.e., the date on which the Board had decided that no further exemption from the EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme and Pensionary Benefit Scheme be recommended.
After January, 1993, requests of about 140 employees for switching over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme were declined.
It was further held that in view of the policy decision taken by the Board and the petitioner being not covered under the said policy, he was not entitled to the direction sought for.
The writ petition was dismissed.
Judgment recorded in CWP No. 6835 of 1997, Annexure P-2, concededly pertains to regular employee, similar to that the petitioner in the present case.
The relief asked for by him was declined.
It is true that no reliance for the desired relief was placed upon instructions, Annexure P-2, and in our view, rightly so, because the same do not pertain to regular employees at all.
The only ground pressed into service in Rishal Singh's case (supra) pertains to the allegation of the petitioner that one JN Kapoor was allowed to switch over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme, to which the respondents had replied that JN Kapoor was allowed to do so prior to issuance of instructions, Annexure R-1.
Grounds rejecting the claim of the petitioner in Rishal Singh's case (supra) by the Division Bench of this Court, which matter pertains to the facts akin to the present case apart, Mr. Agnihotri explained to us that for regular employees as well, policy, Annexure R-1, for switching over to the pensionary benefits did come into being but options had to be exercised by virtue of the provisions contained in the said policy upto a particular time by which time, the entire amount of EPF had to be deposited which alone could create a buffer with the Electricity Board enabling it to give pensionary benefits to the employees.
The petitioner should have well opted for the same at the relevant time and deposited the entire contribution of the Board towards EPF, thus, facilitating the respondent-Board to give him the pensionary benefits.
He did not do so while in service and continued to enjoy the benefit as it was available to him at that time.
The petitioner even got all the benefits of EPF Scheme encashed consequent upon his retirement on 3181991 on attaining the age of superannuation.
He made representation for switching over from EPF Scheme to GPF Scheme for the first time on 1861997 wherein, he had also shown his willingness to deposit the entire amount of EPF.
17.
In our considered view, the petitioner was not entitled to switch over after the cut of date mentioned in the policy, Annexure R-1.
He was in service and yet did not opt to switch over to the pensionary scheme.
He rather chose to continue to avail the benefit of EPF Scheme during entire period of his service without any protest and without any representation.
He even got all the benefits of EPF Scheme encashed, consequent upon his retirement on 3181991.
It is after a period of almost six years that he made representation showing his willingness to deposit entire amount of EPF, which is not permissible.
Case of an employee, similarly situate, has already been dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court.
Further, the respondent-Board is perhaps able to bear the financial burden only if an employee may deposit entire contribution of the Board towards EPF.
The amount so collected by the Board alone, perhaps, can enable it to give pension to its employees.
If the petitioner has failed even upto the date of his retirement to deposit contribution made by the Board towards EPF, he has only to blame himself for the same.
In fact, as mentioned above, on his retirement, he withdrew the entire amount and made a prayer for switching over after almost a period of six years from his retirement.
No relief, in our view, could have been granted to him, in the facts and circumstances, as fully detailed above.
18.
In the additional pleadings made during the course of appeal, the petitioner has cited example of some persons, who were regular employees and were yet allowed to switch over to the scheme, granting them pensionary benefits.
It is the positive case of the respondent-Board that no such employee was ever permitted to switch over to GPF Scheme.
Some names in the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner have been given but the same were without any particulars whatsoever.
Mr. Agnihotri, learned counsel representing the appellant, appears to be right while contending that if, perhaps, some particulars, like, date of joining and retirement etc. of those persons might have been given, the respondent-Board might have been in a position to come up with a proper reply.
It is almost impossible, learned counsel contends, to find out from thousands or lacs of employees, who have retired by now, the facts and in particular, from the names alone as given by the petitioner in the additional affidavit.
We find considerable merit in the contention of learned counsel, as noted above.
That apart, these pleadings have been made by way of additional affidavit only during the course of appeal.
In view of the discussion made above, we allow this Letters Patent Appeal, set aside the impugned judgment passed by learned Single Judge dated 1622001 and dismiss the writ petition filed by the petitioner, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.