Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - The respondent filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 1101974 dismissing him from service with effect from 30.10.1973 and communicated to him by way of written statement in a suit filed, was void and he be declared to be continuing in service with all benefits and interest at the rate of 12% per annum, to be compounded annually.
2.
Case of the respondent-plaintiff is that he joined as JBT teacher in a Government High School on 13.9.1966.
His appointing authority was District Education Officer.
He was involved in a false murder case on 20.3.1973.
He was convicted on 31.10.1973.
Conviction was upheld by the High Court on 25.8.1977.
He was released after undergoing the sentence on 1631982.
He sought to join duties but was not allowed to do so.
Thereafter, he filed a suit wherein a written statement was filed to the effect that an order of dismissal had been passed against him on 1101974.
He withdrew the earlier suit and filed the present suit on 1631983.
3.
The State contested the suit, inter alia, on the ground that the same was barred by limitation.
His dismissal was based on his conduct which led to his conviction after a criminal trial for alleged murder.
Order of dismissal was sent through Block Development Officer under registered despatch on 1101974.
The Deputy District Education Officer passed the order of dismissal but at that time, no regular/permanent District Education Officer was posted at Gurdaspur and the Deputy District Education Officer was acting as District Education Officer.
4.
The trial Court decreed the suit.
It was held that the Deputy District Education Officer was not competent to sign the order of dismissal in absence of sufficient evidence to prove that he was acting as District Education Officer (Para 13).
The suit was within limitation as order was conveyed to the plaintiff only on 29111982 when the written statement was filed (Para 18).
5.
On appeal, findings of the trial Court were affirmed.
Hence, this appeal by the State of Punjab.
6.
Learned counsel for the State submits that the appeal involves substantial questions of law as to whether suit filed nine years after the order of dismissal would be within limitation and whether an employee who ceases to get any salary can claim that he had no knowledge of dismissal.
7.
Learned counsel for the State submitted that payment of salary to the plaintiff was stopped and the plaintiff fully knew about it as he did not get the salary thereafter.
He never put forward any claim to salary or that he was in service and that furnished cause of action to the plaintiff to file a suit.
Limitation had to be counted from the date of stoppage of the salary and was three years from that date.
It was submitted that the view taken by this Court in earlier decisions that if an order of dismissal is void, there was no period of limitation, has since been reversed by the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh, Ashok Kumar, 1991(3) SCT 91 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2219.
8.
It was next submitted that conviction by a criminal Court for the offence of murder was sufficient ground for dismissal of an employee.
Reliance is placed on a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Om Parkash v. The Director, Postal Services (Posts and Telegraphs Deptt), Punjab Circle, Ambala and others, AIR 1973 P&H 1 and a Single Bench judgment of this Court in Kulwant Singh v. State of Punjab, and others, 1989(3) SLR 518.
9.
Mr. PS Goraya, learned counsel on behalf of the plaintiff submitted that since there is violation of Article 311 of the Constitution, Article 120 (Article 113 of the 1963 Act) of the Limitation Act, 1963, will not apply, as held by this Court in Mohinder Singh, Ex Patwari v. Punjab State, 1977 Services Law Weekly Reporter 447, which is a judgment followed by the Courts below.
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that a substantial question of law does arise for consideration as to whether limitation will commence from the date of stoppage of salary or from the date of alleged communication of order of dismissal and whether conviction on the charge of murder was sufficient for passing an order of dismissal.
Further question is whether the Deputy District Education Officer, in absence of District Education Officer could pass an order of dismissal when appointing authority was District Education Officer.
11.
Admittedly, the respondent-plaintiff stands convicted for murder and his conviction was upheld by this Court and he undergone the sentence.
Order of conviction is Ex. D.4 on record.
The plaintiff could, therefore, be dismissed from service.
12.
Admittedly, payment of salary to the respondent-plaintiff was stopped in the year 1973 and it is not the case of the respondent-plaintiff that he ever got salary thereafter of that he put forward any claim for salary which he would have definitely done unless he was aware that he was dismissed from service.
His conduct of not claiming any salary after 1973 is enough to fasten knowledge of order of dismissal on him.
13.
In view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in Gurdev Singh (supra), the judgment relied upon by the Courts below and by learned counsel for the plaintiff in Mohinder Singh (supra) does not hold the field and cannot be preferred to the judgment of the Apex Court in Gurdev Singh (supra).
14.
For the above reasons, the findings recorded by the Courts below that the plaintiff had no knowledge of order of dismissal and that the same could be challenged at any time, cannot be sustained.
Once I hold that the suit is beyond limitation, I need not examine the further question whether the Deputy Education Officer had the capacity of District Education Officer, as contended on behalf of the State.
Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.
Decree of the Courts below is set aside and suit filed by the respondent-plaintiff is dismissed.
Cross-objections filed by the respondent-plaintiff will also stand dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.