Mehtab S Gill, J - Learned counsel for the appellants has stated that the respondent was charged under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and under Section 161 of the IPC.
He was convicted by the Special Judge, Gurdaspur.
Appeal filed by the respondent was dismissed by the High Court.
It is envisaged in Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India that no person can be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after enquiry and after he is informed of the charges.
Proviso (a) to Article 311(2) lays down that this proviso will not be applicable to the persons who are dismissed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
Similar is the language used in Rule 13 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970.
He has relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Municipal Committee, Bahadurgarh v. Krishan Behari and others, 1996(2) SCC 714.
He further submits that no serious prejudice has been caused as the order of dismissal is based on conviction of the respondent.
2.
Learned counsel for the respondent has stated that the respondent has been dismissed without giving a show-cause notice and without being heard.
Respondent's service record was not considered and the punishing authority did not apply its mind.
Order No. 3097-4096/EA dated 22.5.1981 was illegal, ultra vires and violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Appellant No. 2 could not have invoked Article 311 of the Constitution.
Principles of natural justice should have been adhered to.
3.
Learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in Om Parkash v. Director Postal Services, 197(1) SLR 648 and a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Narsingh, AIR 1975 SC 2216.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the records.
5.
Article 311(2) of the Constitution is reproduced as under :-  "311(2).
No such person aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an enquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges : Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed : Provided further that this clause shall not apply - (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such enquiry; (c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry."
6.
It is clear from Article 311(2)(a), that where an employee is convicted on a criminal charge, the mandate given in Article 311(2) will not apply.
7.
Similarly, Rule 13 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules is also worded in a similar manner.
8.
The respondent has been found guilty and convicted of the charge under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and under Section 161 of the I.P.C.  9.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel for the respondent do not apply to the case in hand.
In Om Parkash v. The Director Postal Services (supra), the delinquent was released under Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
Similarly, in Union of India and others v. Narsingh (supra), the delinquent had been released under Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
10.
In the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the appellants in Municipal Committee, Bahadurgarh v. Krishan Behri and others (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court in para-4 has held that Article 311(2)(a) is attracted in serious offences.
In an offence of serious nature involving corruption, there cannot be any other punishment than dismissal.
Sympathy shown in such cases is totally uncalled for and opposed to public interest.
The amount misappropriated may be small or large, it is the act of misappropriation that is relevant.
11.
In the case in hand, the respondent has been convicted by the trial Court and his conviction has been upheld in appeal before the High Court under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and under Section 161 of the IPC, and has been sentenced to undergo RI for one year and to pay a fine of Rs. 600/-.
The learned trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff holding that order of dismissal is legal and valid.
Keeping in view the above discussion, the learned Appellate Court has erroneously reversed the finding of the trial Court on issue No. 1.
Findings of the trial Court on issue No. 1 are restored.
Appeal is allowed.
Judgment and decree dated 27.2.1985 passed by the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur is set aside, while that of the trial Court dated 26.4.1984 dismissing the suit of the plaintiff is restored.
Appeal allowed.