GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent for setting aside order dated 791995 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 15033 of 1991 for payment to the respondent salary and allowances at par with regular employees with effect from the date of his employment/engagement.
2.
Respondent-Subhash was engaged as Beldar on 121988 by Executive Engineer, Provincial Division No. 3, PWD B&R (National Highway), Karnal on daily wages.
After about 3 years, he filed writ petition for directing the respondents to prepare a seniority list of daily wage employees and confer upon them permanent status and also pay him salary in the regular time scale with effect from the date of entry in the service.
He claimed that he had been engaged against a regular vacant post and the departmental authorities were adopting unfair labour practice as defined under Section 2(ra) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and are exploiting the workmen by paying them fixed wages despite the fact that the duties performed by them are similar to those of regular employees.
3.
In the written filed on behalf of the appellants, it was averred that the petitioner (respondent herein) was engaged on daily wages w.e.f.
191988 and not on 121988, as claimed by him.
It was further averred that he was never engaged against any regular or vacant post.
The allegation of exploitation was denied by asserting that the employees engaged on muster roll were paid daily wages and they are not entitled to salary at par with regular employees.
Along with the written statement, the appellants annexed statement showing the total period of work done by the respondent from September, 1988 to July, 1991, a reading of which shows that in some months, he had worked from 23 to 30 days and in other months, he had worked from 3 to 15 days.
4.
The learned Single Judge relied on orders dated 2151992, 2121993, 2.3.1995 and 2381995 passed in CWP Nos. 19190 of 1991, 11175 of 1992, 520 of 1995 and 7784 of 1995 by different Benches of this Court and held that the respondent was entitled to similar pay as was being paid to regular employees because he was doing similar duties.
Accordingly, he directed the appellants to pay salary to the respondent with effect from the date of employment at par with regular employees holding similar posts.
5.
Shri Jaswant Singh relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh, 1997(2) SCT 151 (SC) : 1997(1) RSJ 445; State of Orissa v. Balram Sahu, 2002(4) SCT 902 (SC) : JT 2002(8) SC 477 and State of Haryana v. Tilak Raj, 2003(4) SCT 485 (SC) : (2003)6 SCC 123 and argued that the orders of the learned Single Bench and the Division Benches, on which reliance has been placed by the learned Single Judge, cannot be treated as laying down a correct law.
6.
We have gone through the judgments of the Supreme Court and are inclined to agree with the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General.
In State of Haryana v. Tilak Raj (supra), a Division Bench of the Supreme Court referred to some of the earlier judgments including State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh (supra) and State of Orissa v. Balram Sahu (supra) and set aside the order passed by this Court granting parity in the matter of pay scales to daily wage employees.
The propositions laid down in that case read as under :  "The principle of "equal pay for equal work" is not always easy to apply.
There are inherent difficulties in comparing and evaluating the work done by different persons in different organisations, or even in the same organisation.
It is a concept which requires for its applicability complete and wholesale identity between a group of employees claiming identical pay scales and the other group of employees who have already earned such pay scales.
The problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
A scale of pay is attached to a definite post and in case of daily- wager, he holds no posts.
The respondent workers cannot be held to hold any posts to claim even any comparison with the regular and permanent staff for any or all purposes including a claim for equal pay and allowances.
To claim a relief on the basis of equality, it is for the claimants to substantiate a clear-cut basis of equivalence and a resultant hostile discrimination before becoming eligible to claim rights on a par with the order group vis-a-vis an alleged discrimination.
No material was placed before the High Court as to the nature of the duties of either categories and it is not possible to hold that the principle of `equal pay for equal work' is an abstract one.
Also, judged in the background of the various legal principles enunciated by the Supreme Court, the impugned judgment of the High Court is (sic) indefensible and the same is set aside.
However, the appellant-State has to ensure that minimum wages are prescribed for such workers and the same is paid to them."
7.
The record of this case shows that in paragraph 2 of the writ petition, the respondent did make an assertion that he was appointed on daily wages against a regular and vacant post.
This was controverted by the appellants who categorically averred that the respondent was engaged on daily wages as and when the necessity for engagement arose consistent with the requirement of the works.
The respondent neither filed replication to controvert the assertion of the appellants nor any evidence was produced before the Court to show that he had, in fact, been appointed against a vacant post after being sponsored by the employment exchange or pursuant to a short-term advertisement issued by the appointing authority.
That apart, the learned Single Judge did not have before him any material from which it could be inferred that the nature of duties performed by the respondent were identical or substantially similar to those performed by regular employees.
Therefore, the direction given by him for grant of regular pay scale to the respondent cannot be sustained.
8.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition filed by the respondent is dismissed.
9.
Before parting with the case, we consider it our duty to observe that even if a daily wage employee is engaged against a vacant post, the principle of `equal pay for equal work' cannot be invoked for directing payment of regular pay scale to such employee ignoring the fact that such engagements are usually made in violation of the provisions of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 and the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as also the law laid down in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : (1992)4 SCC 118.
In this context, it is also important to bear in mind that the directions given by the Court for grant of regular pay scale to daily wage employees, who are engaged against vacant posts without complying with the mandate of law and the Constitution result in growth of illegal employment market which benefits unscrupulous public employers at the cost of thousands and thousands of young citizens of this country who are more qualified, more meritorious and more deserving and who get themselves registered with the employment exchanges and stay in the queue for years together with the fond hope that some day, their right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution will be recognised and respected and they will get an opportunity to compete for selection.
Another grave and adverse consequence of such direction is that the country as a whole has to suffer at the hands of less meritorious and at times, inefficient persons who get back-door entry in the public services by corrupt means or are beneficiaries of the prevailing spoil system.
Appeal allowed.