MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of C.W.P.
No. 13388 of 2002 and C.W.P.
No. 13387 of 2002.
These applications have been filed by the workman- respondent for disposal of the writ petition in terms of the order of the Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 4792 of 2003 dated 652003.
According to the averments made in the application the applicant-workman, respondent No. 1 is similarly situated to those of the workmen, who were before this Court in C.W.P.
Nos. 4792 of 2003 and 4793 of 2003 decided on 05062003.
This Court while dismissing the writ petitions filed by the petitioner-State has upheld the awards in favour of the workmen in those two petitions, by holding that no exception could be taken to the findings recorded by the Labour Court that the workmen had rendered service for a period of more than 240 days preceding the date of their termination and that the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act') were not complied with.
On account of the aforementioned view taken by the Division Bench, the award of the Labour Court was upheld.
2.
The contention raised by the petitioner-State that Animal Husbandry Department is not an industry within the meaning of amended clause (j) of Section 2 of the Act was also not entertained because it was found that the amended definition as introduced by Act 46 of 1982 had not been notified by the Central Government by then and, therefore, the same could not be considered to be in force.
It is further appropriate to point out that a writ petition seeking issuance of direction for enforcement of the amendment made by Act 46 of 1982 has also been dismissed by the Supreme Court while deciding the appeal of Union of India v. Gajanan Maharaj Sansthan, JT 2002 (Suppl.1) SC 94.
The Division Bench has applied the principles laid down by a Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa and others, AIR 1978 SC 548, for holding that the Animal Husbandry Department of the State Government falls within the definition of industry as given in the Act.
3.
Notice of the application was issued.
The learned Deputy Advocate General has put in appearance for the non-applicant-petitioner.
4.
The learned State counsel has pointed out that although SLP against the order passed by the Division Bench has been dismissed on 3012004, but a review petition has been filed against the order of the Division Bench, which is pending consideration.
The question which requires consideration is whether the appointments made in the present case by the Deputy Director, Dr. Gurdeep Singh could be considered to be void ab initio because no sanction from the higher authority was obtained.
According to the learned counsel, if no sanction from the authority was obtained and the posts were advertised by the Deputy Director at his own level, then such appointments would be void ab initio and, therefore, it would not attract the provisions of Section 25F of the Act.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Kerala High Court in Eranalloor Service Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Labour Court and others, 1986 II LLJ 492.
5.
Shri BR Mahajan, learned counsel for the workman-respondent No. 1 has drawn my attention to the various judgments of the Supreme Court mentioned in para 5 of the written statement filed by respondent No. 1.
According to the learned counsel, the Supreme Court has taken the view that even if the appointment of a workman has not been made in accordance with the rules, the services of such a workman could not be terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25F of the Act because such an appointment is not an exception under Section 2(oo) of the Act.
For the aforementioned proposition, learned counsel has placed reliance on judgment of the Supreme Court in Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, 1980(3) SCC 340, to argue that when the workman fails to qualify the type test, then it could not be successfully argued by the Management that she was not entitled to be confirmed in service and it would not constitute a ground for ignoring the provisions of Section 25F of the Act.
Learned counsel has also placed reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Limited v. Labour Court, Chandigarh, 1990(3) SCC 682.
The last judgment appears to cover the case of the workman-respondent on all force because the services of the workman were terminated on the ground that the Chairman had no power to appoint the workman.
The aforementioned argument was rejected by the Supreme Court by holding that the termination of the service of a workman for any reason, whatsoever, other than those expressly excluded by definition of Section 2(oo) of the Act, would attract Section 25F of the Act and the workman was held entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service.
6.
The other argument raised by the learned State Counsel based on the judgment of the Kerala High Court would not require detailed consideration in view of the judgments of the Supreme Court on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the applicant-respondent No. 1-workman.
7.
In view of the above, the application is accepted and the writ petition is dismissed by upholding the award of the Labour Court dated 16102001 because the Division Bench already has opined in C.W.P.
Nos. 4792 and 4793 of 2003 decided on 652003 regarding the validity of similar award and the objection taken by the State Government that the Animal Husbandry Department is not an industry within the meaning of Clause (j) of Section 2 of the Act has been rejected.
It has also been held that the amended definition of industry as introduced by Act 46 of 1982 could not be relied upon by the State Government because the amendment has not come into force as it has not been notified by the Central Government.
The Division Bench has further placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board's case (supra) for holding that the Animal Husbandry Department falls within the definition of industry as given in the Act.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.