Surya Kant, J - The petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus to commanding respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to :- (i) implement the order dated January 14, 2004 (Annexure P-1) passed by respondent No. 2, namely, the Secretary, Department of Medical Education and Research, Govt. of Punjab; (ii) admit the petitioners in the MBBS course in Dayanand Medical College and Hospital (DMC), Ludhiana (respondent No. 6); (iii) cancel the admissions of respondent Nos. 9 to 13, which, according to the petitioners, are illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the provisions of the Prospectus.
A further direction has also been sought to command the respondents either to refund the fees deposited by the petitioners or to adjust the same towards the fees payable by them on their admission to the DMC, Ludhiana and to refund the balance amount; with yet another ancillary prayer for directing respondent No. 8 to hand over the original certificates submitted by the petitioners.
2.
The petitioners as well as respondent Nos. 9 to 13 appeared for the Entrance Test (PMET-2003) conducted by Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot (respondent No. 5) for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS etc. course.
The seats for MBBS degree course were to be filled up (i) Govt. Medical College, Patiala, (ii) Govt. Medical College, Amritsar, (iii) Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, (iv) Sri Guru Ram Dass Institute of Sciences and Medical Research (SGRD), Amritsar, and (v) DMC, Ludhiana.
The PMET-2003 was held on 2962003 and as per its result, the merit position of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 9 to 13 was as under :-  S.No.
Name Rank Category 1.
Varinder Joshi (Pet.
No. 1) 189 General 2.
Mohit Shukla (Pet No. 2) 192 -do- 3.
Ankit (Pet.
No. 3) 233 -do- 4.
Richa Garg (Pet No. 4) 261 -do- 5.
Vivek Bansal (Pet No. 5) 265 -do- 6.
Renu Bala (Pet.
No. 6) 270 -do- 7.
Deepak Garg (Resp.
No. 9) 326 -do- 8.
Gurnoor Channi (Resp.
No. 10) 372 -do- 9.
Muskan Dogra (Resp.
No. 11) 857 -do- 10.
Aikaj Jindal (Resp.
No. 12) 857 -do- 11.
Neha Sood (Resp.
No. 13) 2551 -do- 3.
The petitioners appeared in the counselling held on 27, 28 and 29 July, 2003 by the Admission Committee which was headed by the Principal, Govt. Medical College, Amritsar.
As per their merit position and availability of seats in different colleges, petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 were admitted to Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot whereas petitioner Nos. 3 to 6 were admitted to SGRD, Amritsar.
4.
It appears that in the Punjab Govt. notification published on May 14, 2003 pursuant to which PMET-2003 was held, did not provide any NRI seats in the medical colleges.
The afore-mentioned notification, to the extent of denying NRI seats, was challenged in this Court by some of the colleges in CWP No. 12758 of 2003.
A Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated September 25, 2003 (reported as Sri Guru Ram Das Charitable Hospital Trust, Amritsar & others v. State of Punjab and another, 2003(4) SCT 716 (P&H) : 2004(1) RSJ 297) allowed these writ petitions and restored the NRI seats in medical/dental colleges.
Since the deadline of 3092003 for making admissions to the medical colleges was fast approaching and the State Govt. had decided to implement the said judgment, a notice in relation to the counselling appeared in one of the newspapers on 3092003 informing that there were 30 NRI seats for the MBBS and 7 seats for BDS courses respectively in the Govt. Medical and Dental Colleges and the students who had applied for these seats were required to report at Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot on 3092003 itself.
It was further stipulated that admissions of these 30 NRI students were likely to cause shifting of about 25 students who were lower in merit and had already been admitted in Govt. Medical Colleges to other courses/colleges as per their merit and choice, therefore, these students may also report for re-counselling as per the schedule given.
5.
The petitioners assert that they also went for counselling on 3092003 but were informed that there were only 7 NRI candidates for whom 7 vacant seats were available; no candidate admitted in MBBS course was to be dislocated and consequently, no fresh option was sought from them and they were asked to go back to their respective colleges.
According to the petitioners, as a result of admission of 7 students against NRI seats, 3 students (including petitioner Nos. 1 and 2) who were earlier admitted in Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot were ordered to be shifted to other colleges.
These 3 students approached this Court by way of CWP No. 5597 of 2003 (Pawni Sachar and others v. State of Punjab and others) wherein they sought quashing of the order dated 3102003 vide which they were shifted to different colleges.
It may be mentioned here that petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 were ordered to be shifted from Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot to SGRD, Amritsar and their challenge was on the ground that at Faridkot they were admitted against free seats with an annual fee of Rs. 13,500/- whereas on their shifting to SGRD, Amritsar, they were liable to pay annual fee of Rs. 2,16,000/-.
The above mentioned petition was, however, dismissed by this Court on 7102003 on the ground that no legal right of theirs was infringed upon.
6.
The grievance made out by the petitioners in the present writ petition, however, is that on 3092003, when re-counselling was held pursuant to the notice Annexure P-2, respondent Nos. 9 to 13, who are far below the petitioners in the merit list of PMET-2003, were admitted in MBBS course in DMC, Ludhiana without giving any option to the petitioners who were ready and willing to seek admission in the said institute.
The petitioners assert that some of the private respondents were offered and/or granted admissions in DMC, Ludhiana on the basis of a so-called "waiting list" supplied by the Chairman of the Admission Committee (respondent No. 7), namely, Principal, Govt. Medical College, Amritsar.
Vide the said waiting list, names of respondents No. 9, 10 and one Paras Sharma were recommended for admissions.
In addition, the DMC, Ludhiana (respondent No. 6), admitted, on its own, 3 more candidates, namely, respondent Nos. 11 to 13 against the so-called "faculty quota" meant for "wards of faculty members".
These admissions, according to the petitioners, were made in a calendestine manner in the late hours of 3092003 in total violation of the merit list of PMET-2003, therefore, some of them made a complaint to the State Govt., pursuant to which a fact finding inquiry was held by the Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, who vide his report dated 16122003 (Annexure P-5) found as a matter of fact that these admissions in DMC, Ludhiana were illegally made and in violation of the merit in PMET-2003.
7.
It appears that pursuant to the afore-said report, the Secretary, Medical Education and Research, Govt. of Punjab issued certain directions to DMC, Ludhiana pointing out that the admissions in dispute have been made against the settled law and the college had deliberately flouted the admission norms as well as the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Pursuant to this communication, the Principal of DMC, Ludhiana vide his reply dated 612004 (Annexure P-9) gave the explanations and while justifying the "faculty quota" for wards of its faculty members, he explained that admissions out of the "waiting list" were made on the basis of the list supplied by the Chairman of the Admission Committee.
After considering the said explanation the Secretary, Medical Education and Research, Govt. of Punjab (respondent No. 2) passed a self-speaking order on 1412004 (Annexure P-10) which deals with factual aspect behind the admissions from the (i) waiting list, and (ii) wards of faculty members and found he same patently illegal with a follow up direction to rectify the same.
8.
At this stage, we may make a mention here that the name of Deepak Garg (respondent No. 9) though was recommended for admission out of the "waiting list", however, he was not granted admission by the DMC, Ludhiana and in fact through a separate writ petition, he is seeking a direction for his admission.
Needless to say that in the event of implementation of the afore-mentioned order (Annexure P-10), the admissions granted to respondent Nos. 10 to 13 are liable to be set aside whereas the petitioners would be entitled to exercise the option for their shifting to DMC, Ludhiana from SGRD, Amritsar.
9.
Upon notice, reply has been filed by Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 through respondent No. 2.
It will be apposite to reproduce paragraphs 11 and 13 of their reply, which reads as follows :-  "11.
That the contents of this para are admitted to the extent that there were some illegalities in admissions in DMC, Ludhiana.
They admitted three students under so called faculty quota which did not exist.
The admissions in private colleges are made according to the State Government notification and prospectus issued by the University in which there were no provisions for faculty quota.
The DMC, Ludhiana did not admit students under faculty quota in the previous years and they admitted three students under the faculty quota for the first time only in 2003.
Even otherwise the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held so many times that wards of faculty members cannot be admitted in preference to meritorious students.
13.
That the contents of this para are wrong and denied.
The Respondent Nos. 9 to 13 approached the Hon'ble Chief Minister against the order of answering respondent dated 1412004.
The CM felt that the respondent Nos. 9 to 13 whose admissions were cancelled/terminated deserve to be heard.
Hon'ble Chief Minister accordingly asked Shri DS Guru, IAS, Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare vide his order dated 2012004 to hold a fresh inquiry and to submit his report within one month.
The inquiry report was received in the office of Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Medical Education and Research (Respondent No. 2) on 232004.
He has held that the admissions on the basis of waiting list of respondent Nos. 9 and 10 are wrong.
He has, however, recommended that the Department should obtain legal advice whether the petitioners would be shifted to DMC, Ludhiana after 3092003.
As regards faculty quota, it has been held that there is nothing on record clearly enunciating that the faculty quota as such is legal.
He has however recommended that the Department should obtain legal advice whether the faculty quota was validly provided.
The report was examined and the enquiry report has been sent to Legal Remembrancer, Govt. of Punjab for advice as recommended by the Inquiry Officer.
It may, therefore, be seen that Government is yet to take a final decision on the enquiry report.
The writ petition is, therefore, premature and deserves to be dismissed."
10.
A separate written statement has been filed by respondent No. 6 taking a preliminary objection that this writ petition is barred by res-judicata; bad for non-joinder of necessary parties; the claim regarding admission and/or shifting cannot be entertained after the cut-off date for admissions laid down by the Medical Council of India and approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
On merits, it has been averred that the DMC, Ludhiana had got published a notice in the newspapers (Annexure R-6/3) in which it was clearly mentioned that 3 seats under the management quota are meant for "the wards of faculty members of the college".
Thereafter, in the prospectus (Annexure R-6/4) of the college also, under the heading "distribution of seats", it was made clear that in "Pool-D", 3 seats are for "the wards of bona fide faculty members"; that the college is entitled for making admissions against these seats in view of the law laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in TMA Pai Foundation and Islamic Academy's cases.
Regarding the admission of 3 candidates from the "waiting list", a plea has been taken that on 3092003, Principal, DMC, Ludhiana attended the counselling but no student was ready for shifting and that it was after waiting upto 9 PM that the Chairman of the Selection Committee was requested to supply the "waiting list" for 3 vacant seats of the management quota, who vide letter of even date (Annexure R-6/9), supplied the list containing names of 3 candidates out of whom only 2 students were admitted on 3092003 itself as one of the students, namely, Deepak Garg did not report for admission.
11.
In her written statement, respondent No. 10 has also taken several preliminary objections, namely, (i) in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in MCI v. Madhu Singh, 2002(4) SCT 444 (SC) : 2002(7) SCC 258, there is no scope of interference with the admissions after the cut-off date of 3092003; (ii) MCI has also laid down the policy in its communication dated 2782003; (iii) all steps to complete admissions in medical courses for the year 2003-04 were to be taken before 3092003; (iv) the order dated 1412004 (Annexure P-10), implementation of which has been sought by the petitioners, was passed without hearing respondent No. 10, therefore, not binding upon her; (v) there is no statutory or public duty upon the State Govt. to implement the afore-mentioned order, therefore, a writ of mandamus does not lie; (vi) the writ petition is barred by the principle of res- judicata; (vii) the admission of respondent No. 10 had already been upheld by this Court in some other cases; (viii) the respondent No. 10, who was earlier admitted in SGRD, Amritsar, remained present at the time of re-counselling on 3092004 and at that time no candidate, higher in merit offered for admission, therefore, she opted for admission to DMC, Ludhiana.
The writ petition has been contested on merits as well.
12.
In yet another written statement filed by respondent Nos. 11 to 13, they, apart from repeating the preliminary objections taken by other respondents have sought to justify the faculty quota for "wards of the bona fide faculty members" provided by DMC, Ludhiana, and that the petitioners do not belong to that category, therefore, their claim vis-a-vis the afore-mentioned respondents has been alleged to be misconceived.
13.
While questioning the admissions granted to the private respondents and asserting their preferential right for shifting to the DMC, Ludhiana, learned counsel for the petitioners has raised the following main submissions :- (i) that as per the counselling notice dated 3092003 (Annexure P-2), there was to be a re-counselling even for those candidates who had already been admitted to the MBBS course, therefore, the petitioners were entitled to be given an opportunity and/or an option for admission against the vacant seats in DMC, Ludhiana on 3092003 instead of filling up these seats with those candidates who were lower in merit; (ii) respondent Nos. 10 and 11 are far below the petitioners in the merit list of PMET-2003 and they could not have been admitted to DMC, Ludhiana without first giving such an option to the petitioners who were also present for the counselling on 3092003; (iii) the re-counselling which was to be held on 3092003, was meant either for admissions against NRI quota or shifting of some candidates already admitted in the MBBS course, had there been any such eventuality; (iv) in the counselling notice, it was nowhere mentioned that the admissions out of the "Waiting list" will be made or that there exist any faculty quota seats; (v) the reservation provided for the "faculty quota", namely, for the wards of faculty members is totally unconstitutional and in the teeth of various judgments rendered by this Court as well as by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, therefore, the same is liable to be struck down.
14.
In support of his afore-mentioned submissions, learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon the conclusions drawn in the report dated 16122003 (Annexure P-5) of the Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, which read as under :-  "To Conclude Admission of 3 candidates against management seats filled by the wards of faculty members in DMC, Ludhiana is wrong hence their admission be cancelled.
Shifting of 2 students to SGRD, Amritsar is illegal as they are higher in merit than the last candidate already admitted in DMC, Ludhiana.
They should be shifted to DMC, Ludhiana as they are higher in merit.
If the 3 seats filled from the faculty members are vacated then the two candidates which needs to be shifted to SGRD, Amritsar being lower in merit can be adjusted against those candidates already admitted against seats for wards of faculty members.
After the cancellation of admission/shifting/adjustment of candidates as per merit the following seats shall be available.
These seats can be filled by shifting candidates already admitted in SGRD, Amritsar and Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar/Patiala on merit and choice in waiting list.
DMC, Ludhiana 2 seats SGRD, Amritsar 1 seat On scrutiny of the record of Chairman, Selection Committee, B.F.U.H.S., D.M.C.
and SGRD, Amritsar the above findings were observed.
Findings and opinion is submitted for approval and action please."
Similarly, he has also made a pointed reference to the contents of the order dated January 14, 2004 (Annexure P-10) passed by the Secretary, Medical Education and Research, Punjab, the relevant part of which is reproduced below :- 7.
Waiting List : The Principal and Chairman Selection Committee was asked to submit his explanation in regard to the so-called waiting list furnished by him to DMC, Ludhiana on 3092003.
He in his reply dated 28102003 stated that no waiting list was supplied to Principal, DMC, Ludhiana.
However, on 3092003 at 8 PM there was chaos and confusion and he had supplied some information on the spot to the Principal, DMC, Ludhiana that that information was not for admission purpose in the college under management quota.
The Principal, DMC, Ludhiana vide his letter dated 3092003 had asked the Chairman Selection Committee to provide him immediately a list of candidates who had opted for DMC as their first choice in the option forms from the waiting list.
The Chairman Selection Committee on 3092003 supplied a list of three names - Paras Sharma, Deepak Garg and Gurnoor Channi.
The University waiting list starts with Roohi (Merit No. 256).
She has opted for MBBS course in any Government Medical College in her option form.
She could not be considered for DMC, Ludhiana.
The next candidate is Agya Pal (Merit No. 257).
He has in his option form stated that he may be kept in waiting list for MBBS course in any College.
Similarly, the next candidates at Merit Nos. 258, 259, 260, 261, 262 and 263 also opted for MBBS course in any College.
Param Sharma is at Merit No. 264 and he also opted for MBBS course in any College but subsequently some entries were added and the name of DMC, Ludhiana was also inserted.
It is, therefore, quite clear that before forwarding any waiting list to DMC, Ludhiana the 7 candidates who were above Param Sharma in merit and who had opted for MBBS course in any college should have been considered and their names should have been forwarded.
Paras Sharma had got admission in SGRD Medical College, Amritsar during first counselling.
Paras Sharma, therefore, jumped 7 candidates in the waiting list and secured admission in DMC, Ludhiana.
Deepak Garg the second student has been admitted in DMC from the waiting list in merit No. 326.
He also in the same manner jumped all the students in the waiting list from 257 to 325 (55 candidates) who had opted for MBBS course in any college.
He in his option form had also indicated that his name be kept in the waiting list for the course of MBBS in private college and BDS in Govt. college.
But the other 55 candidates had also opted for MBBS course in any college and, therefore, they could not be ignored for admission in MBBS course in DMC, Ludhiana.
He did not get admission during the first counselling in any course and, therefore, does not have any superior claim for being considered for out of turn admission in DMC, Ludhiana.
The third candidate Gurnoor Channi is at Merit No. 372.
She also jumped the candidates from merit No. 257 to 371 (89 candidates in all) and secured admission in DMC Ludhiana.
She was given admission in BDS course in a private Dental College at Faridkot during the first counselling.
She also opted for her name to be kept in the waiting list for MBBS course.
Her first preference was DMC Ludhiana and second preference was SGRD, Amritsar.
Her claim is not superior to the other 89 candidates.
It is, therefore, amply clear that the name of three candidates Paras Sharma, Deepak Garg and Gurnoor Channi were forwarded to DMC, Ludhiana by the Principal and Chairman Selection Committee in an illegal manner.
He had the waiting list with him and he had no business in supplying an incorrect list to DMC, Ludhiana on 1102003 that the list containing the name of three candidates was not for the purpose of admissions.
But the Principal, DMC, Ludhiana still went ahead and made these admissions.
He was also, therefore, a party to this mala fide action.
These three admissions are, therefore, patently illegal.
It has been held categorically by the Supreme Court in its order dated 31102003 and 1482003 that all the admissions including under the Management quota have to be admitted strictly on the basis of merit and the principle of merit cannot be discarded.
These admissions being illegal and fraudulent are liable to be terminated.
8.
Wards of Faculty Members :- The contention of the DMC, Ludhiana that the three wards of faculty members - Muskan Dogra (Merit No. 857), Akaj Jain (857) and Neha Sood (Merit No. 2551) were admitted by the management against the management quota provided by the Supreme Court, is not correct.
As mentioned above the Bench decision of the Supreme Court dated 1482003 is quite categorical on the role of merit in admissions.
The court had held that the Government seats in a private college will be filled up by the University on the basis of merit in PMET conducted by the University.
The private colleges could fill up the management quota either on the basis of merit in the PMET conducted by the University or the Common Entrance Test conducted by the Association of Private Colleges.
The Supreme Court however held if no separate test is held by the private colleges then the management quota by the private colleges will necessarily be filled up on the basis of merit in the PMET conducted by the University.
In the present case no separate test was held either by the Association of the Private Colleges or even by the DMC Ludhiana and, therefore, the three seats which have been given to wards of Faculty Members had to be filled up on the basis of merit in the PMET conducted by the University.
These three admissions are, therefore, illegal and liable to be terminated.
These three seats should be filled up on the basis of merit by shifting the candidates."
15.
There is no dispute between the parties regarding their merit position in PMET-2003.
The petitioners are obviously much higher in merit than the private respondents.
The main question which has arisen for consideration is as to whether or not the admissions of some of the candidates, including respondent No. 10, out of the "waiting list" are justified, transparent and adhere to the principle of merit.
What appears to have happened at the time of re- counselling on 3092003, is mentioned in a letter (Annexure R-6/8) written by the Principal of DMC, Ludhiana to the Chairman of the Admission Committee allegedly after 800 PM which reads as under :-  "Since the counselling was not possible because of the chaotic conditions created by the agitated students and parents, we have been unable to fill up 3 Management quota seats at DMC&H, Ludhiana so far.
Please provide us immediately a list of candidates those who have opted for DMC as their first choice in the optioned plan from the waiting list as today is the last day for admissions."
In response to the afore-mentioned letter, the Chairman of the Selection-cum- Admission Committee, vide his reply of the even date, sent 3 names, as mentioned in his reply, which reads as under :-  "The desired information regarding the students asked for by you in your letter is as under :- 1.
Paras Sharma s/o Sh. Jagjit Sharma Marks - 580 2.
Deepak Garg s/o Sh. Raghwar Dayal Marks - 572 3.
Gurnoor Channy d/o Sh. SS Channy Marks - 564 16.
The DMC, Ludhiana has taken the plea that the admissions were made by it on the basis of the list supplied by the Principal of Govt. Medical College, Amritsar himself which we have extracted above.
The conduct of the Principal of Govt. Medical College, Amritsar and the manner in which he recommended the three names for admission, without even disclosing their merit position in the PMET-2003, has been deprecated by none else than the Govt. itself in its various fact-finding reports including the order dated 1412004 (Annexure P- 10).
It was strenuously argued at the Bar and not disputed by respondent No. 10 also that she happens to be the daughter of a senior bureaucrat of the Punjab State.
It appears that the Principal of Govt. Medical College, Amritsar was keen to accommodate respondent No. 10 at a place of her choice.
We may mention here that out of the 3 names recommended by the Principal, Govt. Medical College, Amritsar, who was Chairman of the Admission Committee, one candidate Paras Sharma has been found to be entitled for admission as per his merit and his admission has been regularised by respondent No. 2.
The second candidate, namely, Deepak Garg, himself has come up in the connected writ petition with the allegation that neither was he aware of his admission to DMC, Ludhiana nor was he asked and/or informed by anyone regarding the same and, thus, could not contact the authorities at DMC, Ludhiana for admission.
It, thus, gives an obvious impression that the names from the "waiting list" were picked up only to accommodate respondent No. 10 at DMC, Ludhiana.
17.
It has been vehemently argued on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners were not present at the time of counselling on 3092003, therefore, they are estopped from making any hue and cry against admission of the candidates lower in merit.
There can be no doubt that in terms of the mandatory conditions laid down in the prospectus, a candidate was required to be present at the time of counselling and his absence would render him ineligible to seek admission.
The petitioners, however, have positively asserted that they were present on 3092003 at the time of the counselling when it was announced that only 7 NRI candidates had come forward for admission for whom 7 vacant seats were available, therefore, the candidates already admitted to the MBBS course were not likely to be dislocated and they were advised to go back to their respective places.
It has been reiterated by the petitioners in their rejoinder also that at the time of counselling on 3092003, no fresh option was sought from them and they were never informed that 6 seats lying vacant in DMC, Ludhiana were also to be filled.
We cannot overlook the fact that the petitioners had been running from pillar to post and they represented, without loss of time, to authorities in the Government, made complaints against the manner in which the counselling was held on 3092003, however, when they found out that despite holding that the admissions granted to the private respondents were illegal, the State Govt. seemed in no mood for taking any action, they approached this Court.
We fail to understand as to why a candidate who might have absented himself from the counselling would be approaching one or the other forums for the redressal of his grievance.
The resentment and protests shown by the students and their parents at the time of counselling, which the Principal of Respondent No. 6 has admitted in his communication Annexure R-6/8 and that too in the late hours after 800 PM on 3092003, is yet another strong circumstance to infer that the counselling was not held in a fair and transparent manner and apparently the occasion appears to have been twisted and so designed to favour certain candidates at the cost of merit.
In our view, no independent findings are required to be recorded by us when the authorities in the State Govt. themselves have found that the admissions granted to some of the candidates out of the "waiting list", including respondent No. 10, are not as par the mandatory guide-lines/policy.
We have no reasons to differ with these findings and accordingly concur with the same.
18.
The issue as to whether there would be a "faculty quota" or not for the "wards of bona fide faculty members" is no longer res integra.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala v. State of Punjab and another, 1995(2) SCT 26 (P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 724, held that reservation in favour of children of employees of the departments/institutions including those being run by private un-aided institutions, is impermissible.
In Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology v. State of Punjab and another, 1997(4) SCT 824 (SC) : 1998(1) RSJ 533, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court also held that reservation of seats in the matter of admissions for wards of employees of the institution is impermissible.
Para 16 of the report reads as under :-  "16.
In so far as Civil Appeal No. 4101 of 1995 is concerned, the letter of respondent-University dated January 15, 1993 directing the T.I.T.& S. not to continue with the reservation of seats for wards of the staff of the TIT & S in the BTech.
course was taken in pursuance of the decision of this Court in JP Unnikrishnan (supra) and is in consonance with the law laid down in Chairman/Director, Combined Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das and others (supra) since TIT & S is affiliated with respondent- University.
It is no doubt true that the four additional seats for which reservation was made for the wards of the college and mill/school staff of the TIT & S is in addition to 90 seats and admission is made on the basis of marks obtained in the Entrance Examination conducted by the respondent- University.
But for the purpose of admission to these four seats a separate merit list is drawn in respect of the candidates who are eligible for these seats and admission is not made according to merit as reflected in the common merit list.
Such reservation in favour of wards of the college and mill/school staff of the TIT & S does not satisfy the test of admission being given strictly on the basis of merit as laid down by this Court and has been rightly held to be impermissible by the High Court.
The said appeal is, therefore, liable to be dismissed."
This view has been consistently followed by this Court in series of judgments which have been summarised in a later Division Bench judgment rendered in Mandip Kaur v. Sri Guru Ram Dass Institute of Sciences and Medical Education, 2002(2) SCT 160 (P&H), to which one of us (Swatanter Kumar, J) is a party, wherein the preferential reservation for admissions to the sons and daughters of teachers of the said institution, despite the said institute being a minority institution, was struck down.
19.
With a view to justify the reservation in favour of "wards of faculty members", Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the DMC, Ludhiana has placed reliance upon the Constitution Bench judgment of the Apex Court in Islamic Academy of Education & Anr. v. State of Karnataka & Ors., 2004(1) SCT 714 (SC) : JT 2003(7) SC 1, particularly para 19 thereof wherein their Lordships, in relation to the admissions for the year 2003-04, issued the following directions :-  "19.
So far as the year 2003-04 is concerned, time is running out as the outer time limit for admission is fast approaching or has gone.
To meet the urgent situation without going into the issues involved in the various petitions/applications, we direct that the seats be filled up by the institution and the State Governments in the ratio 50:50.
However, if by any interim order, this Court has permitted any institution to fill up a higher percentage of seats and the seats have been filled up accordingly, the same shall not be disturbed.
It is made clear that due to the time constraint this arrangement has been made, without deciding the contentious issue involved in various pending cases."
We are, however, unable to persuade ourselves to the afore-mentioned submission.
In para 19 of the judgment extracted above, their Lordships, keeping in view the fact that the time was running out and the outer limit for admissions was fast approaching, without going into the issues involved in the various petitions/applications (emphasis ours), directed that the seats be filled up by the institutions and the State Governments in the ratio of 50:50.
Similarly, an institution was also permitted to fill up a higher percentage of seats if they had been permitted to do so by an interim order.
This direction, in our view, though authorised the managements of the private institutions to fill up 50% seats in the "management quota", but there is nothing to dissect that their Lordships permitted to fill up these 50% seats in utter disregard to the merit in the entrance test.
On a combined reading of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in T.M.A. Pai's case (supra) along with the judgment in Islamic Academy's case (supra), there remains hardly any doubt that any compromise with the merit in the entrance test is impermissible notwithstanding the fact that the seats fell in State controlled quota or the management quota.
20.
Since the reservation for the "wards of faculty members" of an institute has been consistently held to be unconstitutional and struck down on more than one occasions, there can no doubt that any attempt to re-introduce such reservation under the garb of "management quota" shall be nothing less than a contemptuous and patently illegal action of the management.
In view of this, the action of the DMC, Ludhiana (respondent No. 6) in introducing reservation for the wards of its faculty members cannot sustain in law.
21.
Shri ML Sarin, learned Senior Counsel, representing respondent No. 10 has come up with a preliminary objection that the petitioners have sought implementation of the Government order dated 1412004 (Annexure P-10), which, according to him, has already been superseded by a subsequent order dated 2452004 and the later order not being under challenge, the main prayer in the writ petition itself falls flat.
The afore-said objection has been supported by Shri Rajiv Atma Ram who also relied upon Piare Lal v. Union of India & others, AIR 1975 SC 650 in support of his submission.
22.
It is not disputed that so far as the findings returned in the order dated 1412004 (Annexure P-10) about the illegalities committed by DMC, Ludhiana in granting admissions either out of the "waiting list" or against the so-called "faculty quota" meant for wards of the faculty members, have not been differed and/or disturbed in the subsequent order dated 2452004.
However, the consequential action is stated to have been stalled on the plea that upon legal advice taken by the State Govt., it has transpired that the admissions made by DMC, Ludhiana cannot be annulled after the expiry of the cut-off date of 3092003 prescribed for such admissions.
It is no doubt that the Medical Council of India has laid down the deadline of 3092003 for granting admissions to the medical courses throughout the country.
The said deadline was approved by the Apex Court in the case of Medical Council of India v. Madhu P Singh, JT 2002(7) SC 1, and was reiterated in a later judgment in the case of Neelu Arora v Union of India, 2003(3) SCT 629 (SC) : 2003(3) SCC 366.
23.
In Madhu P Singh's case (supra) after observing that, "if any student is admitted after commencement of the course, it would be against the intended objects of fixing a time schedule", their Lordships in para 23 of the judgment, issued the following directions :-  "23.
There is, however, a necessity for specifically providing the time schedule for the course and fixing the period during which admissions can take place, making it clear that no admission can be granted after the scheduled date, which essentially should be the date for commencement of the course.
In conclusion  (i) there is no scope for admitting students midstream as that would be against the very spirit of statutes governing medical education; (ii) even if seats are unfilled that cannot be a ground for making mid-session admissions; (iii) there cannot be telescoping of unfilled seats of one year with permitted seats of the subsequent year; (iv) MCI shall ensure that the examining bodies fix a time schedule specifying the duration of this course, the date of commencement of the course and the last date for admission; (v) different modalities for admission can be worked out and necessary steps like holding of examination if prescribed, counselling and the like have to be completed within the specified time; (vi) no variation of the schedule so far as admissions are concerned shall be allowed; (vii) in case of any deviation by the institution concerned, action as prescribed shall be taken by MCI."
24.
It is clearly discernible from these directions that the cut-off date prescribed for admissions is required to be strictly adhered to so that there is no scope for admitting students in the midstream against the very spirit of statutes governing medical education and no variation of the schedule, so far as the admissions are concerned, shall be allowed.
It is, however, difficult to agree that if a calculated, planned, systematic and collusive fraud is played in making admissions on the last cut-off date itself by those who, in terms of the authoritative law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, were obligated to follow the rule of merit, the State Govt. or the High Court would be rendered helpless and a mute spectator.
It is beyond one's comprehension that if an institution indulged in back-door entries while granting admissions deliberately with an intent to deny the same to the candidates higher in merit and if it does so on the last day of such admissions, then the institute is immune from the scope of judicial review and/or the administrative action by the State Govt/University, as the case may be.
We have already taken notice of the fact that chaotic conditions were created at the time of re-counselling held on 3092003.
It appears that even an attendance register was not maintained to secure signatures of the students as a token of their presence at the time of re-counselling.
It has also come on the record that after 800 PM, the students and their parents started raising slogans.
At 900 PM, the Principal of respondent No. 6, namely, DMC, Ludhiana is stated to have asked the Chairman of the Admission Committee to supply a copy of the "waiting list candidates".
Till then neither respondent No. 6 nor the Admission Committee even disclosed and/or declared that there were still some vacant seats available in the DMC, Ludhiana which were to be filled up on the basis of the merit in PMET-2003.
While sending the names out of the waiting list, the Chairman of the Admission Committee did not indicate even the ranking in the merit list.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, the preliminary objection pressed upon by the respondents, therefore, merits outright rejection.
25.
That apart, the principle of strict adherence to the deadline prescribed for admissions by the Medical Council of India and approved by the Apex Court is otherwise not attracted in this case.
No relief for admission has been sought by the petitioners.
They are either seeking quashing of the admissions granted to the candidates lower in merit or their own transfer from SGRD Amritsar to DMC, Ludhiana.
The petitioners got admission to a medical college much before the deadline and resumed their studies as well.
Their transfer to another medical college, to which, if they are found entitled for admission as per their merit and option, neither goes against the spirit of statutes governing the medical education nor would lower the standards of medical education.
The duration of course, syllabi and curriculum in both the colleges is the same, the University which holds their examinations is also one and the same, therefore, it shall not amount to admission and/or first entry to a professional course.
26.
It has also been argued on behalf of the respondents that this writ petition is barred by the principle of res-judicata.
As pointed out earlier, the re-counselling notice dated 3092003 (Annexure P-2) was published in compliance with a Division Bench judgment of this Court dated 2592003 in Shri Guru Ram Das's case (supra).
The re-counselling was required for 30 NRI seats for the MBBS and 7 for the BDS in Government Medical and Dental Colleges.
Since it was likely to dislocate a few candidates who had already been admitted in MBBS course, they too were advised to attend the counselling and to exercise their options afresh.
It has not been disputed that some of the students including petitioners No. 1 and 2 were actually dislocated and were shifted from Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot to SGRD, Amritsar.
It was the order of their dislocation that was challenged by them in the previous writ petition which was dismissed by this Court after observing that no legal right of theirs was infringed upon.
The challenge to the admission of candidates lower in merit out of the "waiting list" or to the "faculty quota" provided for "wards of faculty members" were not the issues directly or substantially involved in the previous case nor an occasion to adjudicate the same arose before this Court.
The earlier writ petition was not inter-se the parties though some of the petitioners as well as respondents are common.
We, therefore, fail to understand as to how the principles akin to res-judicata can be invoked by the respondents to dislodge the claim put forth by the petitioners.
27.
The respondent Nos. 10 to 13 have also urged that the Government order dated 1412004 (Annexure P-10) was passed behind their back, therefore, the same need not be enforced against them.
We are not impressed by this submission as well.
Firstly, it was a fact finding inquiry held by the Director, Medical Education and Research, Punjab which culminated into passing of the afore-mentioned order.
The inquiry was conducted after obtaining explanation dated 612004 (Annexure P-9) from the Principal of DMC, Ludhiana (respondent No. 6).
Further, the Government itself has come up with the stand that the order dated 1412004 (Annexure P-10) was not implemented on the representation of the students/college and another inquiry was not conducted from Shri DS Guru, IAS, Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
In his report, Shri Guru is also stated to have reiterated the same findings.
In our view, there is a substantial compliance of the principles of natural justice and the respondents cannot complain of being condemned unheard.
28.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 11 to 13, apart from reiterating the submissions made by Sarvshri ML Sarin and Rajiv Atma Ram, Senior Advocates, also invoked the equitable principles on the premise that these respondents have already undergone the MBBS course for a period of one year and if their admissions are set aside at this stage, it will completely mar their academic career.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to this submission as well.
Equity comes into play where the law obligates nothing.
It is equally well settled that "equity acts on the conscience".
"A party that seeks equity must come with clean hands."
Having found, as a matter of fact that, the admissions have been secured by the private respondents either in flagrant violation of the merit list in PMET-2003 and/or on the basis of "faculty quota" which is a new facet given to the "reservations for children of employees/staff" of an institute and which has been repeatedly struck down by the Courts, we are of the view that admission to the private respondents is nothing but playing fraud with the merit, fairness and transparency in admissions to the professional courses.
The fraud could not have been played but for the active participation and/or connivance of the students who, apart from the institute, are also the beneficiaries.
Fraud vitiates everything.
There can be no equity in protecting and/or promoting the committal of fraud.
The growing tendency of securing admissions through dubious means has to be curbed to discourage the wrong- doers.
It cannot be overlooked that the equity is amenable to both sides.
Those who burnt mid-night oil, worked hard and secured superior merit positions in PMET-2003 have a more equitable right to seek admission in an institute of their choice.
We are, therefore, of the firm view that a strict action in accordance with law is promptly required in the case in hand.
29.
For the reasons afore-mentioned, this writ petition is allowed, with costs quantified as Rs. 25,000/- which DMC, Ludhiana shall pay, in the following terms :-  (i) the reservation introduced as "faculty quota", namely, the "wards of bona fide faculty members" by the DMC, Ludhiana for admission to MBBS course is declared unconstitutional and the same is accordingly struck down; consequently, the admissions granted to respondent Nos. 11 to 13, who were admitted against the afore-mentioned "faculty quota", are also set aside; (ii) the manner in which seats have been filled from the "waiting list" is held to be illegal and consequently, the admission granted to respondent No. 10 out of the "waiting list" in DMC, Ludhiana is set aside; (iii) the petitioners (except petitioner No. 3) who are higher in merit than the respondent Nos. 9 to 13, shall be given an option for their allocation to the DMC, Ludhiana against the available seats and strictly as per merit in PMET-2003; (iv) since petitioner No. 3 did not opt for MBBS course and is pursuing the BDS course in the Govt.
Dental College for the last one year, he shall be given an option to join the MBBS course in DMC, Ludhiana, however, in case petitioner No. 3 opts to join the afore-mentioned course, he shall have to start the same from its very beginning; (v) respondent No. 10 (Gurnoor Channi), who was initially admitted to SGRD at Amritsar allegedly as per her merit in PMET-2003; shall, however, be entitled to be re-shifted to the said institute and pursue her MBBS course, if so entitled as per merit.
The cost of Rs. 25,000/- shall be deposited by the DMC, Ludhiana with the Punjab State Legal Services Authority within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.