SS Saron, J - Shri MR Sharma (since deceased) was working as Assistant Divisional Manager, Central Bank of India at Chandigarh (hereinafter referred, to as the employee).
In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the employee has sought directions for quashing the inquiry proceedings as also the orders of his dismissal from service and other orders passed against him i.e. order Annexure P-8, the order dated 28.1.1992 (Annexure P-9), the order dated 2971982 (Annexure P-12) and order dated 271983 (Annexure P-14).
The employee died during the pendency of the writ petition and in terms of order dated 9111987 Smt. Swaran Kumari Sharma and others were brought on record as his L.Rs.
2.
The employee joined the Central Bank of India (Bank - for short) in April, 1944.
He was promoted as Superintendent Grade I in 1976 and posted at Chandigarh.
The employee was then transferred to the Ambala Cantt Divisional Office and the post of the employee of Superintendent Grade-I was re- designated to that of Assistant Divisional manager.
While working on this post, the employee was served a charge-sheet dated 31121976 (Annexure P-1) for certain acts of omission and commission.
The decision of the Bank to hold a departmental enquiry against the employee was also intimated.
As a consequence of the charge-sheet, an ex parte inquiry was held by the Divisional Manager of the Bank.
The employee was held guilty of the charges attributed to him.
The matter was referred to the disciplinary authority and by an order dated 12.9.1979 the employee was dismissed from service of the Bank.
The employee preferred an appeal under Regulation 17 of the Central Bank of India Officers Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1976 (hereinafter called as "the Regulations") against the order of the disciplinary authority.
The appellate authority vide its order dated 731980 ordered de novo inquiry in the matter.
It was observed that the ends of justice would be met if enquiry is held de novo whereby the employee will get a full opportunity to put his case and the management to substantiate the charges as levelled.
The delinquent employee in view of the order of de novo inquiry applied for his reinstatement to the post to which he claimed he was entitled.
However, the disciplinary authority on 2041980 passed another order varying the earlier order by saying that the remand was made for the limited purpose of cross- examination of witnesses who had appeared before the Inquiry Officer on the day the petitioner was absent.
The employee then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2640 of 1981 in this Court assailing the aforesaid order dated 2041980.
The said petition was admitted on 1881981 and the operation of the order dated 2041980 varying the earlier order of de novo inquiry was stayed by this Court.
The employee again applied to the Bank to reinstate him in service and also to pay him the arrears of salary which was not paid by the Bank.
The Bank refused this request of the delinquent employee who then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4456 of 1981 in this Court on 25.9.1981 praying for his reinstatement in service and arrears of salary.
The said petition was also admitted on 24111981.
At this point of time, the employee was due to retire in January, 1982.
Both the petitions i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 2640 and 4456 of 1981 were allowed by this Court on 2011982 (Annexure P-2).
It was observed that the position before the dismissal of the employee was that he was serving employee of the Bank and entitled to rejoin his duty.
The Bank cannot legitimately, in the circumstances so far existing in this case, refuse him to join duty.
The Bank was directed to allow the employee to join his duty whenever he reports after the said judgment and before the day he superannuates.
A direction was also issued to pay the employee his upto-date emoluments.
3.
In terms of the aforesaid judgment of this Court, the employee reported for duty in the office of the Regional Manager of the Bank at Chandigarh as also the Chief Manager of the Bank at Ambala Cantt.
requesting them to allow him to join duty but he was not allowed to join and was asked to furnish copy of the judgment dated 2011982.
The copies of the joining reports of the employee are appended as Annexures P-3 and P-4.
The employee received a telegram from the Chief Manager of the Bank (respondent No. 1) asking him to join duty at Regional Officer at Chandigarh at 1000 A.M.
The said telegram was received at 1630 hours on 2311982 and he could not join duty by 1000 A.M.
The employee sent a reply to the said telegram informing the Bank that the telegram dated 2211982 was received by his daughter on 2311982 at 4.30 P.M. and he would be resuming duty on Monday 25.1.1982.
On 25.1.1982, the employee reported for duty at 1000 A.M. at Chandigarh, but he was not provided any duty and he thus submitted a letter on 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-5) which was received by the Chief Manager at 12.10 P.M. On the same day ie 25.1.1982 at 100 PM, the employee received a communication Annexure P-6 in which it is was indicated by the Chief Manager of the Bank (respondent No. 1) that the employee was advised to take the four letters indicated therein and the same were sent by registered post with a covering letter dated 2311982.
It is further stated that the employee was advised to proceed immediately to the Civil Lines, Jalandhar Branch of the Bank in connection with the departmental inquiry as referred to in the enclosed documents.
Further, departmental inquiry had started at 1000 A.M., on 25.1.1982 information regarding which, it is stated, was given to the delinquent employee verbally also by Shri V Ramaswamy, Disciplinary Authority-cum-Inquiry Officer on 2311982 at Ambala.
The employee in response to the said communication dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-6) sent a telegram asking for adjournment of the inquiry to 27.1.1982.
The employee also wrote another letter dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-7) making various grievances against the Bank.
The delinquent employee, it is stated, was a patient of heart trouble and diabetes and he suffered a heart attack and was admitted in the Civil Hospital at Ambala Cantt on 2611982 and was discharged on 321982.
The delinquent employee had informed the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) vide a telegram dated 2611982 about his admission to the hospital.
Despite the information the inquiry was proceeded with on 27.1.1982.
In the ex parte inquiry the employee was held guilty and liable to pay Rs. 1,47,48553.
This order, it is stated, was passed presumably to enable the Bank to withhold the amount of arrears of salary and other wages due to the delinquent employee from 12.9.1979 to the date of his dismissal from service on 2211982 as also the subsequent period.
The copy of the order passed after the inquiry is Annexure P-8 and the copy of the dismissal order dated 2811982 is annexed as Annexure P-9.
The delinquent employee vide letter dated 321982 (Annexure P-10) from the Chief Manager of the Bank was informed about the emoluments paid to him by the Bank for the period from 12.9.1979 to 2211982 and that deductions were made out of an amount of Rs. 1,47,48553 in terms of order dated 2811982 of the disciplinary authority and administrative orders of the same date i.e. 2811982 (Annexure P-9).
It was, however, found that there was a small clerical error in the calculation which was to be corrected.
The details after making the clerical errors were given i.e. regarding arrears of emoluments from 2311982 to 2811982.
The net amount was worked out to Rs. 49,493.92, which it was stated to be treated as having been paid to the employee by the Bank by deducting Rs. 1,47,48583 and the balance of Rs. 97,99191 was indicated to be yet due and payable by the employee to the Bank in terms of the order dated 2811982 of the disciplinary authority and administrative orders of the same date.
4.
The delinquent employee then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 655 of 1982 assailing the action of the respondents.
The said petition was dismissed as withdrawn on 2841982 as an appeal was provided for by the Regulations and it was ordered that the employee should file an appeal within 15 days and directed the appellate authority to decide the matter within three months.
The employee filed an appeal before the appellate authority on 351982 (Annexure P-11).
He then received a communication dated 2971982 (Annexure P-12) enclosing the findings and the orders dated 2271982 passed by the appellate authority in pursuance of which the appeal dated 351982 (Annexure P-11) had been dismissed and the orders of the disciplinary authority were confirmed.
5.
The employee then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3403 of 1982 against the order of inquiry and disciplinary authority (respondent No. 2) passed on 2811982 (Annexure P-9) and for quashing the order of the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) demanding a sum of Rs. 1,47,48583 and also for setting aside the order dated 2271982 received on 2971982 (Annexure P-12) passed by the appellate authority (respondent No. 3).
The said petition was allowed to be withdrawn on 1081982 to enable the employee to file a review application under Regulation 18, which was filed on 2111982 (Annexure P-13).
The reviewing authority dismissed the same on 271983 (Annexure P-14).
Accordingly, the action of the Bank in dismissing the employee from service imposing a penalty for a sum of Rs. 1,47,48583 being the amount of loss caused to the Bank, has been assailed.
6.
Notice of the case was issued and respondents filed reply dated 1611984.
It is stated that the petition filed by the delinquent employee was smeared with suppression of certain material facts.
A departmental inquiry was instituted against the delinquent employee vide charge-sheet dated 31121976 (Annexure P1) in respect of serious charges pertaining to abuse of his powers by making various unauthorised advances in the matter of various irregularities committed by him resulting in the Bank suffering heavy financial loss.
It is stated that on going through the charges it would be observed that the charges pertain to allowing unauthorised additional facilities to the parties even though various bills purchased were returned unpaid and the controlling office conveyed to him their disapproval of his allowing enhanced facilities.
The employee had also concealed the allowing of such advances by not reporting them in the required control returns expected to be submitted by him.
The Inquiry Officer who initially conducted the inquiry adjourned the inquiry on 1731977, 8121977, 2711978, 1021978, 1041978 and 851978 at the instance of the delinquent employee or his representative.
After giving him six adjournments the delinquent employee or his representative failed to be present in the inquiry on the seventh occasion and enquiry was held ex parte.
The disciplinary authority on the basis of evidence on record dismissed the employee against which he filed an appeal under the Regulations.
It is stated that the appellate authority under the Regulations is not required to give a personal hearing.
Nevertheless the appellate authority with a view to provide the employee a reasonable opportunity gave the employee and his representative an opportunity to be heard in person.
The appellate authority directed for holding a de novo inquiry.
The representative of the delinquent employee in the appeal assured that from the defence side they would never give any opportunity to allege any evading tactics when the enquiry starts de novo.
Despite this assurance and commitment, when the enquiry was held the delinquent employee adopted dilatory tactics by moving this Court by way of two writ petitions i.e. Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2640 of 1981 and 4456 of 1981 and by getting injunction with a view to stall the inquiry and confront the disciplinary authority and the management with a fait-acompli situation arising out of his retirement from 121982.
It is stated that every effort was made by the delinquent officer to prevent the management from proceeding departmentally in spite of various assurances and commitments given by him and his representative to the competent authorities.
The delinquent employee was ultimately dismissed by the disciplinary authority on the basis of evidence on record where it was also held that huge sum of money would be the loss caused to the Bank as a result of the misconduct of the employee.
The appeal of the delinquent employee was also dismissed by the appellate authority which concurred with the findings of the disciplinary authority vide findings dated 2811982.
The Reviewing Authority did not find any merit.
It is stated that the principles of natural justice have been complied with.
It is denied that the employee was promoted either as Superintendent or its equivalent post as Assistant Divisional Manager.
Both these posts and the earlier posting of the employee at Jalandhar Civil Lines Branch are stated to be in the same category.
Therefore, the question of promotion did not arise in the case.
It is stated that the charge-sheet was served on the employee not after his alleged promotion but after his transfer from Civil Lines Branch on an equivalent post of Superintendent at the relevant time.
The other aspects regarding the holding of a de novo inquiry and the filing of writ petitions and the stay granted by this Court are admitted.
The judgment dated 2011982 (Annexure P-2) of this Court, it is stated, has been complied with.
In regard to the averments after the passing of the judgment by this Court on 2011982 (Annexure P-2), it is stated that the delinquent employee came at the Bank on 2111982 at 130 PM and was advised to furnish copy of the judgment so that further action could be taken in compliance thereof.
The employee instead of supplying the copy of the judgment went to Ambala Division Office the next day and submitted a letter dated 2211982 asking the Bank to give him the arrears of salary although it was categorically held that payment of arrears of salary was not a condition precedent for the employee attending the departmental inquiry and his reinstatement.
It is submitted that on the advice of the Advocate of the Bank the employee had to be reinstated as per orders of this Court.
Therefore, a telegram was sent to the petitioner on 2211982 advising him to report for duty at Chandigarh at 1000 A.M. on 23111982.
In addition to this, a telephonic message was sent to the Chief Manager Divisional Office Ambala to find out whether the delinquent employee was still in Ambala or had left for Chandigarh.
However, when the employee did not turn up at Chandigarh at 1200 noon, four officers of the Bank went to Ambala on 2311982 to inform the employee about his reinstatement and to further inform him about the departmental inquiry which was to be conducted de novo after the judgment of this Court.
The employee contacted the Chief Manager of the Bank at Ambala on telephone around 2.00 P.M. On the basis of inquiry made by the Chief Manager Ambala through the Assistant Divisional Manager Ambala the employee was told to come to the office immediately.
When he came to the office the four officers were already there and four letters Annexures R-1 to R-4 were handed over to him.
After going through the contents of the same the employee refused to accept the said four letters at the Divisional Office Ambala on 2311982 in the presence of the four officers of the Bank.
Shri V Ramasway Chief Manager Bombay of the Bank informed the employee that irrespective of the fact that he had refused to accept the said four letters, it was once again brought to his notice that Inquiry Officer Mr. Rama Swamy shall be proceeding with the inquiry on 25.1.1982 as scheduled and he should attend the inquiry.
A note regarding the aforesaid fact was prepared at the spot and signed by Shri V Rama Swamy Chief Manager Bombay and copy of which is attached as Annexure R-5.
The said four letters were also sent under Registered A.D. Post and under Postal Certificate on the same date to the delinquent employee at his residential address.
In these circumstances it is submitted that the telegram sent by the delinquent employee on 2311982 was a clever attempt on his part to give an impression as if he had not read the contents of the four letters as detailed in para 10 of the written statement.
In the letter of the Disciplinary Authority-cum-Inquiry Officer as also in the letter dated 2211982, it was stated that the inquiry had to start on 25.1.1982 at Civil Lines Branch of the Bank of Jalandhar.
The delinquent employee, it is stated, in order to shield his knowledge with the intention to avoid the inquiry had sent the telegram.
It is denied that the delinquent employee had reported for duty on 25.1.1982 at 1000 A.M.
He came at 12.10 P.M. with a letter.
Since the employee was already in the knowledge of the inquiry scheduled to be held on 25.1.1982 at 1000 A.M. in the Civil Lines Branch at Jalandhar, his coming for duty on that day at Chandigarh was only to justify his false stand and his absence from the inquiry which had started at 1000 A.M. on 25.1.1982 at Jalandhar as scheduled.
It is stated that the employee had no intention to attend the departmental inquiry.
He had come to the office at 12.10 P.M. on 25.1.1982 to deliver a letter, reply to which was given to him in writing at 12.50 P.M. on the same day which he had received after signing the receipt.
The reply is annexed as Annexure R-7.
It is also denied that the employee suffered any heart attack on 2611982.
He got himself admitted in Civil Hospital Ambala Cantt.
on account of high blood pressure.
The cardio report is stated to be absolutely clear.
The four officers who visited the delinquent employee in the hospital on 2811982 at Ambala Cantt.
after inquiry made from the doctor at the hospital submitted their report Annexure R-8.
It was recorded therein that the four officers went to deliver the administrative orders and the orders and findings of the disciplinary authority in pursuance of the departmental inquiry held against the employee and that the delinquent employee refused to accept the same.
The delinquent was imposed the penalty of dismissal from service and recovery of the amount to the extent of loss caused to the Bank which it is stated has been rightly imposed in the circumstances of the case.
Therefore, it is prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
7.
Shri Shireesh Gupta, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has contended that the action of the respondents in passing the impugned orders and not reinstating the employee at the relevant time and also in not paying him anything in terms of the judgment of this Court are illegal and arbitrary.
Besides, it is contended that the conduct of the inquiry and passing of the impugned orders is in violation of the provisions of Regulation 6 of the Regulations, which have statutory force and provide a detailed procedure that is required to be followed before imposition of major penalties.
Even otherwise the disciplinary authority has not framed any definite and distinct charges on the basis of the allegations against the delinquent employee.
The further contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the delinquent employee was not afforded a fair and reasonable opportunity to meet his case which is in violation of the principles of natural justice and the procedure provided for by the Regulations, which vitiates the entire inquiry.
8.
In response Shri Girish Agnihotri, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, contends that the delinquent employee was afforded fair and reasonable opportunity to meet his case and the delinquent himself evaded the inquiry on one pretext or the other and, therefore, he could not take the benefit of his own wrong.
9.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the respective contentions of the learned counsel and have also perused the records.
It is appropriate to note that the nature of charges are in relation to various acts of omission or commission in the functioning of the Bank.
The charges as attributed to the petitioner are indicated in the charge-sheet (Annexure P-1).
10.
The question that requires consideration is whether the delinquent employee had been granted fair and reasonable opportunity to meet his case.
As already noticed, the petitioner was punished for the charges attributed to him and dismissed from service on 12.9.1979.
In appeal, the Appellate Authority on 731980 ordered de novo inquiry and the delinquent employee was awarded opportunity to put his case and the management to substantiate the charges as levelled in the charge-sheet.
The delinquent employee applied for re- instatement to the post on which he was working.
The Disciplinary Authority, however, on 2041980 varied the earlier order by saying that the remand was for the limited purpose of cross-examination of witnesses.
The said action of the Disciplinary Authority was assailed by the delinquent employee by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 2640 of 1981 filed in this Court.
The said petition was admitted and the operation of the order dated 2041980 was stayed.
The employee again asked the respondent-Bank to re-instate him and also pay him his arrears of salary.
The Bank refused this request which action was also assailed by the delinquent employee in this Court by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 4456 of 1981.
The said petition was also admitted by this Court on 25.8.1981.
The employee was due to retire on 3111982 and was, therefore, desirous that the matters be settled.
The aforesaid two writ petitions i.e. Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2640 and 4456 of 1981 were decided on 2011982 and the relevant part of order reads as follows :-  "The net result of this is that the petitioner gets back to that very position in which he was before the order of his dismissal.
The learned counsel for the respondent admitted that the petitioner was not under suspension.
The position before the dismissal was that the petitioner was serving employee of the Bank and entitled to rejoin his duty.
The respondent-Bank cannot legitimately, in the circumstances so far existing in this case, and brought to my notice upto date, refuse him to join his duty.
The respondent is, therefore, directed to allow the petitioner to join his duty whenever he reports after this judgment and before the day he superannuates.
As a corollary to the above finding, the petitioner has a valid claim to the salary and allowances to which he is found entitled, by his employer.
The respondent-Bank should pay him the emoluments upto date.
With these observations, Civil Writ Petition No. 2460 of 1981 is allowed to this extent."
In terms of the above order dated 2011982 passed by this Court, the employee was to be reinstated in service.
However, the employee was to retire on 3111982 and the judgment was pronounced on 2011982.
Within this span of 11 days the record shows that the entire proceedings have been undertaken by the Bank.
The delinquent employee has pleaded that he went to the Bank for joining duty but he was not allowed to do so on the ground that he should furnish copy of the judgment dated 2011982.
The delinquent employee tendered his joining report dated 2111982 (Annexure P-3) to the Regional Manager of the Bank at Sector-17, Chandigarh for joining duty.
Thereafter, on the following day, the delinquent employee went to the Chief Manager of the Bank at Ambala Cantt and tendered his joining report dated 2211982 (Annexure P-4).
However, he was not allowed to join and instead he received a telegram on 2311982 at 1630 hours asking him to join on 2311982 at Regional Officer Chandigarh at 1000 A.M.
Therefore, he could not join at 1000 A.M. and he sent a telegram in this regard.
The delinquent employee reported for duty at Chandigarh on 2511982 at 1000 A.M.
However, he was not provided any duty, he thus delivered a letter dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-5) addressed to the Chief Manager, Central Bank of India, Sector 17-B, Chandigarh.
On the same day, the petitioner received a communication dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-6) in response to his letter Annexure P-5.
It was indicated in the Bank's communication Annexure P-6 that when the employee had met the Chief Manager at the Divisional Office, Ambala Cantt on 2311982 in the presence of S/Shri RP Sharma, Chief Manager, Ambala; V Ramaswamy, Disciplinary Authority-cum-Inquiry Officer Central Office, Bombay; RM Vasudevo Law Officer Central Office, Bombay and ML Chhiber, Deputy Chief Officer (LNW) Chandigarh he was advised to take the following four letters :-  (1) Letter No. RO/PRS/Legal-96/429 dated 2211982.
(2) Letter dated 2211982 addressed to the employee by Mr. V Ramaswamy, Disciplinary Authority-cum-Enquiry Officer.
(3) Letter dated 2211982 addressed to the employee by Mr. MV Mauskar, General Manager (Personnel) alongwith (4) Forwarding letter No. RO/PRS/Legal/96/82/430 dated 2211982.
11.
It is further stated in the communication Annexure P-6, that the employee refused to take the above said letters after reading the same and the letters were sent to him by registered post with a covering letter dated 2311982 and another copy of the said four letters was enclosed.
The employee was advised to proceed immediately to Civil Lines, Jalandhar Branch of the Bank in connection with the departmental inquiry as referred in the enclosed documents.
The employee in reply to the communication Annexure P-6 sent a telegram to the Chief Manager of the Bank (respondent No. 1) asking him to adjourn the inquiry to 27.1.1982.
The delinquent employee also made a written request dated 25/2611982 (Annexure P-7) in which it is submitted by the delinquent employee with reference to the letter dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P- 6) from the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) that on 2311982 when the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) had met the delinquent employee at the Divisional Office at Ambala Cantt., he had advised him to take the four above mentioned letters.
It is further stated that the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) was aware that when the delinquent employee came to the DM office at Ambala on the call of the Bank on 2311982 at about 300 PM the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) was holding sheet of papers in his hand in which he had typed an acknowledgement letter to be signed by the delinquent employee giving therein reference number of certain letters to be delivered to him in the closed cover.
The delinquent pleaded that he could not accept the closed envelope without reading the contents therein and give him his signatures on the sheet of paper which the Chief Manager (respondent No.1) was waiving in front of the delinquent.
The delinquent had declined to sign the paper and requested that it be sent by post.
The delinquent was, thus, informed on 25.1.1982 that the inquiry proceedings had already started at Jalandhar at 1000 A.M.
He stated that he could not be expected to attend the inquiry without first re-instating him.
Besides, he could not contact his representative who was to defend him as he was working at Yamunanagar Branch.
He also stated that he was fully prepared to face the inquiry but he be allowed to exercise his rights by being present at the time of inquiry with his representative.
He also prayed for paying him back wages from 12.9.1979 i.e. the date of his initial dismissal from service upto 2611982 since he had no money and required the same badly.
Besides, if the calculation with regard to back wages were not complete he may be given advance of Rs. 40,000/- against past wages unpaid to him.
12.
Thereafter the employee suffered a heart attack and was admitted at the Civil Hospital, Ambala Cantt.
on 2611982 and he was discharged on 321982.
The petitioner informed respondent No. 1 vide telegram dated 2611982 about his admission to the hospital.
However, the inquiry was proceeded against and the order Annexure P-8 (which does not depict any date) was passed.
Thereafter, letter dated 2811982 (Annexure P-9) was addressed by the Chief Manager (respondent No. 1) to the delinquent official enclosing the findings and order of the Disciplinary Authority-cum-Inquiry Officer dated 2811982 in the departmental inquiry held against him on 25.1.1982 and 27.1.1982.
In terms of the order or the Disciplinary Authority, the employee stood dismissed with immediate effect i.e. 2811982 and he was also held liable to pay the Bank a sum of Rs. 1,47,48583 being the loss caused to the Bank as a direct result of his actions as a Branch Manager at Civil Lines, Jalandhar.
The said sum, the delinquent employee was called upon to pay within three days of the date of the letter failing which the Bank would recover the same from any amount receivable by him from the Bank or in the alternative the Bank would proceed to recover the same entirely at his risk and responsibility.
In this manner, the inquiry was held against the delinquent on 25.1.1982 and 27.1.1982 for two days.
13.
It would be appropriate to note the punishments that can be imposed on an Officer of the Bank for acts of misconduct.
The same are indicated in Regulation 4 of the Regulations which reads as under :-  PENALTIES :  "The following are the penalties which may be imposed on an officer employee, for acts of misconduct or for any other good and sufficient reasons.
Minor penalties : (a) Censure; (b) Withholding of increments of pay with or without cumulative effect; (c) Withholding of promotion; (d) recovery from pay or such other amount as may be due to him of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the bank by negligence or breach of orders.
Major Penalties : (e) reduction to a lower grade or post, or to a lower stage in a time scale; (f) compulsory retirement; (g) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for future employment; (h) dismissal which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment.
Explanation - The following shall not amount to a penalty within the meaning or this regulation namely :- x x x x x x x" Clause (d) of Regulation 4 under the Head `Minor Penalties', provides for recovery from pay or such other amount as may be due to him of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the bank by negligence or breach of orders.
14.
The procedure for imposing major penalty which has been imposed on the delinquent is provided for in terms of Regulation 6 which is as under :-  "PROCEDURE FOR IMPOSING MAJOR PENALTIES : (1) No order imposing any of the major penalties specified in clauses (e), (f), (g) and (h) of regulation 4 shall be made except after an inquiry is held in accordance with this regulation.
(2) Whenever the Disciplinary Authority is of the opinion that there are grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour against an officer employee, it may itself enquire into, or appoint any other public servant (hereinafter referred to as the Inquiring Authority) to enquire into the truth thereof.
Explanation : When the Disciplinary Authority itself holds the inquiry any reference in sub-regulation (8) to sub-regulation (21) to the inquiring authority shall be construed as a reference to Disciplinary Authority.
(3) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry, the Disciplinary Authority shall frame definite and distinct charges on the basis of the allegations against the officer employee and the articles of charge, together with a statement of the allegations, on which they are based, shall be communicated in writing to the officer employee, who shall be required to submit within such time as may be specified by the Disciplinary Authority (not exceeding 15 days), or within such extended time as may be granted by the said Authority, a written statement of his defence.
(4) On receipt of the written statement of the officer employee, or if no such statement is received within the time specified, an enquiry may be held by the Disciplinary Authority itself, or if it considers it necessary so to do appoint under sub-regulation (2) an Inquiring Authority for the purpose : Provided that it may not be necessary to hold an inquiry in respect of the articles of charge admitted by the officer employee in his written statement but shall be necessary to record its findings on each such charge.
(5) The Disciplinary Authority shall, where it is not the inquiring authority, forward to the inquiring authority : (i) a copy of the articles of charges and statements of imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour; (ii) a copy of the written statement or defence, if any, submitted by the officer employee; (iii) a list of documents by which and list of witnesses by whom the articles of charge are proposed to be substantiated; (iv) a copy of statements of the witnesses, if any; (v) evidence proving the delivery of articles of charge under sub-regulation (3); (vi) a copy of the order appointing the Presenting Officer in terms of sub- regulation (6) (6) Where the Disciplinary Authority itself enquiries or appoints an inquiring authority for holding an inquiry, it may, by an order, appoint a public servant to be known as the "Presenting Officer" to present on its behalf the case in support of the articles of charge.
(7) The officer employee may take the assistance of any other officer employee but may not engage a legal practitioner for the purpose.
(8) (a) The inquiring authority shall by notice in writing specify the day on which the officer employee shall appear in person before the inquiring authority.
(b) On the date fixed by the inquiring authority, the officer employee shall appear before the inquiring authority at the time, place and date specified in the notice.
(c) The inquiring authority shall ask the officer employee whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make and if he pleads guilty to any of the articles of charge, the inquiring authority shall record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signature of the officer employee concerned thereon.
(d) The inquiring authority shall return a finding of guilt in respect of those articles of charge to which the officer employee concerned pleads guilty.
(9) If the officer employee does not plead guilty, the inquiring authority shall adjourn the case to a later date not exceeding 30 days, or within such extended time as may be granted by the inquiring authority.
10(a) The inquiring authority shall, where the officer employee does not admit all or any of the articles of charge, furnish to such officer employee a list of documents by which and a list of witnesses by whom, the articles of charge are proposed to be proved.
(b) The inquiring authority shall also record an order that the officer employee may for the purpose of preparing his defence - (i) inspect within five days of the order or within such further time not exceeding five days as the inquiring authority may allow, the documents listed; (ii) submit a list of documents and witnesses that he wants for the inquiry; (iii) be supplied with copies of statements of witnesses, if any, recorded earlier and the inquiring authority shall furnish such copies not later than three days before the commencement of the examination of the witnesses by the inquiring authority.
(iv) give a notice within ten days of the order or within such further time not exceeding ten days as the inquiring authority may allow for the discovery or production of the documents referred to in item (ii) NOTE : The relevancy of the documents and the examination of the witnesses referred to in item (ii) shall be given by the officer employee concerned.
(11) The inquiring authority shall, on receipt of the notice for the discovery or production of the documents, forward the same or copies thereof to the authority in whose custody or possession the documents are kept with a requisition for the production of documents on such date as may be specified.
(12) On the receipt of the requisition under sub-regulation (11), the authority having the custody or possession of the requisitioned documents, shall arrange to produce the same before the inquiring authority on the date, place and time specified in the requisition : Provided that the authority having the custody or possession of the requisitioned documents may claim privilege if the production of such documents will be against the public interest or the interest of the bank.
In that event, it shall inform the inquiring authority accordingly.
(13) On the date fixed for the inquiry, the oral and documentary evidence by which the articles of charge are proposed to be proved shall be produced by or on behalf of the disciplinary authority.
The witnesses produced by the Presenting Officer shall be examined by the Presenting Officer and may be cross-examined by or on behalf of the officer employee.
The Presenting Officer shall be entitled to re-examine his witnesses on any points on which they have been cross-examined, but not on a new matter without the leave of the inquiring authority.
The inquiring authority may also put such questions to the witnesses as it thinks fit.
(14) Before the close of the case, in support of the charges, the inquiring authority may, in its discretion, allow the Presenting Officer to produce evidence not included in the charge-sheet or may itself call for new evidence or recall or re-examine any witness.
In such case the officer employee shall be given opportunity to inspect the documentary evidence before it is taken on record, or to cross-examine a witness, who has been so summoned.
The inquiring authority may also allow the officer employee to produce new evidence, if it is of opinion that the production of such evidence is necessary in the interest of justice.
(15) When the case in support of the charges is closed, the officer employee may be required to state his defence, orally or in writing, as he may prefer.
If the defence is made orally, it shall be recorded and the officer employee shall be required to sign the record.
In either case, a copy of the statement of defence shall be given to the Presenting Officer, if any, appointed.
(16) The evidence on behalf of the officer employee shall then be produced.
The officer employee may examine himself in his own behalf, if he so prefers.
The witnesses produced by the officer employee shall then be examined by the officer employee and may be cross-examined by the Presenting Officer.
The officer employee shall be entitled to re-examine any of his witnesses on any points on which they have been cross-examined, but not on any new matter without the leave of the inquiring authority.
(17) The inquiring authority may, after the officer employee closes his evidence, and shall, if the officer employee has not got himself examined, generally question him on the circumstances appearing against him in the evidence for the purpose of enabling the officer employee to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him.
(18) After the completion of the production of the evidence, the officer employee and the Presiding Officer may file written briefs of their respective cases within 15 days of the date of completion of the production of evidence.
(19) If the officer employee does not submit the written statement of defence referred to in sub-regulation (3) on or before the date specified for the purpose or does not appear in person, or though (through ?)
the assistant officer or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations, the inquiring authority may hold the inquiry ex parte.
(20) Whenever any inquiring authority, after having heard and recorded the whole or any part of the evidence in an inquiry ceases to exercise jurisdiction therein, and is succeeded by another inquiring authority which has, and which exercises, such jurisdiction, the inquiring authority so succeeding may act on the evidence so recorded by its predecessor, or partly recorded by its predecessor and partly recorded by itself.
Provided that if the succeeding inquiring authority is of the opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interest of justice, it may recall, examine, cross-examine and re- examine any such witnesses as herein before provided.
(21)(i) On the conclusion of the inquiry the inquiring authority shall prepare a report which shall contain the following : (a) a gist of the articles of charge and the statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour; (b) a gist of the defence of the officer employee in respect of each article of charge; (c) an assessment of the evidence in respect of each article of charge; (d) the findings on each article of charge and the reasons therefor.
Explanation :- If, in the opinion of the inquiring authority, the proceedings of the inquiry establish any article of charge different from the original article of charge, it may record its findings on such article of charge : Provided that the findings on such article of charge shall not be recorded unless the officer employee has either admitted the facts on which such article of charge is based or has had a reasonable opportunity of defending himself against such article of charge.
(ii) The inquiring authority, where it is not itself the Disciplinary Authority, shall forward to the Disciplinary Authority, the records of inquiry which shall include - (a) the report of the inquiry prepared by it under clause (i); (b) the written statement of defence, if any, submitted by the officer employee referred to in sub-regulation (15); (c) the oral and documentary evidence produced in the course of the inquiry; (d) written briefs referred to in sub-regulation (18), if any; and (e) the orders, if any, made by the Disciplinary Authority and the inquiring authority in regard to the inquiry."
15.
It would also be appropriate to note the operative part of the order Annexure P-8 of the Disciplinary Authority in dismissing the delinquent employee from service.
The same is as follows :-  "In view of what has been mentioned above, I order as under by way of consolidated punishment : 1.
That by way of penalty a sum of Rs. 1,47,48583 being the amount of loss caused to the Bank as a direct result of his mala fide misconduct established in the clean overdrafts accounts and in the account of Grove Engineering Works, should be recovered from him from his salary or any other amounts receivable by him.
2.
That the punishment of dismissal would meet the ends of justice for the charges levelled and proved in the accounts of RD Steel Industries; Doaba Pipe Industries and Swastika Ruber Industries.
He shall stand dismissed with immediate effect."
A reading of the above imposition of punishment on the delinquent employee in pursuance of order Annexure P-8 would show that two separate punishments have been imposed.
A sum of Rs. 1,47,48583 was ordered to be recovered being the amount of loss caused to the Bank besides punishment of dismissal from service.
The first part of the punishment would come under the head of minor punishment and the latter under that of a major punishment.
16.
In the circumstances it is to be seen whether the proper procedure as enjoined by the Regulations has been followed for the imposition of punishments and more particularly for the imposition of major penalty.
In this respect it may be noticed that in terms of the order dated 731980 of the Appellate Authority against the initial dismissal of the delinquent on 12.9.1979, a de novo inquiry had been ordered.
This Court while deciding Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2640 and 4456 of 1981 in terms of order dated 2011982 (Annexure P-2) interpreted the word "de novo inquiry" as used by the Disciplinary Authority as follows :-  "The word used by the disciplinary authority is "De novo Inquiry".
The ordinary dictionary meaning of the word de novo is to start afresh.
In common parlance also this word is understood in the same sense.
The disciplinary authority, which is a very high officer of the respondent Bank, could not mean anything different than the starting of the inquiry afresh.
An enquiry cannot be started afresh if the order adversely affecting the interest of the aggrieved person and which is under challenge before that authority, is allowed to persist and remain intact.
The use of the word de novo clinches the matter in favour of the petitioner.
Although in Annexure P-2 the order of dismissal was not specifically referred to as set aside, but it had actually been vacated.
This intention of the disciplinary authority was made manifest by him vide his letter dated 7th of July, 1981, vide which he recalling the order Annexure P-4 had directed the holding of a de novo inquiry.
The same is the position reflected from the portion extracted from Civil Misc. No. 57 of 1982 filed on behalf of the respondents.
After the disciplinary authority had decided the appeal finally vide Annexure P-2, it could not give an interpretation to negate the effect of the earlier decision."
The above-said findings and conclusions reached at in the earlier writ petitions between the parties have attained finality and it is not shown that the judgment dated 2011982 (Annexure P-2) was assailed by the Bank by way of appeal.
Therefore, findings reached at in the earlier petitions between the same parties operate as res judicata between them.
In Satyadhyan Ghosal v. Smt. Deoroajin Debi, AIR 1960 SC 941, the Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the principles of res judicata in the following manner :-  "The principle of res judicata is based on the need of giving a finality to judicial decisions.
What it says is that once a res is judicata, it shall not be adjudged again.
Primarily it applies as between past litigation and future litigation.
When a matter - whether on a question of fact or a question of law - has been decided between two parties in one suit or proceedings and the decision is final, either because no appeal was taken to a higher court or because the appeal was dismissed, or no appeal lies, neither party will be allowed in a future suit or proceeding between the same parties to canvass the matter again.
This principle of res judicata is embodied in relation to suits in Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure; but even where Section 11 does not apply, the principle of res judicata has been applied by courts for purpose of achieving finality in litigation.
The result of this is that the original court as well as any higher court must in any future litigation proceed on the basis that the previous decision was correct."
17.
Keeping in view the above enunciation of law, it is evident that the conclusions reached at regarding the conduct of de novo inquiry would mean conducting the enquiry from the state of Sub Regulation (2) of Regulation 6 referred to above which provides for the procedure for imposing major penalty in respect of any officer of the Bank.
Besides, the principle of audi alteram partem is a basic principle of the rules of natural justice.
The said rule in the conduct of departmental inquiries is to be observed in its proper perspective and not mere pretence of complying with it would satisfy the requirement of law.
The rule of audi alteram partem has been explained by the Supreme Court in Neelima Misra v. Harinder Kaur Paintal, AIR 1990 SC 1402 in the following manner :-  "An administrative order which involves civil consequences must be made consistently with the rule expressed in the Latin maxim audi alteram partem.
It means that the decision maker should afford to any party to a dispute an opportunity to present his case.
A large number of authorities are on this point and we will not travel over the field of authorities.
What is now not in dispute is that the person concerned must be informed of the case against him and the evidence in support thereof and must be given a fair opportunity to meet the case before an adverse decision is taken.
Ridge v. Baldwin, 1963(2) All ER 66; State of Orissa v. Dr. Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269."
The above dictum, therefore, entails the affording of opportunity to the delinquent to present his case and affording of an opportunity would mean affording a reasonable and an effective opportunity and not a mere lip service.
18.
In the case in hand, there is a definite trend on the part of the Bank to finish the inquiry before the retirement of the delinquent employee.
After the passing of the order dated 2011982 (Annexure P-2) by this Court there were 11 days before the retirement of the employee on 3111982 within which there was an endeavour on the part of the Bank to conclude the inquiry.
The circumstances as have been given above show that the Bank conducted the inquiry in a hurried manner.
It may be noticed that after the passing of the order dated 2011982 (Annexure P-2) by this Court allowing the two writ petitions filed by the employee, the employee went to join his duties at Chandigarh and Ambala Cantt.
Admittedly the Bank issued a telegram dated 2211982 asking the employee to report for duty on 2311982 at 1000 A.M. at the Regional Office, Chandigarh.
The said telegram according to the employee was received by his daughter on 2311982 at 1630 hours.
The employee sent a reply telegram regarding late intimation and that he would be resuming duty on 25.1.1982 (Monday).
Thereafter, it is the case of the Bank that the employee came to the office of the Chief Manager, Divisional Office at Ambala on 2311982.
There in the presence of four senior officers of the Bank, the employee was handed over four letters which he read and after reading refused to accept them.
In any case Mr. V Rama Swamy informed the employee that irrespective of the fact he had refused to accept the letters, the enquiry as scheduled would be proceeded with.
The enquiry proceedings were scheduled to commence on 25.1.1982 at the Civil Lines Branch of the Bank at Jalandhar.
The case of the employee, however, is that he went to the Bank at Chandigarh on 2511982 and submitted Memo (Annexure P-5).
In response to the same, the Bank gave him a Memo dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-6) at 100 PM The employee was informed to proceed to the Civil LInes Jalandhar Branch in connection with the departmental enquiry.
These disputed questions of facts are not to be gone into in exercise of the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, however, the afore-noticed circumstances do show that the respondents indeed were in a hurry to conclude the departmental enquiry against the employee before his retirement which was due on 3111982.
The hurried manner in which the inquiry was concluded is also evident from the fact that after the retirement of the delinquent, the Bank issued a revised letter dated 321982 (Annexure P-10) pointing out certain errors in the calculation that had been conducted earlier regarding recovery of Rs. 1,47,48583.
As per the revised letter the balance that was due and payable by the delinquent worked out to be Rs. 97,99191 in terms of the earlier order dated 2811982 (Annexure P-9).
19.
The employee filed Civil Writ Petition No. 655 of 1982 for quashing the inquiry proceedings.
The said petition was disposed of by this Court with the observation that the employee should file an appeal within fifteen days thereof before the Appellate Authority who was directed to decide the matter within three months thereafter.
The delinquent filed an appeal on 351982 (Annexure P-11).
The appeal was dismissed on 2271982 and the employee was informed vide letter dated 2971982 (Annexure P-12).
The employee then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3404 of 1982 for quashing the order of Chief Manager (respondent No. 1).
The said petition was withdrawn on 1081982 to enable him to file a Review Application in terms of Regulation 18 of the Regulations.
The employee filed a Review Petition on 2111982 (Annexure P-13) which was dismissed by the Reviewing Authority on 271983 (Annexure P-14).
20.
The perusal of the findings of the Appellate Authority dated 2271982 as conveyed to the employee vide letter dated 2971982 (Annexure P-12) shows that the Appellate Authority has not considered the material fact that the inquiry against the delinquent was conducted within 2 days ie on 25.1.1982 and 27.1.1982 and the order imposing the penalties Annexure P-8 was passed, which was conveyed on 2811982 (Annexure P-9).
The perusal of the record shows that the procedure enjoined by Regulation 6 for conducting an inquiry for imposition of major penalty had not been followed.
The provisions of Regulation 6 of the Regulations as are reproduced above, provide for a detailed procedure for the conduct of inquiry.
The Disciplinary Authority in terms of the order dated 2011982 (Annexure P-2) passed by this Court was to conduct de novo inquiry which would include that it was required to frame definite and distinct charges on the basis of allegations against the officer employee and the articles of charge, together with the statement of allegations on which they are based.
In terms of the procedure envisaged by Regulation 6, the officer employee is to be given an opportunity to submit within such time as may be specified by the Disciplinary Authority a written statement of his defence.
On receipt of the written statement of the officer employee, or if no such statement is received within the time specified, the inquiry is to be held either by the Disciplinary Authority itself or by other Inquiring Authority.
Besides, a Presenting Officer to present the case on behalf the Bank is to be appointed.
The officer employee is also entitled to take the assistance of any other officer employee.
A date is to be fixed for the officer employee to appear before the Inquiring Authority and he is to be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make.
In case the officer employee does not plead guilty, the Inquiring Authority is to adjourn the case to a later date not exceeding 30 days or such extended time as may be granted by the Inquiring Authority.
The officer employee is also to be given for the purpose of preparing his defence an opportunity to inspect the relevant records, submit a list of documents and witnesses that he wants for the inquiry and be supplied with copies of statements of witnesses, if any, recorded earlier and the Inquiring Authority is to forward such copies not later than 3 days before the commencement of the examination of the witnesses by the Inquiring Authority.
The officer employee is also to be given a notice within ten days of the order allowing him for the discovery and production of documents regarding which a list has been submitted.
In case such a list is furnished, the Inquiring Authority is to forward the same to the authority in whose custody or possession the documents are kept with the requisition for the production of documents on such days as may be specified.
On the date fixed for the inquiry, the oral and documentary evidence by which the article of charges are proposed to be proved, shall be produced by or on behalf of the Disciplinary Authority.
The officer employee is also to be given an opportunity to cross-examine those witnesses.
When the case in support of the charges is closed, the officer employee may be required to state his defence, oral or in writing, as he may prefer.
Thereafter, the evidence on behalf of the officer employee is to be produced and after his evidence is closed, the Inquiring Authority is to examine the officer employee if he has not examined himself.
There is also a procedure for filing written proofs by the Presenting Officer and the officer employee within fifteen days of completion of the production of evidence.
Sub Regulation (19) of Regulation 6 provides for ex parte proceedings in case the officer employee does not submit written statement of defence referred to in sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 6 on or before the day specified for the purposes or does not appear in person or through the Assisting Officer or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of the Regulations.
21.
The circumstances of the case in hand show that the delinquent employee was not served with any fresh articles of charge to conduct a de novo inquiry.
Besides, he was given no opportunity to file his defence.
The four letters which were served on the delinquent employee in terms of letter dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-7) do not reflect the same to be the documents relating to Articles of charge and asking the delinquent employee to file written statement of defence in compliance with the procedure provided by the Regulations for the conduct of inquiries for imposing major penalties.
The administrative authority of the Bank was charged with a duty to act fairly in the conduct of the inquiry.
However, there was an apparent endeavour to rush through the inquiry and in the circumstances there has been violation of the principles of natural justice, at the very initial stage.
In Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 818 it was observed :  ".............. if the statute conferring the power is silent with regard to the giving of a pre-decisional hearing to the person affected and the administrative decision taken by the authority involves civil consequences of a grave nature, and no full review or appeal on merits against that decision is provided, courts will be extremely reluctant to construe such a statute as excluding the duty of affording even a minimal hearing shorn of all its formal trappings and dilatory features at the pre-decisional stage, unless, viewed pragmatically, it would paralyse the administrative process or frustrate the need for utmost promptitude.
In short, this rule of fair play "must not be jettisoned save in very exceptional circumstances where compulsive necessity so demands".
The court must make every effort to salvage this cardinal rule to the maximum extent possible, with situational modifications.
But, to recall the words of Bhagwati, J the core of it must, however, remain, namely, that the person affected must have reasonable opportunity of being heard and the hearing must be a genuine hearing and not an empty public relations exercise."
Therefore, the violation of the principles of natural justice at the first stage in the circumstances was not cured at the appellate stage in terms of order dated 2271982 received by the employee on 2971982 (Annexure P-12).
The order dated 271983 (Annexure P-14) in review also has not considered this aspect of the matter.
Therefore, there has been a violation of rule audi alteram partem both at the first stage and the appellate and revisional stage in respect of the conduct of inquiry.
As such for the failure to comply with the procedure for imposing major penalty as contained in Regulation 6 vitiates the inquiry against the delinquent in respect of imposition of major penalty of dismissal from service.
After having reached a finding that the procedure prescribed by Regulation 6, has not been followed, the decision of imposing major penalty of dismissal from service would warrant interference by this Court.
22.
While reaching the conclusion that the procedure for imposition of major penalty had not been followed, it is not in dispute that the petitioner was served with the four documents as referred to in the Memo dated 25.1.1982 (Annexure P-6) a reference to which has been made above.
The petitioner refused to take the same after reading and the same were therefore sent by registered post with the covering letter dated 2311982.
The procedure for imposition of major penalty as contained in Regulation 6, has other material requirements to be complied, which are noticed above.
However, the procedure for imposing minor penalty is provided in terms of Regulation 8 which reads as under:-  "PROCEDURE FOR IMPOSING MINOR PENALTIES : (1) Where it is proposed to impose any of the minor penalties specified in Clauses (a) to (d) of regulation 4, the officer employee concerned shall be informed in writing of the imputations of lapses against him and given an opportunity to submit his written statement of defence within a specified period not exceeding 15 days or such extended period as may be granted by the Disciplinary Authority and the defence statement, if any, submitted by the officer employee shall be taken into consideration by the Disciplinary Authority before passing orders.
(2) Where, however, the Disciplinary Authority is satisfied that an enquiry is necessary, it shall follow the procedure for imposing a major penalty as laid down in regulation 6.
(3) The record of the proceedings in such cases shall include - (i) copy of the statement of imputations of lapses furnished to the officer employee; (ii) the defence statement, if any, of the officer employee; and (iii) the orders of the disciplinary authority together with the reasons therefor."
The above provision shows that for imposing minor penalty, the officer employee is to be informed in writing of the imputations of lapses against him and given an opportunity to submit his written statement of defence within a period not exceeding 15 days and where the Disciplinary Authority is satisfied that an inquiry is necessary it is to follow the procedure for imposing the major penalty as laid down in Regulation 6.
As already noticed the said inquiry was ordered to be held de novo by the Appellate Authority on 731980.
The inquiry was initiated in terms of the letter given to the petitioner on 2311982 and the inquiry started on 25.1.1982 and finished on 27.1.1982.
The procedure provided for imposing minor penalty has, in the circumstances, been substantially, therefore, been complied with.
Regulation 4(d) of the Regulations under Head `Minor Penalty' provides for recovery from pay or such other amount as may be due from the officer employee of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Bank or by negligence or breach of orders.
In the case in hand, the for imposition major penalty of dismissal from service of the employee is not valid for failure to follow the procedure prescribed by Regulation 6.
There is an apparent infraction of the same.
However, for the conduct of minor punishment the procedure is substantially complied with.
In State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC) : AIR 1966 SC 1669, it was held that substantive provision has normally to be complied with.
However, in case of procedural provision which is not of a substantial or mandatory character, if no prejudice is caused to the person proceeded against no interference of the Court is called for and substantial compliance of such provision is enough.
It was observed that in the case of violation of a procedural provision, the position is that the procedural provisions are generally meant for affording a reasonable and adequate opportunity to the delinquent officer/employee.
These are generally speaking, conceived in his interest.
Violation of any and every procedural provision, it was held, cannot be said to automatically vitiate the inquiry held or order passed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case in hand it can be said that for imposing the minor penalty of recovery from pay of the employee as may be due to him of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Bank by negligence or breach of orders as provided for in terms clause (d) of Regulation 4, the procedure for imposing minor penalties in terms of Regulation 8 even if not strictly followed has been substantially complied with.
Therefore, the imposition of penalty for recovery of the amount due from the delinquent for the pecuniary loss caused to the Bank is justified as the procedure provided for the imposition of minor penalty is substantially complied with.
Therefore, the order Annexure P-8 would be valid to the extent the recovery of Rs. 97,99191 instead of Rs. 1,47,48583 as modified vide order dated 321982 (Annexure P-10) has been imposed.
The substituted amount of recovery ordered to be effected from the delinquent employee is liable to be sustained and upheld.
At the same time the order imposing punishment of dismissal is liable to be quashed.
23.
Consequently, the writ petition is partly allowed and the order Annexure P-8 to the extent that penalty of recovery from the delinquent employee being the amount of loss caused to the Bank which was modified by the order dated 321982 (Annexure P-10), is upheld.
However, the same is quashed to the extent the punishment of dismissal has been imposed.
The order dated 2811982 (Annexure P-9), the appellate order dated 2271982 as intimated vide letter dated 2971982 (Annexure P-12) and the order dated 271983 (Annexure P-14) passed in review shall also stand modified accordingly and the petitioners who are the legal representatives of the deceased employee shall be given consequential reliefs accordingly.
In the circumstances, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.