GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against order dated 981994 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing C.W.P.
No. 805 of 1987 filed by the appellant in the matter of payment of gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (for short, the Act) in lieu of the services rendered by her husband late Shri RL Malhotra.
2.
The appellant's husband joined service as a Warehousman under the Haryana State Warehousing Corporation (for short, the Corporation) in 1964 in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400.
In the year 1979, he was promoted as Manager in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1400.
He died on 16121982.
The appellant's claim for payment of gratuity was rejected by the Managing Director of the Corporation on the ground that her husband did not fall within the definition of the term employee under Section 2(e) of the Act.
3.
The writ petition filed by the appellant for quashing communication dated 27121985 (marked as Annexure P2 with the writ petition) was dismissed by the learned Single Judge with the observation, that her husband was not covered by the definition of the term employee.
For the sake of reference, the relevant portions of the order passed by the learned Single Judge are reproduced below :  "It is clear from the aforesaid provisions of Section 2(e) of the Act that the same cannot be attracted in the case of an employee performing the functions of a Manager and whose emoluments exceed Rs. 1,000/- per mensum.
The respondents have taken a categoric stand that the husband of the petitioner while working as Manager was drawing more than Rs. 1,000/- per mensum as salary.
As such the claim of the petitioner was rightly turned down by the respondent-Corporation.
The petitioner has not been able to show that the duties performed by the husband of the petitioner while working as Manager were supervisory in nature.
On the other hand, it is the categoric stand of the respondents that the petitioner's husband was performing the duties of the Manager.
The amendment in the aforesaid Section 2(e) of the Act came into force in the year 1984, i.e., after the death of the petitioner's husband and the same cannot be applied restrospectively.
Under the payment of Gratuity Rules, a person employed in a managerial capacity or holding the civil post under the Central Government is not entitled to the payment of gratuity as he is not covered under the purview of the definition of employee.
As stated earlier, the petitioner's husband was discharging the functions of Manager.
As such the petitioner is not entitled to the release of gratuity."
4.
Shri Subhash Ahuja relied on two judgments of Gujarat High Court in M/s Sarabhai Chemicals Ltd, Baroda v. Ambaram, 1977 SLWR 275 and Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd Baroda v. CA Panchal, 1977 SLWR 344 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Management, Goodyear India Ltd v. KG Devessar, AIR 1985 SC 1759 and argued that even though on the date of his demise, late Shri RL Malhotra was drawing emoluments exceeding Rs. 1,000/- per mensum and he was holding the post of Manager, the appellant has a right to receive gratuity for the period during which he had drawn emoluments less than Rs. 1,000/- per mensum.
5.
We have carefully gone through the judgments relied upon the Shri Ahuja and find that the same fully support his contention and the entitlement of the appellant to the payment of gratuity under the Act.
6.
In M/s Sarabhai Chemicals Ltd, Baroda v. Ambaram (supra), a Division Bench of Gujarat High Court referred to the definition of employee under Section 2(e) of the Act and observed :  "On plain reading of the definition of the expression `employee' as given in the above referred cl. (e) of Section 2 we find that the contention raised by Shri Nanavati on its interpretation is unacceptable as it seeks to add some more words to the above quoted definition by limiting its operation with reference to a particular date, even though the words and language of the clause are wide enough to cover the case of an employee, who has held a non- managerial or non-administrative post and has received wages of not more than Rs. 1,000/- per month at any time in the past.
The definition clause obviously speaks of a person employed on wages.
It does not use the word `employee' with reference to any specified period of time.
In other words, the employment which is contemplated here is employment simplicitor without being hedged by any condition as regards time.
This will be evident from the following analysis of this definition :  The main part of cl. (a) which contains definition of the expression `employee' has both positive and negative aspects.
The positive aspect prescribes the positive requirements of being an employee which are that only that person is an employee :  (a) who is employed on wages not exceeding Rs. 1,000/- per month.
(b) whose employment must be in any establishment, factory, mine oil-field, plantation, port, railway company or shop; and  (c) whose employment must also be to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work.
The negative aspects are covered by the clause of exclusion, which says that the expression employee does not include any person :  (a) who is employed in a managerial or administrative capacity; (b) who holds a civil post under the Central Government or a State Government; (c) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, the Army Act, 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957.
This exclusion clause uses the words `is employed'.
These words also cannot be construed as referring to any specific period of time and certainly not to the time when the occasion to apply the provisions of section 4 arises, in view of the fact that the language of his clause (e) of section 2 does not justify any such limitation.
Similar situation was considered by the Supreme Court in Bennett Coleman and Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. Punva Priya Das Gupta, AIR 1970 SC 426.
The Supreme Court in that case considered the provisions contained in cl. (f) of Section 2 of Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act (1955).
According to this clause, a working journalist means a person whose principle avocation is that of journalist and is employed as such in, or in relation to, any newspaper establishment.
In view of the use of the words `is employed', a contention which was raised before the Supreme Court was that since the respondent workman was not in continuous employment at the time he filed his claim in the Labour Court, he was not a working journalist, and his case did not fall within the definition contained in cl. (f) and, therefore, he was not entitled to avail himself of the provisions of the above referred Working Journalists Act.
This contention was rejected by the Supreme Court holding that the expression `who is employed' in Section 2(f) of the Act, was not restricted to a newspaper employee, who was presently employed in a newspaper establishment, but it also related to an ex-employee, whose employment had come to an end as a result of acceptance of his resignation and, therefore, such an ex-employee could also resort to the provisions of the Act.
While taking this view, the Supreme Court has made the following pertinent observations :  "The scheme of all Acts dealing with industrial questions is to permit an ex- employee to avail of the benefits of their provision, the only requirement being that the claim in dispute must be one which has arisen or accrued whilst the claimant was in the employment of the person against whom it is made."
7.
The portion emphasised from the above excerpt taken from the said Supreme Court decision clearly brings out the ratio that if the claim has arisen or accrued whilst the claimant was in employment, the use of the present tense would not be a detriment factor, and such a use of the present tense must be construed with reference to the scheme and object of beneficial legislations.
The obvious object of the Gratuity Act is to provide for a scheme for the payment of gratuity to certain categories of employees engaged in certain specified types of concerns.
Gratuity is, in its essence, a payment in consideration of past service, made only at the end of the said service, when the employment terminates.
Therefore, the very essence of gratuity is the past and not the present.
It is for this reason that the definition of the expression employee is couched in a language which admits of no periodical limitations.
If, therefore, both inclusive and exclusive clauses of the definition are read in this light, it follows that a person who satisfies the requirements of the inclusive clause continues to be an employee till he is covered by the exclusive clause without reference to any specific period of time.
Any attempt to find whether his case is covered either by the inclusive or by the exclusive clause on a particular day or at a particular point of time, would amount to doing violence not only to the plain language of the definition, but also to the original intention and object with which the statute was enacted."
8.
The same view was reiterated in Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Baroda v. CA Panchal (supra).
Some of the observations made in that case are extracted below:  "The gratuity is in its essence a payment in consideration of past services made only at the end of the said service when the employment terminates.
Therefore, the very essence of gratuity is past and not the present.
Under the circumstances, it is clear that by using the present tense in the definition of the word employee, the Legislature could not have intended to negative the gratuity claim of those employees who had rendered the requisite period of service in the past, and who were not otherwise disqualified from getting gratuity under the provisions of the Act.
This position becomes very evident by reference to the Explanation, which is attached to definition of the word employee.
The said Explanation says that in case of an employee who has been employed for a period of not less than 5 years on wages not exceeding Rs. 1,000/- per month but who is employed at any time thereafter on wages exceeding Rs. 1,000/- per month, his gratuity shall be determined on the basis of the wages received by him for the period during which he has served on the wages of less than Rs. 1,000/- per month.
This explanation clearly contemplates the cases of those employees, who have been employed in the past for a continuous period of 5 years on a salary which is not more than Rs. 1,000/- per month.
Thus, the Explanation makes it quite clear that the intention of the Legislature was to take into consideration the whole record of the past service of the employee and to give benefit of gratuity even to those employees who were receiving the salary of more than Rs. 1,000/- per month on the date on which the Act came into force.
This intention of the Legislature should, therefore, be carried out."
9.
In Management, Goodyear India Ltd v. KG Devessar (supra), the Supreme Court took notice of the fact that the Act had come into force on 16.9.1972 and amendment made in Section 2(e) had the effect of taking out the expression "drawing emoluments exceeding Rs. 1000/- per month" from the definition of the term `employee' and upheld the claim of the respondents by making the following observations :  "The submission on behalf of the management was that both on the date when the Act came into force and on the date when the respondent retired from the service, he was drawing wages exceeding Rs. 1000/- and, therefore, he was not entitled to payment of any gratuity.
The submission of the learned counsel was that if the definition of employee was read into Section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act it would show that only those persons who are drawing wages of less than Rs. 1000/- on the date of superannuation, retirement, etc. would be entitled to payment or gratuity provided that such retirement, superannuation, etc. was after the date of coming into force of the Act.
We do not agree with the submission.
The date of coming into force of the Act has relevance to the date on which gratuity becomes payable.
Gratuity becomes payable on the termination of employment and therefore, in order to be eligible to payment of gratuity, the termination of employment whether it be due to superannuation or retirement or resignation or death or disablement, has to be after the date of coming into force of the Act.
Once that condition is satisfied, the further question would be regarding the amount of gratuity payable.
Gratuity will have to be paid to all those persons whose employment came to an end after the coming into force of the Act for that period during which he came within the definition of an employee within the meaning of Section 2(e) of the Payment of Gratuity Act.
To hold otherwise may render a whole class of persons who all their lives got wages of less than Rs. 1,000/- per month, but on the eve of their retirement started getting wages of Rs. 1,000/- per month.
Surely that could not have been the intention of Parliament.
We think the only reasonable way of construing Section 4 in the light of the definition of employee in Section 2(e) is to hold that a person whose services are terminated for any of the reasons mentioned in Section 4(1), after the coming into force of the Act is entitled to the payment of gratuity, if he has rendered continuous service for not less than five years, for that period during which he satisfied the definition of employee under Section 2(e) of the Act."
10.
By applying the ratio of the above referred judgments to the facts of this case, we hold that even though on the date of his death, i.e., 16121982, late Shri RL Malhotra was holding the post of Manager and was drawing emoluments exceeding Rs. 1,000/- per month, the appellant is entitled to receive gratuity in lieu of the services rendered by her husband prior to his promotion as Manager.
11.
Hence, the appeal is allowed.
Order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition filed by the appellant for issuance of a direction to the respondents to pay gratuity in terms of the provisions of the Act is allowed.
The respondents are directed to calculate the amount of the gratuity payable to the appellant and pay the same to her within a period of 4 months from the date of presentation of copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.