GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner could be removed from the post of Member of Punjab State Electricity Board (for short, `the Board') under Section 10(1)(e) of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (for short, `the Act') without giving him opportunity to submit his explanation in terms of Section 10(3) of the Act is the question which arises for determination in this petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing order dated 23.6.2003 (Annexure P7) passed by the Chief Secretary-cum-Principal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power.
2.
The petitioner claims that he has been a senior functionary of the Shiromani Akali Dal and has held the post of General Secretary and Joint Secretary of the Party and has also remained District President.
He was elected as Vice Chairman of the National Federation of Cooperative Banks of India and as Chairman of the Punjab State Cooperative Bank.
Vide notification dated 24122001 issued by the State Government under Section 5 of the Act read with Rules 3 and 4 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Rules, 1959 (for short, `the Rules'), he was appointed as Member of the Board.
He joined that post on 26122001 after submitting resignation from the post of Chairman and Director of the Punjab State Cooperative Bank and Sangrur Central Cooperative Bank.
By an order of the same date (Annexure P4), the Chairman of the Board allocated the portfolio of the Administrative Member to the petitioner.
After two months and about twenty days of his taking over as Member of the Board, the State Government placed him under suspension vide offer dated 732002.
This was done on the basis of the complaints received from Baldev Singh Mann, ex-Administrative Member of the Board and Shri Kuldip Rai, Office Secretary, Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee, Chandigarh, who alleged that the petitioner had misused his position as Administrative Member of the Board and actively participated in the campaign in connection with the Assembly Elections and thereby violated the Model Code of Conduct framed by the Election Commission of India.
He challenged the order of suspension in C.W.P.
No. 5056 of 2002 on the ground of mala fides and arbitrary exercise of power.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it was averred that order of suspension was passed keeping in view the preliminary fact- findings enquiry got conducted by the government and a formal charge-sheet is likely to be issued to him and if he is found innocent, then order of suspension may be revoked.
The relevant portion of the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, which has been reproduced in paragraph 10 of this petition, reads as under :-  "A formal chargesheet is likely to be issued to the petitioner, to which the petitioner may submit his reply and if during the course of inquiry, the petitioner is found to the innocent of the charges levelled, against him, the order of suspension may be revoked or in the alternative, if the charges, are proved against the petitioner during the course of inquiry, appropriate action shall be taken against him under the Rules as well as the Act."
4.
That question was finally disposed of by this Court on 2.5.2003 in the following terms :-  "Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the inquiry against the petitioner has been completed by the Inquiry Officer and report submitted.
It has further been submitted that the matter is under consideration of the Punishing Authority.
In view of the above, present writ petition is disposed of with a direction to competent authority to take a final decision in the matter within 4 months from today in accordance with law.
Request made by the petitioner with regard to subsistence allowance shall also be considered by the competent authority."
5.
During the pendency of the writ petition filed by the petitioner against the order the suspension, the State Government appointed Shri GS Srivastava, Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala to make an enquiry against him on the following charges :-  (i) Shri GS Bachi had taken over the charge of Administrative Member, PSEB on 24122001.
The Election Commission declared the holding of General Election of Punjab Vidhan Sabha on 26122001.
Sh. Bachi participated in the Election Campaign in favour of one independent candidate from Dirba Assembly Constituency.
(ii) The Chairman of Punjab State Electricity Board issued instructions on 2812002 regarding non-leaving of headquarters by any member of the P.S.E.B without permission of Chairman.
But, Sh. Bachi violated the instructions issued by the Chairman & he participated in the Election Campaign of Ropar, Jallandhar, Dirba and Chandigarh Assembly Constituencies.
(iii) Sh. Bachi joined duty as Administrative Member, PSEB on 26122001.
At the same time he was holding the charge of Cooperative Bank Department, like Director of Punjab State Agriculture Development Bank, Sangrur, Director, Punjab State Cooperative Bank, Sangrur."
6.
Shri CS Srivastava did not give any notice to the petitioner about the date, time and place of enquiry and proceeded to record the statements of Shri Baldev Singh Mann, the predecessor-in-office of the petitioner, his driver - Shri Surjit Singh, Darshan Singh, a resident of Dariba and Shri NS Bhullar, Assistant Executive Engineer, Lehra Mohabat on 16752002.
He also summoned the record relating to the resignation of the petitioner from the Chairmanship and his appointment as Member of the Board and then submitted report dated 392002 (Annexure R1).
7.
After nine months of the submission of the enquiry report, the Chief Secretary-cum-Principal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power issued the impugned order removing the petitioner from the post of Member of the Board, the relevant extracts of which are reproduced below -  "5.
Whereas Shri CS Srivastava, IAS, Commissioner, Patiala Division, was appointed as Inquiry Officer to conduct enquiry into the allegations, levelled against Shri Gurbachan Singh Bachi, Member, Punjab State Electricity Board (Under Suspension) in the complaints mentioned in Para No. 2 above vide Order of the Governor of Punjab, dated 2532002.
6.
Whereas the Inquiry Officer submitted his inquiry report which was received on 392002.
The following charges were enquired into by the Inquiry Officer :- (i) Sh. GS Bachi had taken over the charge of Administrative Member PSEB on 24122001.
The Election Commission declared the holding of General Election of Punjab Vidhan Sabha on 26122001.
Shri Bachi participated in the Election Campaign in favour of one independent candidate from Dirba Assembly Constituency.
(ii) The Chairman of Punjab State Electricity Board issued instructions on 2812002 regarding non-leaving of headquarters by any Member of the PSEB without permission of Chairman.
But Sh. Bachi violated the instructions issued by the Chairman and he participated in the Election Campaign of Ropar, Jalandhar, Dirba Assembly Constituencies.
(iii) Shri Bachi joined duty as Administrative Member, PSEB on 26122001.
At the same time, he was holding the charge of Cooperative Bank department like Director of Punjab State Agriculture Development Bank Sangrur, Director of Punjab State Cooperative Bank Sangrur.
Charge Sheet was sent to Sh. Gurbachan Singh Bachi by the Inquiry Officer and was duly served upon him.
He also submitted his reply thereto.
He was afforded full opportunity by the Inquiry Officer to defend himself.
After examining the oral and written evidence against Sh. Bachi, the Inquiry Officer has come to the conclusion that all the three charges stand proved; 7.
Whereas the Inquiry report and the related record have been examined.
The record clearly established that Sh. GS Bachi has canvassed for the independent candidate Shri Surjit singh Dhiman in the Vidhan Sabha Assembly Elections and he also travelled in his official vehicle in the constituency for the purposes not connected with his official duty.
The record also establishes that Shri Bachi violated the instructions of the Chairman PSEB dated 2812002 by leaving the headquarters without the permission of Chairman;  Now, whereas the charges (i) and (ii) mentioned in para 6 above are proved against Shri Bachi beyond any shadow of doubt and are very serious and reveal abuse of position as Administrative Member of the Board as well as violation of Model Code of Conduct for Elections.
Therefore, Shri Gurbachan Singh Bachi, the suspended Member of Punjab State Electricity Board is hereby removed from the office of Member, PSEB under Section 10(1)(e) of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948; and  Whereas the post of Administrative Member of PSEB is a tenure post and there is no provision in the PSEB Chairman Powers Rules for giving subsistence allowance/salary to any Member during his suspension.
Hence, Shri Gurbachan Singh Bachi is not entitled to any subsistence allowance or salary during the period of his suspension."
8.
The petitioner has challenged his removal from the post of Member mainly on the ground of violation of Section 10(3) of the Act and the rules of natural justice.
He has averred that copy of the charge-sheet was not served upon him and the enquiry officer did not give him opportunity to participate in the proceedings of enquiry.
Not only this, copy of the enquiry report was also not made available to him for the purpose of making representation against the adverse findings recorded therein.
According to the petitioner, the report submitted by Shri CS Srivastava on the basis of the ex parte enquiry conducted by him could not have been relied upon by the State Government for passing the impugned order.
He has further averred that the allegations levelled against him are baseless and the enquiry held by Shri CS Sarivastava without giving him notice regarding time, date and place was a total farce and the report submitted by him was vitiated due to violation of the basic rule of natural justice.
9.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 through Shri Manjit Singh, Additional Secretary, Department of Power, Government of Punjab, it has been averred that the enquiry officer had afforded full opportunity to the petitioner to defend himself and after examining oral and written evidence, he had come to the conclusion that three charges levelled against him have been proved.
According to Shri Manjit Singh, the petitioner was removed by the government in view of the adverse finding recorded by the enquiry officer.
He has also defended the findings recorded by the enquiry officer that the petitioner had participated in the elections held in 2002 and thereby misused his position as Administrative Member of the Board.
Similar written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
10.
The petitioner has filed replication and reiterated that he was not served with formal charge-sheet and that the statements of Sarv Shri Baldev Singh Mann, Surjit Singh, Darshan Singh and NS Bhullar recorded behind his back could not have been relied upon for holding him guilty of the three charges.
He has further averred that the enquiry officer did not give him opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses or to put up his defence.
He has also denied the receipt of letter dated 1072002 to which reference has been made in enquiry report Annexure R1.
11.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Section 10 of the Act, which provides for removal or suspension of member, reads as under :-  "10.
Removal or suspension of member.
- (1) The State Government may suspend from office for such period as it thinks fit or remove from office any member of the board who -  (a) is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or (b) is adjudged insolvent; or (c) fails to comply with the provisions of section 9; or (d) becomes or seeks to become a member of Parliament or any State Legislature or any local authority; or (e) in the opinion of the State Government :- (i) has refused to act; or (ii) has become incapable of acting; or (iii) has so abused his position as a member as to render his continuance on the Board detrimental to the interests of the general public; or (iv) is otherwise unfit to continue as a member; or (f) is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude.
(2) the State Government may suspend any member pending an inquiry against him.
(3) No order of removal shall be made under this section unless the member concerned has been given an opportunity to submit his explanation to the State Government, and when such order is passed, the seat of the member removed shall become vacant and another member may be appointed under section 5 to fill up the vacancy.
(4) A member who has been removed shall not be eligible for re- appointment as member or in any other capacity to the Board.
(5) If the Board fails to carry out its functions, or refuses or fails to follow the directions issued by the State Government under this Act, the State Government may remove the Chairman and the members of the Board and appoint a Chairman and members in their places."
An analysis of the provisions reproduced above shows that the State Government can suspend or remove any member of the Board on any of the grounds specified in clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 10 of ther Act.
Clause (e) of Section 10(1) provides for suspension or removal of the member if in the opinion of the State Government, he has refused to act; or has become incapable of acting; or has so abused his position as a member as to render his continuance on the Board detrimental to the interest of general public; or is otherwise unfit to continue as a member.
Sub-section (2) of Section 10 empowers the State Government to suspend any members during the pendency of an enquiry.
Sub-section (3) of Section 10 declares that no order of removal shall be made unless the member concerned has been given an opportunity to submit his explanation to the State Government.
The expression "an opportunity to submit his explanation" has not been defined in the Act, but keeping in view the importance of the position held by a member of the Board, the said expression has to be read as an embodiment of the basis rule of natural justice i.e. audi alteram partem - no man can be condemned unheard.
The opportunity envisaged in the sub-section (3) of Section 10 necessarily means an effective opportunity to the member to defend himself and includes disclosure of adverse material sought to be used against him with a chance to rebut/controvert the same.
Therefore, when a member of the Board is sought to be removed on the basis of the charges levelled against him which are sought to be proved by holding an enquiry, then it is incumbent upon the government to disclose the charges to the member concerned and give him an opportunity to defend himself in the enquiry held for the purpose of proving the charge.
12.
In State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269, their Lordships of the Supreme Court recognised the applicability of the rule of audi alteram partem to purely administrative actions and observed :-  "An order by the State to the prejudice of a person in derogation of his vested rights may be made only in accordance with the basic rules of justice and fairplay.
The deciding authority, it is true, is not in the position of a Judge called upon to decide an action between contesting parties, and strict compliance with the forms of judicial procedure may not be insisted upon.
He is, however, under a duty to give the person against whom an enquiry is held an opportunity to set up his version or defence and an opportunity to correct or to controvert any evidence in the possession of the authority which is sought to be relied upon to his prejudice.
For that purpose, the person against whom an enquiry is held must be informed of the case he is called upon to meet, and the evidence in support thereof.
The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed is entitled to a hearing applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the fundamental rules of our constitutional set up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
Duty to act judicially would, therefore, arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed; it need not be shown to be super-added.
If there is power to decided and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essentials of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is a nullity.
That is a basic concept of the rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a decision in any particular case.
xx xx xx xx xx xx It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences, as already stated, must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
In Sayeedur Rehman v. The State of Bihar and others, AIR 1973 SC 239, the Apex Court highlighted the importance of the rule of the audi alteram partem in the following words :-  "This unwritten right of hearing is fundamental to a just decision by any authority which decides a controversial issue affecting the rights of the rival contestants.
This right has its roots in the notion of fair procedure.
It draws the attention of the party concerned to the imperative necessity of not overlooking the other side of the case before coming to its decision, for nothing is more likely to conduce to just and right decision than the practice of giving hearing to the affected parties.
The omission of express requirement of fair hearing in the rules or other source of power claimed for reconsidering an order is supplied by the rule of justice which is considered as an integral part of our judicial process which also governs quasi-judicial authorities when deciding controversial points affecting rights of parties."
In Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597, the Supreme Court observed :-  "Although there are no positive words in the statute requiring that the party be heard, yet the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the legislature.
The principle of audi alteram partem, which mandates that no one shall be condemned unheard, is part of the rules of natural justice.
Natural justice is a great humanising principle intended to invest law with fairness and to secure justice and over the years it has grown into a widely pervasive rule affecting large areas of administrative action.
The inquiry must, always be : does fairness in action demand that an opportunity to be heard should be given to the person affected ?
The law must now be taken to be well settled that even in an administrative proceeding, which involves civil consequences, the doctrine of natural justice must be held to be applicable."
13.
The question whether the adverse material collected against a person which is used for passing an order adversely affecting him is required to be disclosed to him before passing final order was considered by the Supreme Court in Election Commission of India and another v. Dr. Manmohan Singh and others, (2000) 1 SCC.
591 in the backdrop of an enquiry held by the Electoral Registration Officer doubting the correctness of the declaration made by the respondent that he was a resident of the particular constituency.
The High Court accepted the plea of the respondent that the enquiry being held against him was vitiated due to violation of the rules of natural justice.
While upholding the decision of the High Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "By reason of sub-section (4) of Section 20 of the R.P.
Act, 1950 a person who holds a declared office is deemed by law to be, on any date, an ordinary resident of a constituency in which he would ordinarily have resided but for the fact that he holds such declared office.
For this purpose, by reason of sub-section (5) of Section 20, the statement of the holder of the declared office, made in the form and verified as required, must be accepted as correct "in the absence of evidence to the contrary".
The statement of a declared office is not always to be accepted as correct.
It can be questioned, but only if the Electoral Registration Officer has, "evidence to the contrary".
Therefore to question the correctness of the statement as to his ordinary residence made by the holder of a declared office, the Electoral Registration Officer must be in possession of evidence to the contrary.
That is a pre- requisite for the non-acceptance of the statement of the holder of a declared office.
If the Electoral Registration Officer has such evidence, he must inform the holder of a declared office accordingly and state the substance of such evidence so that the holder of the declared office may rebut it in the course of the inquiry on facts that must follow.
The inquiry has to be "decided" on the facts of the case; its quasi-judicial character is clear.
In the present case the claim the Form 1 which relates to the declaration of the ordinary residence by a person holding a declared office, was filed by the first respondent, when he was already a Cabinet Minister and thus the holder of a declared office.
His statement therein could, having regarding to the true interpretation of Section 20 sub-sections (4) and (5) have been questioned by the third respondent only if the third respondent was possessed of evidence to the contrary and the third respondent had intimated to the first respondent that fact and the substance of such evidence.
There is nothing to indicate that the third respondent had any evidence to the contrary, and he certainly did not so state in his letter.
In fact, he called upon the first respondent to adduce his evidence.
The first respondent's statement in Form 1 could not, therefore, have been questioned and the inquiry in this behalf is bad in law.
There is no substance in the contention of the appellant that the order of the Chief Election Officer and the notices subsequent thereto showed that the inquiry also related to the statement of the first respondent about the place of his ordinary residence in Form 6, that is to say, when he was not the holder of a declared office, and therefore, the enquiry should be allowed to proceed.
Firstly, the enquiry commenced with the third respondent's letter whereby the first respondent was asked to furnish evidence in support of his "claim of ordinary residence as stated in Form 1", that is to say, in support of the statement made by the first respondent as the holder of a declared office.
In the second place, and in any event, the inquiry cannot be allowed to proceed having regard to the order of the then Chief Election Commissioner.
Having regard to the fact that the third respondent was a subordinate of the then Chief Election Commissioner and, given the nature of the inferences drawn by the latter without giving to the first respondent the opportunity of a defence, there can be no doubt that allowing the inquiry to proceed would be detrimental to fair play and the interests of the first respondent.
The inquiry and all notices and orders pertaining thereto must stand quashed."
In Sona Builders v. Union of India, (2001) 10 SCC.
280, their Lordship of the Supreme Court considering whether non-supply of the relevant documents had the effect of vitiating the compulsory purchase of immovable property under the Income-tax Act and held as under :-  "Moreover, the notice, alleged that the apparent consideration of the transaction was low based on the sale instance mentioned therein.
To be able adequately to respond to that allegation, it was necessary for the appellant to ascertain what the merits and demerits were of that property which had been auctioned, and to know what were the terms and conditions of the auction.
No copy of any document relating to the sale instance was furnished by the Appropriate Authority to the appellant along with the notice, or at any time whatsoever."
14.
Reference may also be made to the Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Krunakar, JT 1993(6) SC 1 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC).
The issue considered in that case was whether it was incumbent upon the disciplinary authority to furnish a copy of the enquiry report to the delinquent before passing the order of punishment.
Their Lordships held that the right to make representation to the disciplinary authority against the findings recorded in the enquiry report is an integral part of the opportunity of defence against the charges and it is a breach of principles of natural justice to deny the said right.
Their Lordships further held that the law laid down in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCC 588 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) should apply to the employees in all establishments whether government or non-government, public or private irrespective of the fact that there are rules governing the disciplinary proceedings or not and whether they expressly prohibit the furnishing of a copy of the report or are silent on the subject.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that an order of removal of a member of the Board cannot be passed under Section 10 of the Act without giving him opportunity to explain the circumstances appearance against him and adverse material collected at his back.
We further hold that if an enquiry is held to prove the charges against the member of the Board, then he is entitled to participate in the enquiry, cross-examine the witnesses, rebut the documentary evidence and also produce his defence.
If the material collected in the ex parte enquiry is sought to be used against the member concerned, then he is entitled to a copy of the enquiry report and an opportunity to controvert the evidence collected at such enquiry.
15.
The facts of the present case show that the impugned order was passed by the State Government on the basis of the findings recorded by Shri CS Srivastava, who had conducted ex parte enquiry against the petitioner.
The respondents have not controverted the petitioner's assertion that the enquiry officer did not give him notice about the date, time and place of enquiry and that he had recorded the statements of four persons without giving opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine them or to produce defence evidence.
In view of this, it must be held that the report prepared by the enquiry officer was vitiated due to violation of the basic rules of natural justice and the order passed on the basis of such report is liable to be declared as nullity.
16.
Before concluding, we deem it proper to notice the argument of Ms. Rita Kohli that even though, the petitioner was not given opportunity to controvert the findings recorded by the enquiry officer and the impugned order appears to have been passed without complying with the rules of natural justice, the Court may not interfere with the same because the denial of opportunity of hearing has not caused any prejudice to him.
We are afraid, there is no substance in the argument of the learned Deputy Advocate General.
The theory of absence of prejudge can be invoked by the Court for denying relief of a petitioner if breach of the rules of natural justice is insignificant or the person complaining of the breach has acquiesced in the same.
However, this theory cannot be applied to a case, like the present one in which the impugned order was passed by the State Government in total disregard of the fundamental rule of natural justice and denial of opportunity to the petitioner to defend himself and to explain his position qua the findings recorded by the enquiry officer has resulted in total failure of justice.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 23.6.2003 (Annexure P.7) is quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
However, it is made clear that the State Government shall be free to pass fresh order in the matter in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.