KS Garewal, J - This petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by KPS Bawa, retired Additional Director General, Defence Estate for quashing order dated 14101997 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench (for short, `the Tribunal') in amended Original Application No. 3/CH/1995.
2.
The petitioner joined the Military Lands and Cantonment Service on December 26, 1997 on a Group B post through direct recruitment on the basis of a competitive examination.
The petitioner claims that he was promoted to Class-I in July, 1969 when he was granted Junior Time Scale and his pay was fixed at Rs. 700/- per month.
According to the petitioner, he was promoted to Junior Administrative Grade in 1983 on ad hoc basis.
3.
However, during the intervening period the seniority list of the service dated October 31, 1996 was quashed by a Division Bench of Delhi High Court in KK Gupta v Union of India (C.W.P.
No. 102 of 1969) decided on September 26, 1975.
The seniority was apparently recast thereafter.
The seniority was further recast after the decision of OA No 838/1987 (MP Singh and another v. Union of India) by the Principal Bench of the Tribunal on November 30, 1988.
This Judgment was challenged by the Union of India and the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India dismissed the appeal on February 27, 1990, reported as Union of India v. MP Singh, AIR 1990 S.C. 1098.
Therefore, the directions in MP Singh's case attained finality and were required to be implemented.
The direction to the department was to prepare a fresh seniority list by treating Assistant Military Estate Officers as members of the service from the date of their respective appointment and a Review DPC be held afresh for various years in which vacancies in the higher posts in Group A had arisen and regular appointments should be made on the basis of the recommendations.
Furthermore, it was directed that in case the officers were duly recommended by the Review DPC for promotion, they would be entitled to consequential benefits, including arrears of pay and allowances admissible under the Rules.
If in the process of such review and promotions granted on the basis of the such review, persons who had already been promoted were likely to be adversely affected, they would be accommodated by creating adequate number of super- numerary posts.
4.
Therefore, Review Departmental Promotion Committee met on February 11, 1992 to consider a review of the DPCs which had been held on September 21, 1987 and on February 4/5 1988 for officiating promotion to the Junior Administrative Grade of Indian Defence Estate Services (Group `A'), scale of pay Rs. 3700-5000 for the years 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1982, 1985 and 1987.
The minutes of the said Review DPC are on record and reveal that there were 17 vacancies for the said years.
The Committee first reviewed the proceedings of the original DPC dated September 21, 1987 and assessed the officers in the order of their revised seniority and graded them in Annexure-A for the various years.
The name of the petitioner appeared within the zone of consideration for the first time in 1980 at serial No. 6 and the assessment, whether on the basis of his A.C.Rs.
or the Committee's decision is "not yet fit".
The petitioner was placed at serial No. 4 for the year 1981 and his assessment remained unchanged.
Likewise, for the years 1982 and 1985 as well, the petitioner was at serial No. 3 and 2 respectively but his assessment remained the same i.e. "not yet fit."
5.
The Committee then prepared the list of candidates to be promoted to the 17 posts, needless to say the petitioner was not included in the list of 17 although he had been duly considered as described above.
6.
The Committee then went on to review the proceedings of the next DPC which had been held on February 4/5, 1988 and assessed the officers in order of their revised seniority and graded them.
In this list, the petitioner was at serial No. 1 for the year 1987 and his assessment was very good.
In the light of the grading assigned to the officer, the Committee recommended the panel for officiating promotion to Junior Administrative Grade of 20 officers and placed the petitioner at serial No. 1.
7.
It will be important to record at this stage that when the petitioner presented the Original Application under Section 19 of the Central Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, he did not have the details of the Review DPC which had promoted him to the Junior Administrative Grade on the basis of the proceedings on February 11, 1992 after the decision of MP Singh's case (supra).
At no stage, the actual proceedings were placed on record, either before the Tribunal or before this court until the synopsis of the case was filed by the respondents during the course of arguments.
The question for consideration in this case is whether the petitioner was fairly treated and whether his promotion to Junior Administrative Grade by the Review DPC was just.
The answer to this question would depend upon whether the petitioner had been rightly ignored for promotion for the years 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1985 on the ground that he was "not yet fit".
8.
The respondents placed on record the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner for the years 1974 to 1985.
A perusal of these reports would show that it was only for the years 1974 and 1975 that the petitioner had been graded as "not yet fit" by the Reviewing Officers.
In 1976, the petitioner earned an average report but in the remarks column relating to fitness for promotion nothing had been mentioned by the Reviewing Officer as the column had been left blank.
In the remarks for 1977, the Reviewing Officer had recorded "I would hesitate to entrust him with greater responsibility".
9.
Thereafter, from 1978 to 1985 the petitioner had been assessed as fit for promotion although he earned some advisory remarks, like relations with junior colleagues need improvement (1979), improve relations (1981), good officer but does not pull along well with the Reporting Officer (1982) etc.
Therefore, the question which would require consideration is whether on the basis of these reports and on the basis of continuous fitness for promotion from 1978 onward could the petitioner have been assessed as "not yet fit" by the Review DPC on February 11, 1992 for the years 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1985.
To unravel this conundrum one shall have to examine the principles which should have been applied by the Committee while making the promotions.
10.
In the minutes of the Committee it was recorded as under :-  "Accordingly the Committee first reviewed the proceedings of the original Departmental Promotion Committee held on 21st Sept 1987 and assessed the officers in the order of their revised seniority and graded them as in Annexure `A'.
In the light of the grading assigned to the officers in Annexure `A', the Committee recommended, in supersession of the panel recommended by the Departmental Promotion Committee held on 21st Sept, 1987, that the yearwise/consolidated panel for officiating promotion to the Junior Administrative Grade of the former Military Land & Cantonment Service/Indian Defence Estates Service, Ministry of Defence should consist of the officers as mentioned in Annexure `B' in the order stated therein."
11.
If the Committee had the selection criteria in mind then, the relevant assessment of the record of the various candidates would have been necessary.
If the Committee had simply (kept) the promotion criteria in mind, then it could have based the promotion on seniority-cum-fitness basis.
It seems that the Committee did make some assessment on the basis of the record because the officers had been graded as good and very good; very good officers naturally superseded good ones.
This had happened for the year 1977 when the Committee assessed 8 candidates and found 2 to be very good, namely, RR Pillai and VK Budhiraja, both of whom found place in the panel for the year 1977 for which there were only 2 vacancies.
Similarly, for the year 1978, 8 candidates were considered for the 2 vacancies and out of the 8 candidates, 5 were assessed as very good.
Therefore, the 2 senior-most very good officers, namely I.R.K.
Bhatt and S.A.A.
Rizvi got the posts.
This process continued for all the subsequent years.
Barring the petitioner, who was assessed as unfit for 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1985 and thus ignored altogether, there was only one other officer who was assessed as unfit - S.N.
Chaturedi (1977) - but in the following years he was assessed as very good and earned promotion of the vacancy which occurred in 1980.
12.
The petitioner was continuously assessed as unfit or not yet fit from 1980 onwards.
Therefore, the question arises whether he had been fairly treated as his Reviewing Officer had found him fit for promotion in the A.C.Rs.
from 1978 onwards.
If the petitioner's unfitness was on the basis of the assessment of the members of the Committee, then this assessment was made without any material basis.
If this was on the basis of the reports of the petitioner, then it was clearly a misreading of the reports since it was only in 1974 and 1975 that the petitioner had been found to be unfit.
From 1978 onwards he had been found to be fit for promotion although he did reveal some defects in his relationships with his colleagues, although there was no adverse entry in the record.
In the report of the Reviewing Officer for 1980 it has been mentioned in column 27 that the officer was exonerated of the charges regarding Ferozepur Cantt.
Thereafter, there was no entry regarding disciplinary/vigilance cases.
13.
Even if it is to be presumed that the Committee had erred in assessing the officer as unfit and should have given either a good or a very good grading from 1980 onwards; the result of the promotion may not have been much different as there were only 2 vacancies in 1980 which went to officers who were senior to the petitioner namely, SN Chaturvedi and LSA Mendies.
Similarly for the years 1981 and 1982, the solitary vacancies went to Inderjit Singh and Nagabhushanam.
The result would have been different only for 1985, if the petitioner had been graded as good or very good because 5 officers were considered and since only the petitioner was assessed as unfit, the other 4 got the 4 vacancies for 1985 including 3 who were junior to the petitioner.
14.
The officer's original grievance had been that he was denied the benefit of Rule 11 of Military Lands and Cantonment Service Rules 1951 and, therefore, the petitioner was denied justice for 30 years by not getting his due seniority.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. MP Singh's case (supra) gave the detailed history of how officers drawn from various sources were merged in a common cadre and how their seniority was to be determined.
Since the matter has been discussed at length in MP Singh's case, no useful purpose would be served by repeating what has already been laid down.
The petitioner has not been able to point out how and in what manner his seniority was disregarded or illegally disturbed.
The petitioner argued his case himself and kept on placing documents/written arguments on record, which exercise would not have been necessary if he had prepared his case diligently or if he had the benefit of sound legal advice.
15.
Nevertheless, since the petitioner has appeared in person, it may become necessary to go into his contentions and discuss them on the basis of the settled legal position.
The petitioner was selected on the basis of a competitive examination and joined Military Lands and Cantonment Service (Class II) in December 1962.
He pleaded that he was promoted as Class-I officer on July 14, 1969 and his pay was fixed at Rs. 700/- at the level of Senior Time Scale.
According to the petitioner, the Department arbitrarily fixed his seniority in Junior Time Scale as on January 1973 and thus committed perjury before the Tribunal by stating that the petitioner had been allotted Class-I vacancy in 1969.
The petitioner was shown as officiating Class-I till 1982 as per service record.
He was promoted in ad hoc Junior Administrative Grade on September 10, 1983 and was made officiating in the said grade from February 1989.
The petitioner was promoted to Senior Administrative Grade w.e.f.
December 1, 1993.
The petitioner never challenged the above so-called illegalities inflicted upon him during his service career when he was denied seniority as per rules.
The petitioner challenged the seniority of the Junior Administrative Grade as revised by the DPC on the basis of the MP Singh's case only when cause of action arose to him in 1992.
In this petition the petitioner has challenged not only the action of the Review DPC but also the lowering of his seniority from 1969 onwards.
According to the petitioner, seniority list dated October 31, 1966 was quashed by the Delhi High Court in KK Gupta's case on the ground of violation of the quota rule and seniority was revised.
In MP Singh's case the seniority was again revised.
16.
At the outset, it may be observed that the petitioner is probably his own worst enemy because instead of filing a simple, straight-forward application before the Tribunal, scientifically drafted and methodically pleaded, his application was loaded with cliches hyperboles and was peppered with extreme cynicism and disregard to the norms of good drafting.
Perhaps some excerpts from his original application will illustrate the petitioner's attitude and state of mind.
In paragraphs 4.12(c), 414, 415(a), 415(d) and 415(e) the petitioner has pleaded that :-  4.12(c) "That the appellant had all the more reasons to feel deeply hurt and aggrieved at the said, yet again, suppression because he had rendered DISTINGUISHED AND OUTSTANDING SERVICE as per Annexure A-XII for which he had repeatedly requested to the then Respondent No. 2 through his ACRs.
to initiate a case for confirement of appropriate DISTINGUISHED SERVICE AWARD, at par the PVSM in the Armed Forces.......
The applicant further requests this Hon'ble Court to direct Respondents No. 1 & 2 to proceed and finalise the case, within 60 days, regarding confirement of National Award for Distinguished Service on the applicant in view of his profound and extra- ordinary dedication and single-minded devotion to his job thereby saving MISAPPLICATION OF HUNDREDS OF CRORES from the National Exchequer and resolving issues at lightning speed which solutions others could not either conceive or resolve in years."
414 "Lordship, in routine Land Acquisition cases involving more than one year's delay, Courts Order payment of interest plus 30% solatium is paid as compensation for forced purchase of property.
In the case of Applicant the very source of his family's livelihood was coercively denied to him for 27 long years during which period a RUPEE has come down to only ONE PAISA.
Hence request for 50% compound interest per annum to cover elements of market rate of Interest plus INFLATION NEUTRALISATION is MINIMUM AND MOST REASONABLE."
415(a) "that THIS IS RAREST OF A RARE CASE WITHOUT POSSIBILITY OF A PARALLEL IN THE ENTIRE HISTORY OF BUREAUCRACY OF THIS COUNTRY.
An individual officer is singled out and made to face and be consequently CRUSHED UNDER THE MIGHT OF BRUTAL, UNJUST, FRAUDULENT AND MALICIOUS Rule, not for a day, a week, or a month but for the totality of his working life.
This experience puts in clear perspective phrases like "LIVING DEATH" OR "DYING EVERY LIVING MOMENT."
415(d) "that for having so unjustly suffered a total life of INDIGNITY, HUMILIATION, UNSUFFERABLE WORKING CONDITIONS AND MOST DIFFICULT PLACES OF POSTINGS due to repeated and series of frauds committed by the then Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 virtually leading to complete decimation and destruction of a family, the Applicant requests this Hon'ble Court to AWARD HIM APPROPRIATE AND SUITABLE DAMAGES OF Rs. 10 crores.
We have, however, to keep the absolute reality in perspective that NOT EVEN HUNDRED THOUSAND CRORES can bring back to the applicant's family their lost and devasted years, veritably their entire lives."
415(e) "The applicant further prays to this Hon'ble Court to direct Respondents 1 & 2 to make arrangements for providing the Applicant suitable Government Accommodation, Staff Car, supporting staff etc. now, to compensate for denial of these facilities during his working life due to his distorted seniority.
This could also be considered as a REWARD FOR his EXCEPTIONAL AND DISTINGUISHED SERVICE TO THE NATION.
Field Marshals in the Armed Forces are also provided facilitates on these lines during their post-retirement life."
17.
The reliefs claimed by the petitioner in the Original Application may be noticed in order to discern therefrom what was the precise nature of his grievance.
The petitioner claimed quashing of order dated June 5, 1992 whereby 17 officers were promoted to Junior Administrative Grade on the basis of Review conducted in February 1992 of the 1987 DPC These 17 officers had been given the Junior Administrative Grade after the decision of MP Singh's case (supra).
In the same review when DPC of 1988 was reviewed, 20 officers were given the Junior Administrative Grade including the petitioner who is placed at serial No. 1.
The second relief claimed by the petitioner is amendment of the seniority in Class-I (Grade-A), and for being placed in Senior Scale Class-I from December 27, 1968 instead of January 1, 1973.
He further sought amendment of order dated January 15, 1992 for being placed below NK Sengupta and above Ms. A Mubayi instead of being placed between LSA Mendies and OP Kejriwal.
18.
The petitioner then sought consequential relief of fresh/review DPCs.
for grant of his due seniority and upon rectification of seniority the petitioner sought arrears from 1969 to date alongwith interest at 50% compound per annum since money had depreciated 9900%.
He also sought damages of Rs. 1000 crores because he had been subjected to life long indignity and shame, a tortuous existence worst than death (an example of the type of delusions which the petitioner has been suffering from).
19.
The crux of the matter is whether the petitioner's seniority was just below MK Sengupta and above Ms. A Mubayi.
Since the petitioner was seeking to supersede 11 officers mentioned in the cause title of the Original Application, including Ms. A Mubayi who heads the list of this group, the Tribunal dealt with this aspect in a forthnight manner and held that the prayer was untenable because Ms. A Mubayi was a direct recruit to Group-A service in 1963 while the petitioner was a direct recruit to Group-B service in 1962.
It is quite clear that Group-B service was the feeder cadre for Group-A service and when an individual is directly recruited to the feeder cadre he must wait for a vacancy to arise and promotion against that vacancy to enter Group-A service by promotion.
In any case this event took place in 1962-63 when the two officers were directly recruited one to Group-B and other to Group-A Therefore, the cause of action arose at that time but the petitioner delayed in filing his Original Application before the Tribunal until 1992 when he challenged the fixation of his seniority on the basis of the Review DPC mandated by the decision of MP Singh's case.
As discussed above, the Review DPC considered respective records of 17 officers and found the petitioner unfit to be promoted to the Junior Administrative Grade until 1987.
20.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in State of WB and another v. Manik Chandra Biswas and others, 1999 S.C.C.
(L&S) 160 laid down as under :-  "The rule for promotion was merit-cum-seniority.
In the absence of adverse remarks in the ACR of Respondent 1 merit was considered along with other candidates and due selection was made.
The same cannot be faulted with.
The question of suitability of a candidate to the promotional post of Deputy Excise Collector is judged by the Public Service Commission, an expert body in this respect and on consideration of all material facts, it came to the conclusion that Respondent 1 was not suitable for the promotional post.
Normally courts/tribunals would not substitute their view in the place of the expert body's views unless some illegality has crept in."
21.
While it is somehow true that according to A.C.Rs.
the petitioner had been found fit for promotion after 1978 onwards but the Review DPC found him "not yet fit" for the years 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1985.
It seems that the Committee gave this grading on some other consideration.
Since the petitioner's seniority was below MH Alawi and above OP Kejriwal he could not have secured promotion for any of the 4 vacancies of 1976, 2 of 1977, 2 of 1978, 1 of 1979, 2 of 1980, 1 of 1981 and 1 of 1982 irrespective of his grading because MH Alawi and OP Kejriwal secured promotion only in 1985.
At best, the petitioner could have got a vacancy in 1985 if he had been granded good on very good by the committee.
The basis of the gradation is not known and in view of the decision in Manik Chandra Biswas's case (supra) the finding of the Committee is not justiciable.
The petitioner ultimately got his promotion in 1987.
At this stage reference may also be made to DK Reddy and another v. Union of India and others, 1995(3) S.L.R.
97 which has in fact, followed MP Singh's case and a direction was given to make an adjustment in the seniority between the officers who were holding promotional Group-A posts and Assistant Military Estate Officers who had been found fit to be promoted to these posts.
Ultimately the question which would arise is whether the petitioner was entitled to be given the same treatment as DK Reddy.
In the petitioner's case the Review DPC had considered him for promotion for the years 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1985 but found him not fit.
In D.R.
Reddy's case there had been no such consideration because A.M.E.Os.
had been considered with DK Reddy who was pushed down.
Since the petitioner had been considered and found not fit for promotion for the relevant years and that view of the Review DPC cannot be questioned in these proceedings because there was no illegality or malafides, the petitioner cannot complaint that he had been wrongly superseded.
It has been demonstrated above that the petitioner's claim for being placed above Ms. A Mubayi in seniority was not tenable.
Even so the petitioner was considered along with others but found not fit.
22.
Resultantly, it is held that the petitioner was neither discriminated nor victimised but was treated fairly and given due consideration by the Committee which granted him promotion when he was found fit by the Committee.
The petitioner's grievance that his seniority had not been properly fixed was dealt with and rejected by the Tribunal.
That findings calls for no interference.
Resultantly, this petitioner is without merit and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.