Jasbir Singh, J - Appellant Sardari Lal filed a suit for declaration with a prayer that the order passed by the Director, Public Instructions, Punjab, which was communicated to him by the Deputy Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar, vide memorandum No. 1001-2 dated March 28, 1997 be declared illegal, invalid and unconstitutional and he be held entitled to get pay, which he was drawing before the enforcement of Grant-in-aid Rules.
It was further prayed that after setting aside above mentioned order, his pay be fixed accordingly on the basis of Delhi pattern of Grant-in-aid Rules as applicable to other employees, similarly situated.
The suit was dismissed by the trial Court vide judgment and decree dated September 27, 1979.
Plaintiff-appellant went in appeal, which, too was dismissed by the appellate Court below vide judgment and decree dated October 31, 1981.
Hence this regular second appeal.
2.
Briefly, it was case of the appellant that he was appointed as a part time Accountant in Shri Parbati Jain High School, Jalandhar, in October, 1961.
He was given regular appointment on August 1, 1967 as an Accountant-cum-Clerk in the pay scale of Rs. 150-8-270.
State of Punjab implemented Grant-in-aid rules governing employees working in the privately managed recognized schools in the State.
To get necessary relief as prayed in the suit, appellant relied upon Rules 11(2) and 10(e) of the Grant-in-Aid Rules.
Pay of the appellant was not fixed as per aforesaid Rules on the ground the he was not qualified to get the requisite scale of a Clerk.
He has drawn salary of Rs. 219/- upto November 7, 1969.
However, subsequent thereto his salary was reduced and he was given pay scale of Rs. 60-4-80/5-120/5-175.
He represented against reduction of his pay.
On March 28, 1973, Circle Education Officer informed the management that pay of the appellant could not be protected.
3.
Appellant-plaintiff then served a legal notice upon the department.
Thereafter appellant went before the civil Court praying that the impugned order be quashed and he be given necessary relief.
His claim was resisted by the official respondents-defendants.
Service of notice was denied.
In the written-statement, it was further stated that the suit, being time barred, was liable to be dismissed.
On merits, it was stated that as on November 30, 1967, appellant-plaintiff was not possessing requisite qualifications of a clerk.
As such, his claim was rightly rejected.
After framing issues, trial Court asked the parties to lead their evidence and thereafter suit of the appellant-plaintiff was dismissed by the trial Court.
His appeal also failed.
4.
Shri RK Chopra, Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the appellant, vehemently contended that before implementation of `Grant-in-Aid Rule's by the State of Punjab, appellant was drawing Rs. 219/- as salary.
It was required to be protected in view of the Grant-in-Aid Rules.
However, his pay was wrongly reduced.
He contended that Courts below had failed to appreciate Grant-in-Aid Rules in a correct manner, due to which his suit and appeal were wrongly dismissed.
Shri Chopra argued that since August 1, 1967, appellant was working against the post of an Accountant and, therefore, he was required to be given the pay of the post.
He further argued that at the time of implementation of Grant-in-Aid Rules, he was wrongly shown as a Clerk.
By raising above-mentioned arguments, counsel prayed that judgments and decrees under challenge be set aside and suit of the plaintiff-appellant be decreed.
5.
Shri GS Bhandari, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the respondent-State, vehemently controverted the arguments raised by counsel for the appellant.
He contended that so far as Schools covered under Grant-in-Aid Rules are concerned, no post of Accountant was available in those Schools.
He further contended that even in the list prepared by the School of its non-teaching staff, appellant was shown only as an Accountant-cum-Clerk but he failed to produce any appointment letter even in that regard.
He submitted that as per Grant-in-Aid Rules, the appellant being non-matriculate was not qualified for the post, even of a Clerk.
When he improved his qualification, his pay was rightly fixed as a Clerk w.e.f.
December 1, 1969.
He prayed that the appeal, having no substance, be dismissed as no substantial question of law was involved.
6.
With the assistance of counsel for the parties, records have been perused.
This Court is of the opinion that Regular Second Appeal has no substance and the same is liable to be dismissed.
7.
In this case, basic facts are not in dispute.
Shri Chopra, at the time of arguments, failed to rebut a fact that the appellant was under-Matric when Grant-in-Aid Rules were made applicable to the privately managed Schools in the State of Punjab.
It was further not disputed that no post of Accountant was available in those Schools.
Appellate Court below, after looking into evidence of both the parties, had opined as under:  "7.
On the record, the plaintiff had failed to produce the order appointing him as an Accountant in the School.
In fact, there was no post of an Accountant in the non-teaching staff in the School and the same was also true in respect of Shri Parbati Jain High School.
D.W.1 had clearly stated that the plaintiff was considered as a Clerk on 1.12.67, when the grant-in-aid rules were made applicable but he was not found eligible for that grant because he was not a Matriculate and since he did not fulfill the qualification, he could not be found entitled to the grant of an Accountant- cum-Clerk even.
Under Rule 156 of the grant-in-aid rules incorporated in the Education Code, a person can claim the grant only, if he has fulfilled all the qualifications prescribed for a particular post and under that provision, even clerks could be appointed only on their being Matriculates.
No appointment of a Clerk was to be made of any person, who was not at all Matriculate or had not passed 11th Class and consequently, such Clerks were not found eligible for grant-in-aid.
By the same rule, the Middle pass Clerks completing 15 years continuous service upto 30.11.67, were held entitled to earn grant under the Delhi pattern and were entitled to scale of pay equal to Matriculates.
Admittedly, the plaintiff had passed his Matriculation examination on 8.11.69 and after that, the grant applicable to him was given.
He being not an eligible candidate for claiming grant-in-aid to a Clerk, even according to the qualification prescribed by the State Government, he was rightly not fixed in the grade of an Accountant or Clerk on 1.12.67 simply because he was shown as an Accountant-cum-Clerk in the school record was of no consequence.
It was for the respondent Punjab State to fix the appointment of a particular individual on fulfilling the requisite qualifications prescribed by it.
Therefore, the question of giving any increment to the plaintiff as a Clerk was purely the function of the school management.
The department has given the grade of a Clerk to the plaintiff, after he had become Marticulate.
Therefore, the order in question was rightly held to be legal and proper and the plaintiff was found to be not entitled to any declaration prayed for by him.
The findings of the trial Court on issues No. 1 and 2 call for no interference and they are, therefore, affirmed."
8.
On perusal of record, this Court feels that the above-mentioned reasoning given by the appellate Court below is perfectly justified.
It is an admitted fact that on December 1, 1969, when Grant-in-Aid Rules were made applicable, appellant-plaintiff was not even eligible for a post of a Clerk as he was not a Matriculate.
A perusal of Grant-in-Aid Rules indicates that both the Courts below were justified in denying relief to the appellant in this case.
Since he as not qualified and eligible, no relief could have been granted to him.
It is also an admitted fact that post of Accountant (non-teaching staff) was not available in the privately managed recognized Schools in the State of Punjab.
In the list prepared by the School itself of its non-teaching staff, the appellant was shown as Account-cum-Clerk.
Even for that post, he had failed to produce on record his appointment letter.
It is also not in dispute that when appellant improved his qualification, he was granted the pay scale of a Clerk subsequent thereto.
9.
Shri Chopra has failed to indicate any misreading of evidence on the parts of the Courts below and had also failed to indicate any legal infirmity in the impugned judgments passed by both the Courts below.
No substantial question of law is made out, on the basis of which any interference can be made by this Court in the Regular Second Appeal.
Consequently, appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.