SS Saron, J - This order will dispose of Review Application No. 110 of 2001 filed by the petitioners for review of the order dated 19.2.1998, passed by a Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 5671 of 1997.
2.
The facts leading to the case are that the petitioners retired from the service of various Municipal Committees before 16.4.1992 i.e. the date from which the Haryana Municipal Employers' Pension and General Provident Funds Rules 1993 (hereinafter referred to as "the 1993 Rules") were brought into effect to.
The 1993 Rules, however, were notified on 531993.
The Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 was amended vide Notification dated 16.4.1992 by way of Haryana Municipal (Amendment) Act, 1992 (Haryana Act No. 14 of 1992).
In terms of the said amendment in Section 38(2) of the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 for the words; "provident fund and gratuity", the words and sign; "provident fund, pension and gratuity" were substituted.
Similarly, in Section 57(1) (c) of the Haryana Municipal Act for the words; "provident fund and gratuity" the words and sign; "provident fund, pension and gratuity" were substituted.
In short the position is that the word "pension" which was not there in Sections 38(2) and 57(1)(c) of the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 was added.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners in the writ petition filed by them i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 5671 of 1997 was against the cut off date for the grant of retiral benefits.
The petitioners sought directions from this Court for directing the respondents to grant them pension from the date of their respective retirement and pay arrears up to date and issue a writ declaring Rule 2(1)(II) of 1993 Rules as unconstitutional insofar as it denied pensionary benefits to them.
An additional prayer was also made for directing the respondents to grant pension to the petitioners in accordance with the Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in the State of Haryana) and other rules as applicable to the Government employees from the date of their retirement and pay the arrears up to date.
4.
The said writ petition as already noticed above, was dismissed by this Court on 1921998.
An earlier order passed by this Court in the case of Gian Chand Walia and 17 others v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) S.C.T.
523, (C.W.P.
5259 of 1993) was followed.
It was noticed that the 1993 Rules came into effect from 16.4.1992 and that the amendment of Sections 38 and 57 of the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 for including the word "and pension" was challenged by a large number of persons who had retired from various Municipal Committees before 16.4.1992 in the said writ petition titled Gian Chand Walia & Ors. v. State of Haryana (C.W.P.
No. 5259 of 1993).
The said writ petitions were dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on 1711994.
Those petitioners filed petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) Nos. 15098-15103 of 1994 in the Supreme Court of India.
The same were dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 1991994.
Accordingly the earlier writ petitions i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 5671 of 1997 filed by the petitioners was dismissed.
5.
The present petitioners, however, filed Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 1323 of 1998 against the order dated 19.2.1998 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 5671 of 1997.
The said SLP was disposed of by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 30112000 by passing the following order :-  "Learned counsel addressed arguments during the course of which it has come out that the contention has been raised in the writ petition that even apart from the 1993 Rules, petitioners are entitled to pension under 1982 Rules, as contended by the learned counsel.
He has now realised that this aspect has not been highlighted before the High Court and hence he would advise the petitioners to move the High Court for Review of the judgment.
If any such review application is filed on the basis of the averments made in the writ petition such review will not be dismissed solely on the ground of delay.
With these observations the special leave petition is allowed to be withdrawn.
It is accordingly dismissed".
6.
It is in consequence of the above order that the present review application has been filed by the petitioners for grant of pension in accordance with the Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the "1982 Rules").
Notice of the review application was issued by this Court on 2932001.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 have filed their reply to the review application in which the claim of the petitioners for the grant of pension under the 1982 Rules has been denied.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
8.
Shri RK Malik, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has contended that the petitioners are entitled to pension under the 1982 Rules because these rules have a proviso for applicability of Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in the State of Haryana) to the petitioners which includes provision regarding pension as well.
He has submitted that this aspect of the matter that the petitioners are entitled to pension under the Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in the State of Haryana) was taken in the writ petitioner.
However, in view of the fact that similar writ petition i.e. Gian Chand Walia v. State of Haryana (supra) had been dismissed by this Court and SLP against the same was also dismissed, therefore, this aspect of the matter could not be dealt with.
9.
On the other hand, Shri Vijay Dahiya, Assistant Advocate General for the State of Haryana has contended that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of pension under the 1982 Rules read with Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in the State of Haryana) as the employees of the Municipalities are specifically excluded for the grant of pension under the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioners placed strong reliance on Rules 15(3) and 18 of the 1982 Rules in support of his contention for the applicability of the Punjab Civil Services Rule (as applicable in the State of Haryana) and ultimately for the grant of pension as the Punjab Civil Service Rules provide for the grant of pension to its employees and therefore the petitioners are also entitled for pension in terms of the said rules.
In order to appreciate this contention a reference may be made to Rules 15(3) and 18 of the 1982 Rules, which read as under :-  15(3) "The Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volumes I, II and III and Punjab Financial Rules, Volumes I and II, as amended from time to time and applicable to the State of Haryana, shall apply to the members of the Services constituted under the rules, so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act".
18.
Leave, travelling allowance, joining time, suspension, medical facilities, fees and honoraria and other matters.
In respect of leave, travelling allowances, joining time, suspension, medical facilities, fees, honoraria, house rent allowance, dearness allowance, fixation of pay, grant of increment, crossing of efficiency bar, deputation and other matters not expressly provided in these rules, members shall be governed by the corresponding provisions contained in the rules applicable to Haryana Government Employees.
The authority competent to sanction casual leave, earned leave, increment and efficiency bar shall be as indicated against each category of services of Appendix D : Provided that a person on transfer shall draw his travelling allowance and joining time benefits from the committee to which he is transferred".
The perusal of above Rules, which are applicable to the employees of the Municipal Committee no doubt provide for the applicability of Punjab Civil Service Rules and Punjab Financial Rules to the members of the service constituted under these rules insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act i.e. the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973.
11.
The Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume II, Part-I, deal with pension.
Chapter I of the said Rules deals with extent of application and definition.
Chapter II deals with general provisions relating to grant of pension and Chapter III deals with service qualifying for pension.
Rule 316(a) and Note-I dealing with the examples of Government employees excluded from pension by the said Rule are apposite which read as under;-  3.16(a) "The service of a Government employee does not qualify unless he is appointed and his duties and pay are regulated by the Government or under conditions determined by the Government.
(b) Past service rendered in a Part B State (excluding Surashtra but including an Indian State which subsequently became a Part B State) shall be treated as equivalent to Government service for the purpose of pension and shall count for pension on permanent absorption in the Punjab Government service in the same manner as such service rendered in a former Part "A" State counts.
Note 1.
- The following are examples of Government employees excluded from pension by this rule :-  (1) Employees of a municipality; (2) x x x x x x (3) x x x x x x (4) x x x x x x (5) x x x x x x" The perusal of the above shows that employees of municipalities even under the Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in the State of Haryana) were specifically excluded for the purposes of pension.
It is only after the issuance of the notification dated 16.4.1992 that the words; "and pension" were included by way of amendment of Section 38(2) and Section 57(1)(c) of the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973.
It is in consequence of the said amendment that 1993 Rules were framed which were notified on 531993.
Therefore, the position is that it is only by virtue of the 1993 Rules that employees of the Municipalities came to be entitled for the grant of pension with effect from 16.4.1992.
The said claim for the grant of pension to the petitioners stands already rejected by this Court vide order dated 19.2.1998 and SLP against the same has also been dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
12.
The claim of the petitioners, therefore, for the grant of pension under the 1982 Rules on the basis that they are entitled to pension under the Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in the State of Haryana) is also devoid of merit as Rule 316(a) and the example referred to in Note-I under the same specifically exclude the employees of municipality for the grant of pension.
In other words the Rules do not provide for the grant of pension to the petitioners.
In these circumstances it would be unjustifiable to submit that by an appropriate writ, the Court should direct something which is contrary to the statutory of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Further, in such cases there cannot be any consideration on the ground of hardship.
If the Rules are not providing for grant of pensionary benefits it is for the authority to decide and frame appropriate rules but the Court cannot direct payment of pension on the ground of hardship likely to be caused to persons who are not entitled for getting pensionary benefits.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the review application of the petitioners and the same is consequently dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.