SS Saron, J - This order will dispose of the above two petitions as they involve somewhat similar facts and identical questions of law.
CWP No. 540 of 1987  2.
The petitioner-MS Chauhan was working with the respondent-State Bank of India in the Junior Management Grade, Scale-I (JMGS-I).
He was placed under suspension pending disciplinary enquiry on 28.1.1980.
Thereafter, he was served with the chargesheet on 1251981 on the allegation that he had asked for payment either on the strength of Short Credit Payment Advice or accepted in collection the cheques of various amounts with regard to the accounts of one Surjit Singh.
It is stated that said Surjit Singh was a swindler and had defrauded many banks.
However, in all there were six such transactions where the cheques or withdrawal slips were passed for payments.
Three of the items of the charge-sheet were against the petitioner and with regard to other three items, it was common to the petitioner and one HP Garg who was posted as Clerk at the Tarori branch of the respondent-bank.
The third charge was against RP Singhal, Field Officer (petitioner in the connected petition).
The petitioner filed his reply to the chargesheet on 1571981 which was found to be unsatisfactory.
Accordingly, vide order dated 28.8.1981, the Chief General Manager i.e. the Disciplinary Authority ordered regular enquiry into the matter.
The enquiry was held ex parte against the petitioner.
After enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report on 2951982 by recording his findings on the allegations of charge.
The report was forwarded to the punishing authority who vide order dated 1781982 (Annexure P-4) dismissed the petitioner from service with immediate effect in terms of Rule 49(h) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred as `the 1975 Rules').
Petitioner aggrieved against the said order filed an appeal before the Appellate Authority under Rule 51(1) of the 1975 Rules (as amended).
The said appeal was dismissed in limine.
The petitioner then filed a writ petition bearing CWP No. 2313 of 1984 in this Court which was referred to a Division Bench of this Court and vide order dated 1091984 (reported as MS Chauhan v. State Bank of India and others, 1985(1) SLR 684), the petition was accepted and the order passed by the Appellate Authority was set aside and the case was sent back to the Appellate Authority for deciding the appeal in accordance with law.
The petitioner did not receive any notice of the appeal.
However, he had submitted a brief history of the case along with his comments and the relevant case laws.
The Appellate Authority vide order dated 1531986 (Annexure P-7) found the charges contained in items 1 to 5 of charge No. 1 as proved whereas other charges were held to be not substantiated but in the ultimate analysis the appeal was dismissed on 19.3.1986 (Annexure P-6).
On the quantum of punishment, instead of dismissal the petitioner was ordered to be removed from Bank's service under sub-rule (g) of Rule 49 instead of Rule 49(h) of the 1975 Rules.
The petitioner addressed letter dated 1851986 (Annexure P-8) to the Appellate Authority for making certain corrections in the order as according to him, at number of places wrong facts were mentioned and wrong rules were quoted besides a mention had been made in the order with regard to some witnesses who had never been examined.
The petitioner received reply dated 1681986 (Annexure P-9) informing him that due corrections would be made in the order as suggested.
However, with regard to consideration of non-existence of evidence concerned, it is stated that no reply was received by the petitioner.
The petitioner thus filed the present writ petition for quashing order dated 1781982 (Annexure P-4) regarding his dismissal from service as also order dated 1531986 (Annexure P-6) whereby the Appellate Authority ordered his removal from service.
CWP No. 3350 of 1987  3.
The petitioner-Raj Pal Singal joined the State Bank of India, Chandigarh Branch as Cashier on 14121967.
In the year 1971, he was transferred to Punjab University branch, Chandigarh and was promoted as Clerk in 1972 and transferred to Karnal Branch of the Respondent-Bank.
He was further promoted as Officer Scale II (now redesignated as Officer, Junior Management Scale I).
In 1977, he was transferred to Tarori branch of the State Bank of India where he joined on 561978.
Thereafter, he was transferred to Region-I, Regional Office, Chandigarh on 1551979.
By an order dated 2011980, the petitioner was placed under suspension pending disciplinary enquiry for certain acts of irregularity and lapses which were attributed to him in the chargesheet dated 1251981 (Annexure P-1) which relate to his posting at the Tarori branch of the State of India.
The petitioner filed his reply to the chargesheet and denied the allegations levelled against him.
The Disciplinary Authority being not satisfied with the reply ordered the holding of a departmental enquiry.
The Enquiry Officer found that charges No. 3 and 4 were fully proved whereas charges No. 1, 2 and 5 were held to be partly proved.
The enquiry report was considered by the Disciplinary Authority who vide order dated 241983 (Annexure P-3) ordered the dismissal of the petitioner from service in terms of Rule 49(h) of the 1975 Rules.
The petitioner filed an appeal under Rule 51(1) of the 1975 Rules before the Appellate Authority against the said order dated 241983 which was also dismissed by the Appellate Authority on 2251984 (Annexure P-5).
Aggrieved against the dismissal of the appeal, the petitioner filed a review petition dated 25.6.1984 (Annexure P-6).
However, the same was also dismissed vide order date 531987 (Annexure P-7).
Thus, the petitioner filed the present petition for quashing order dated 241983 (Annexure P-3) passed by the Disciplinary Authority, order dated 2251984 (Annexure P-5) passed by the Appellate Authority and order dated 531987 (Annexure P-7) passed in his review petition, besides praying for his reinstatement to the original post with full back wages, continuity of service, increments, leave and other consequential benefits.
4.
I have heard Shri R.L.
Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner in both the cases and Shri RL Chhiber, Senior Advocate assisted by Shri Anand Chhiber, Advocate for the respondents and with their assistance gone through the record of the case.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised several pleas which, however, need not be gone into for the reason that during the hearing of the case the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent-Bank has, in view of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Punjab National Bank and others v. Kunj Behari Misra, 1998(3) SCT 833 (SC) : 1998(7) SCC 84, fairly conceded that where Disciplinary Authority comes to a finding different from that recorded by the Enquiry Authority on some of the charges, he is required to afford an opportunity of hearing to the delinquent officer in compliance of the principles of natural justice.
In Kunj Behari Misra's case (supra), the respondents therein were Assistant Managers in the Punjab National Bank and were held responsible for shortage of cash of Rs. one lakh.
The Enquiry Officer after conducting an enquiry absolved one of the respondents and the other held guilty of only one charge, that is, he had not signed the relevant register, but exonerated him of the remaining five charges.
The Disciplinary Authority in the said case to whom these reports were submitted did not agree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charges 2 to 6 and he accordingly held one of the respondents to be responsible for the shortage in question.
The question that arose for consideration was when the Enquiry Officer, during the course of disciplinary proceedings, comes to the conclusion that all or some of the charges alleging misconduct against an official are not proved, then can the Disciplinary Authority differ from that and give a contrary finding without affording any opportunity to the delinquent official.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the light of the decision in the case of Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunkar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 1074 held that a delinquent official is entitled to represent to the Disciplinary Authority where the findings in the enquiry report are against him and that it will not, therefore, stand to reason that when the findings are in favour of the delinquent official but they are proposed to be over-turned by the Disciplinary Authority, then no opportunity should be granted.
In such a case the delinquent is entitled to be heard.
6.
The ratio of the judgment in Punjab National Bank and others v. Kunj Behari Misra (supra) was reiterated in the case of Yogi Nath D. Bagade v. State of Maharashtra and another, 1999(4) SCT 403 (SC) : 1999(7) SCC 739 regarding giving of opportunity of hearing to a charged employee before reversing the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
It was held that requirement of affording opportunity of hearing as laid down in Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Behari Misra (supra) being in consonance with Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and being a constitutional right to be heard has to be read into a rule which does not make specific provision to this effect.
The same is the position in the case of SBI and others v. Arvind K Shukla, 2001(3) SCT 776 (SC) : AIR 2001 SC 2398.
This was further reiterated in a more recent decision in the case of State Bank of India and others v. KP Narayanan Kutty, 2003(3) S.C.T.
743 : 2003(2) SCC 449.
7.
In the case in hand, it is not in dispute that in the case of Rajpal Singhal (CWP No. 3350 of 1987) the Enquiry Officer had given his findings that charges No. 3 and 4 are fully proved whereas charges No. 1, 2 and 5 had been held partly proved and the punishing authority differed with the Enquiry Officer on charge No. 2 and held that charge No. 2 is fully proved against the petitioner-Rajpal Singhal.
However, while differing with the Enquiry Officer, no reason has been given how and in what manner he was not agreeable with the Enquiry Officer.
Besides no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner before reaching a different conclusion.
Even in MS Chauhan's case (CWP No. 540 of 1987), it is conceded by the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent-bank that the Disciplinary Authority was liable to hear the petitioner while differing with some of the charges recorded in the enquiry report.
In view of the above said position, the matter would have to be remitted to the Disciplinary Authority at the stage it was after the Enquiry Officer had submitted his report.
The Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy, 1996(3) SCT 410 (SC) : JT 1996(5) SC 403 held that when the enquiry was found to be faulty, it could not be proper to direct reinstatement with consequential benefits and that the matter requires to be remitted to the Disciplinary Authority to follow the procedure from the stage at which the fault was pointed out and to take action according to law.
Besides, pending enquiry the delinquent must be deemed to be under suspension and the consequential benefits would depend upon the result of the enquiry and order passed thereon.
Shri Chhiber, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent-bank also accepts that he has no objection if all the contentions as urged in these petitions and other contentions to be urged by the respective petitioners are considered by the Disciplinary Authority.
8.
Shri Chhiber, learned Senior Advocate, however, further contends that in terms of the ratio of the judgment in Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Behari Misra (supra), the retrospective petitioners, even if they succeed in their case, would not be entitled to back wages in the light of the observations made in para 21 of the report which are to the effect that the respondents in the said case had superannuated and during the pendency of the appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, one had died and his legal representatives were brought on record and more than 14 years had elapsed since the delinquent officer had superannuated.
Therefore, it was held that it would not be in the interest of justice that the case should be remanded to the Disciplinary Authority for starting another innings.
As such, no such directions were issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court while confirming the decision of the High Court which had set aside the orders imposing penalty and had directed the appellant-bank therein to release the retirement benefits to the respondents in the said case.
In the light of the said observations, it is contended by the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent-bank that the petitioners in any case would not be entitled to consequential benefits.
I have considered this aspect and find that once this Court has come to the conclusion that the matter is to be remitted back to the Disciplinary Authority for adjudication from the stage of the enquiry report, it would be more appropriate that this matter is also considered by the Disciplinary Authority keeping in view the observations of the Supreme Court in Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy's case (supra).
9.
Another aspect which has been contended by Shri Chhiber, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent-bank is that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of SBI v. Arvind K Shukla (supra) while considering the 1975 Rules made an observation to the effect that the delinquent employee therein "preferred an appeal under the statutory rules....." It is contended that the 1975 Rules are in fact not statutory rules as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in KL Tripati v. State Bank of India, AIR 1984 SC 273 which affirmed the decision of the Allahabad High Court in the said case titled KL Tripathi v. State Bank of India, 1978 Labour and Industrial Cases 441.
Besides, this Court in State Bank of India v. VR Vaid, 1987(2) PLR 568 held that employees of the State Bank of India were not civil servants and that the rules framed by the State Bank of India have no statutory character.
However, this question does not arise for consideration in these petitions as the matter is being remitted to the Disciplinary Authority for reconsideration of the enquiry report after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners/delinquent employees.
10.
Consequently, the writ petitions are disposed of with the directions that in the case of MS Chauhan (CWP No. 540 of 1987), the order dated 1781982 (Annexure (P-4) dismissing him from service as also the order dated 1531986 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Appellate Authority removing his from service shall stand quashed.
11.
In Raj Pal Singh's case (CWP No. 3350 of 1987), the dismissal order dated 241983 (Annexure P-3), the appellate order dated 2251984 (Annexure P-5) and the review order dated 531987 (Annexure P-7) shall stand quashed.
12.
The matter shall be considered afresh by the Disciplinary Authority from the stage at which it was after the submission of the report by the Enquiry Officer.
The respective petitioners shall be entitled to urge all grounds in support of their contentions including those urged in the writ petitions.
The Disciplinary Authority shall consider the cases of the respective petitioners in the light of the above considerations within three months from the date of receipt of the certified copy of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.