SS Saron, J - The petitioner joined the Punjab Police as a Constable on 4111989.
He was absent from duty for the period from 26.5.1994 till 31191994 for about 158 days.
In respect of his absence and thereafter re- joining Daily Dairy Reports No. 37 and 13 of the respective dates were recorded.
Departmental proceedings were initiated against the petitioner on 6.11.1994 for remaining absent from duty.
He was served with a charge sheet alleging that he was absent for the aforesaid period without any information, without permission and without any leave and had deliberately violated the police discipline with carelessness.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, City-1, Bathinda was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
He conducted the inquiry against the petitioner and found him liable for the charges attributed to him.
2.
The disciplinary authority i.e. Senior Superintendent of Police after serving a show cause notice imposed the penalty of dismissal from service with effect from 3011995 vide order dated 221995 (Annexure P-4).
The petitioner filed an appeal against the said order of dismissal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ferozepur Range, Ferozepur, which was dismissed on 2571996 (Annexure P-5).
The petitioner, it appears while his appeal was pending before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, also filed a revision-complaint/mercy petition dated 1191995 before the Inspector General of Police against the order of his dismissal dated 221995 (Annexure P-4).
The same was also dismissed by the Inspector General of Police vide his order dated 10.6.1996 (Annexure P-6).
3.
The petitioner in this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks the quashing of the aforesaid orders dated 221995 (Annexure P-4) passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police Bathinda, 2571996 (Annexure P-5) passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ferozepur Range Ferozepur and 10.6.1996 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Inspector General of Police, Punjab dismissing the petitioner from service.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
5.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned orders are illegal, arbitrary, without application of judicious mind and are liable to be set aside.
Besides, Rule 162(1) of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") has not been considered in its true perspective inasmuch as the mere absence from service is not "gravest act of misconduct" as provided for in Rule 162(1).
In support of his contention the learned Counsel has relied upon a Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the case State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 123 (P&H).
6.
The learned counsel for the State, however, contends that the petitioner was a police constable and, therefore, absence from duty for a police official is a gravest act of misconduct and since the delinquent had remained absent from duty, he has rightly been dismissed from service in accordance with the Rules governing his service.
Besides, it is contended that this Court in exercise of its supervisory writ jurisdiction is not to re-appreciate the quantum of punishment on the proved misconduct of the petitioner.
7.
Insofar as the contention of the petitioner regarding the impugned orders being illegal, arbitrary, without application of judicious mind and, therefore, liable to be set aside is concerned, it may be noticed that the petitioner has not in any manner shown as to how the orders assailed by him are illegal, arbitrary and without application of judicious mind.
These are bald assertions of the petitioner without anything on record to substantiate the same.
Even otherwise judicial review of the administrative order imposing punishment is not concerned with the decision but with the decision making process and it is not shown by the petitioner as to whether there has been illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety in passing the orders assailed by him.
Even otherwise this Court in exercise of its supervisory writ jurisdiction is not to act as an appellate Court.
This limitation necessarily means that findings of fact reached by the departmental authorities cannot be reopened or questioned by adverting to the evidence on record.
8.
The petitioner was admittedly a member of a disciplined force.
He joined the police force as constable on 4111989 and he worked up to 3011995.
In respect of the absence from duty, the petitioner was served a charge sheet and departmental proceedings were conducted against him.
After conclusion of the departmental inquiry, the petitioner was issued a show cause notice Annexure P-1.
He filed his reply Annexure P-2 to the said show cause notice.
9.
The disciplinary authority i.e. the Senior Superintendent of Police, Bathinda considered the inquiry report and the reply filed by the petitioner.
He also heard the petitioner who contended that he was absent from duty due to acute pain in his back for which he got treatment from a doctor at Rampura Phul.
However, he did not agree with the written reply and the contention of the petitioner.
It was observed by the disciplinary authority that the petitioner had not sent any information or leave regarding his long absence and had remained absent from duty on his own accord.
Besides, he had fabricated the story later on in his defence.
Therefore, the case of the petitioner for his absence from duty that he had a severe back pain for which he was getting treatment from Rampura Phul was found by the disciplinary authority to be without any basis.
This finding was reached at after appreciation of evidence and material on record.
Therefore, these are not liable to be reopened in the present proceedings under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The decision taken by the departmental authorities is not in any manner perverse or irrational.
It is not a decision which is not supported by evidence and neither is it absurd or illogical, which would warrant interference by this (Court) in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
Therefore, we find no merit in the contention of the petitioner regarding the impugned order being illegal, arbitrary or without judicial application of mind.
10.
Insofar as the other contention regarding non-consideration of Rule 162(1) is concerned, the provisions of the same may be noticed which read as under:-  "162.
Dismissal - (1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
(Emphasis added).
11.
A perusal of the above shows that dismissal is to be awarded only for gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
It also provides that in making such an award, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
12.
The question therefore that requires consideration is whether absence from duty amounts to "gravest act of misconduct" as provided for in Rule 162 referred to above.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed strong reliance on Parkash Chand's case (supra).
In the said case, the respondent was a Constable in the Punjab Armed Police and had absented himself from duty for the period from July 20, 1977 to September 16, 1977.
It was held by a Division Bench of this Court that the said absence from duty without leave did not amount to "gravest act of misconduct".
13.
However, the Supreme Court in a latter case titled State of Punjab v. Bakshish Singh, 1997(3) SCT 401 (SC) : (1997) 6 SCC 381 considered the question of a constable of the State of Punjab who was absent from duty.
While allowing the appeal of the State it was held as follows :-  "It is settled legal position that it is for the disciplinary authority to pass appropriate punishment; the civil Court cannot substitute its own view to that of the disciplinary as well as appellate authority on the nature of the punishment to be imposed upon the delinquent officer.
In view of the finding of the appellate Court that it is a grave misconduct, the appellate Court ought not to have interfered with the decree of the trial Court.
The High Court dismissed it without application of the (sic) mind and ignoring the settled legal principle."
Besides, another Division Bench of this Court of which one of us (Swatanter Kumar, J) was a member in the case of Ex-constable Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) SCT 475 (P&H) : 1997(3) Recent Services Judgments 353, which also related to a case of a constable of the Punjab who was absent without leave, considered the matter in the context of Rule 162 and held that where the inquiry was fair, in consonance with the Rules and principles of natural justice, the unauthorised absence of the delinquent for 73 days is fully established, this would constitute a misconduct of grave nature.
14.
In the case in hand it is not the case of the petitioner that there was any violation of the principles of natural justice or that he was not afforded a full and complete opportunity to defend himself in the departmental action.
The contention is that the true effect of Rule 162 was not considered inasmuch as the absence from duty of the petitioner was not "gravest act of misconduct".
This as already noticed in view of Bakshish Singh's case (supra) and Satnam Singh's case (supra) is without any basis.
The inquiry against the petitioner was held in a fair manner.
No infraction of the rule has been pointed out which would vitiate the departmental action against the petitioner.
Besides, the petitioner belongs to the Police Service in which discipline and obedience is of paramount importance which defines the nature of duties.
The departmental authorities have taken conscious decisions to dismiss the petitioner from service and whether a different view is possible cannot be gone into.
15.
For the foregoing reasons there is no merit in this petition which is accordingly dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.