Swatanter Kumar, J - An FIR No. 160 dated 2442003 was registered against 11 petitioners who are police officers i.e. Sub Inspectors, Head Constables and Constables respectively, working in the Punjab Police for the offences punishable under Sections 7, 12 and 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
It was stated that some ill-reputed speculative gamblers of the town, who were involved in number of cases of speculative gambling and fraud were running an office and this illegal business by setting police officers who are bribed by them and all the petitioners are named as such officers in that FIR  2.
The department served an order dated 27.4.2003 directing departmental action against the petitioners and ordered that departmental proceedings will be conducted on day-to-day basis under Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules and Standing Instructions No. 3 of 1981 and report shall be submitted within two months.
A charge-sheet was served upon the petitioners.
The relevant part of the charge-sheet reads as under :-  "There is an allegation of charge against Inspector Darshan Ram No. 53/PR that some anti-social elements and speculators based at Ludhiana against whom cases relating to speculation and fraud have already been registered, are secretly indulging in speculative activities on a large scale while selling approved lotteries of Punjab Govt. under the jurisdiction of PS Division No. 6, Ludhiana.
Instead of genuine lottery tickets they are selling rough slips prepared by them.
They are running this illegal trade in connivance with Inspector (Darshan) Ram No. 53/PR.
This employee Inspector Darshan Ram No. 53/PR supplies information regarding any probable legal action against them after accepting bribe from these speculators and also himself does not take any legal action against them on account of these illegal activities.
As such case No. 168 dt. 24403 u/s 7, 12, 13 of Anti Corruption Act, 1988 has been registered against the employee in PS Division No. 6, Ludhiana.
While having a member of a disciplinary force, this lapse on the part of this employee Inspector Darshan Ram No. 53/PR in conniving with these notorious speculators, passing on advance information of the probable legal action proposed to be taken by the police and himself taking no action against them and in return taking bribe from speculators amounts to criminal offence besides taking a grave violation of the rules of the Police Deptt.
It has put a black spot on the reputation of the police department."
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner while relying upon the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd & Anr., 1999(2) SLR 338 : 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC); Kusheshwar Dubey v. M/s Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., and others, AIR 1988 SC 2118; of the Hon'ble Karnataka High Court in the case of AR Ravi v. Karnataka Agro Industries Corporation Ltd and others, 1993 Lab.IC 1720 : 1993(4) SCT 432 (Karnataka) and of this High Court in the case of BK Aggarwal v. State Bank of India and others, 1995(5) SLR 743 : 2000(1) SCT 702 (P&H) contended that the petitioners are likely to suffer prejudice in their defence in criminal cases in the event departmental proceedings are not stayed immediately.
According to the petitioners both proceedings are based on somewhat similar facts and as such the departmental proceedings should not be permitted to continue.
We are unable to agree with the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners.
It will neither be just nor fair that the departmental proceedings are awaited till the attainment of finality in criminal proceedings wherein investigation has not concluded as of today.
4.
The scope of departmental proceedings is entirely different and falls in an ambit quite distinguishable from the scope of criminal proceedings.
The above judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as of this Court were considered in great length in a recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of HC Inderjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 15743 of 2000, decided on 2252003, wherein in somewhat similar facts and circumstances, the Court held as under :-  "In addition to the above judgments, reference to some other judgments of the Apex Court which have a direct bearing on the matter in issue would be proper.
In the case of State of Rajasthan v. BK Meena and others, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 13 : 1996(4) SCT 707 (SC), it was held as under:- "It would be evident from the above decisions that each of them starts with the indisputable proposition that there is no legal bar for both proceedings to go on simultaneously and then say that in certain situations, it may not be `desirable', `advisable' or `appropriate' to proceed with the disciplinary enquiry when a criminal case is pending on identical charges.
The staying of disciplinary proceedings, it is emphasised, is a matter to be determined having regard to the facts and circumstances of a given and that no hard and fast rules can be enunciated in that behalf.
The only ground suggested in the above decisions as constituting a valid ground for staying the disciplinary proceedings is "that the defence of the employee in the criminal case may not be prejudiced."
This ground has, however, been hedged in by providing further that this may be done in cases of grave nature involving questions of facts and law.
In our respectful opinion, it means that not only the charges must be grave but that the case must involve complicated questions of law and fact.
Moreover, `advisability', `desirability' or `propriety', as the case may be, has to be determined in each case taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case."
"The interest of the delinquent officer also lies in a prompt conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings.
If he is not guilty of the charges, his honour should be vindicated at the earliest possible moment and if he is guilty, he should be dealt with promptly according to law.
It is not also in the interest of administration that persons accused of serious misdemeanour should be continued in office indefinitely, i.e. for long periods awaiting the result of criminal proceedings.
It is not in the interest of administration.
It only serves the interest of the guilty and dishonest.
While it is not possible to enumerate the various factors, for and against the stay of disciplinary proceedings, we found it necessary to emphasise some of the important considerations in view of the fact that very often the disciplinary proceedings are being stayed for long periods pending criminal proceedings.
Stay of disciplinary proceedings cannot be, and should not be a matter of course."
"In the case of Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd and another, 1992(2) RSJ 318, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "These decisions indicate that though it would not be wrong in conducting two parallel proceedings, one by way of disciplinary action and the other in the criminal court, still it would be desirable to stay the domestic inquiry if the incident giving rise to a charge framed against the employee in a domestic inquiry is being tried in a criminal court."
"In the case of Corporation of the City of Nagpur, Civil Lines, Nagpur and another v. Ramchandra and others, 1981(2) S.L.R.
274, it was held as under :- "Normally where the accused is acquitted honorably and completely exonerated of the charges it would not be expedient to continue a departmental inquiry on the very same charges or grounds or evidence, but the fact remains, however, that merely because the accused is acquitted, the power of the authority concerned to continue the departmental inquiry is not taken away nor is its discretion in any way fettered."
"In the case of Jang Bahadur Singh v. Baij Nath Tiwari, AIR 1969 Supreme Court 30, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under :- "The issue in the disciplinary proceedings is whether the employee is guilty of the charges on which it is proposed to take action against him.
The same issue may arise for decision in a civil or criminal proceeding pending in a court.
But the pendency of the court proceedings does not bar the taking of disciplinary action.
The civil or criminal court has no such power.
The initiation and continuation of disciplinary proceedings in good faith is not calculated to obstruct or interfere with the course of justice in the pending court proceeding."
"Upon analysing the application of principles enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court, a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Sarita Kumari and others v. The Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and others, 1995(2) SCT 143 (P&H) spelled out the conditions which need to be satisfied before the Court could grant stay of departmental proceedings because of pendency of criminal trial of the delinquent official.
The Court held as under :- "It is true that Court may not be able to evolve any hard and fast rule or formula on the basis of which stay of departmental proceedings can or cannot be granted in cases of simultaneous invocation of remedies by an employer.
Equally true is the position of law that emerges from various other pronouncements including the judgments referred to supra that there can be no legal bar for simultaneous proceedings being taken against delinquent employee i.e. disciplinary as well as criminal action.
Thus, we feel that it may be appropriate to satisfy certain basic conditions or criteria which the Courts may consider while dealing with the cases specially of the present nature.
These are intended to the general guiding factors and are not exhaustive.
Thus, the Courts may have to consider the existence of the following conditions in their right perspective to determine and decide whether the stay may or may not be granted in a given case :-  i) The criminal action and the disciplinary proceedings are grounded upon the same set of facts; ii) Identical and or similar question(s) arise for determination before the criminal court of competent jurisdiction and the disciplinary/enquiring authority; iii) The complexity of the merits of the case, that it is say, the case is of grave nature and involves questions of fact or law which are not simple and normally should be decided by a Court of law alone; and  iv) Whether it will be unfair to the delinquent employee, to permit continuation of simultaneous proceedings because it would prejudicially affect the case of the said employee, or the delinquent employee would face serious prejudice in his criminal trial because of continuation of disciplinary proceedings."
"In a recent judgment the Hon'ble Apex Court has also taken the view that even (if) the proceedings before the Civil Court and/or the criminal Court are based on the same cause of action, the proceedings before both should be permitted to continue simultaneously as it is not necessary that findings arrived at by the Civil Court shall be binding over the criminal Court.
They would also not supersede the findings recorded by the others.
This view has taken in the case of KG Premshanker v. Inspector of Police and another, 2002(4) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 596 : 2002(4) R.C.R.
(Civil) 330 : JT 2002(7) SC 30 and it was held that the view expressed by the Apex Court in the case of VM Shah v. State of Maharashtra and anr., 1995(3) RRR 300 : 1995(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 416 : JT 1995(6) SC 433 is not the correct view.
It is indicative of the fact that continuation of proceedings founded on common cause necessary need not lead to an inevitable result of staying one during the pendency of the other.
This view can be appropriately applied to the proceedings before the criminal and departmental proceedings on the principle of ratio decidendi.
Therefore, it may not be appropriate to hold as a principle of law that the departmental proceedings ought to be stayed if on somewhat similar facts or cause criminal proceedings were initiated before the competent Court of jurisdiction against the delinquent officer.
It is a settled principle of law that the ambit, scope and consequences of these two proceedings are entirely distinct and different.
On the analysis of the afore-stated principle it could fairly be stated that stay of departmental proceedings on the ground of pendency of criminal proceedings would not be a rule but an exception which could be applied only upon satisfaction on the afore-noticed conditions precedent."
We may also refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of Som Parkash Wadhawan v. The Uttari Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam and others, CWP No. 4037 of 2000, decided on 1242000 and Birbal ALM v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula and others, 2003(1) S.L.R.
page 39 where the Court declined to stay the departmental proceedings as a result of pendency of criminal proceedings against the delinquent officers.
Expeditious conclusion of departmental proceedings is in the interest of the employer as well as the employee.
Pendency of these proceedings is more prejudicial to the service career of the delinquent employee.
Unless seriously substantial and complicated question of fact and law, based on identical facts, arise in the departmental and criminal proceedings, which require to be determined by the Court of competent jurisdiction, it will not be appropriate to stay the departmental proceedings during pendency of the criminal trial as a matter of rule.
In the present case as well, only charge has been framed against the accused and the departmental proceedings have been stayed by order of the Court since November, 2000.
We are unable to appreciate who is the gainer in this state of affairs ?
Certain enough, petitioner is a loser as he has been placed under suspension and presumably faces financial hardships.
The petitioner is exposed to this stress now for last more than four years.
Nothing has progressed on any front.
We are informed that charge has been framed in the proceedings before the Criminal Court on 2752003.
The delayed conclusion of departmental proceedings can cause serious prejudice to the petitioner and, thus, its expeditious conclusion would mean the ends of justice.
We are of the considered views that it will serve a greater purpose and benefit all concerned if the departmental proceedings themselves are concluded as expeditiously as possible so as to lift the sword of the threatened order of disciplinary proceedings hanging on the petitioners for a considerable period now.
Thus, we direct that the departmental proceedings should be concluded within one year from the date a certified copy of this order is brought to the notice of the concerned authorities.
We hope, the petitioner shall fully co- operate in the departmental enquiry.
However, we are unable to appreciate what prejudice is likely to be caused to the petitioners as a result of continuation of departmental proceedings.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show what are the complicated questions of fact and law which require record based investigation or mode of proof before conclusion of the proceedings.
In terms of law, mode of proof, onus, appreciation of evidence and effect of its conclusion are bound to be differ and distinct in both these proceedings."
4.
In addition to what we have stated above, it will be appropriate to notice that in the case of Capt.
M Paul Anthony (supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court was concerned with a case where the departmental proceedings before the Criminal Court have concluded.
The Criminal Court had recorded a finding that prosecution has not been able to prove the raid and recovery at the residence of the delinquent official.
In that context their Lordships held that if there is complicated questions of law and facts involved, it is desirable to stay the departmental proceedings.
5.
In another case of Kusheshwar Dubey (supra) the Hon'ble Apex Court again held that it is neither possible nor advisable to evolve hard and fast and straight jacket formula and it is not necessary that conclusion of disciplinary proceedings should always be deferred.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of BK Aggarwal (supra) was discussed at great length by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Head Constable Inderjit Singh (supra).
6.
In view of the above detailed discussion, we are not able to see any element of prejudice being caused to the petitioners if the departmental proceedings are permitted to continue.
Cumulative effect of the above enunciated principles of law is that indefinite postponement of departmental proceedings is prejudicial to the interests of the department as well as the employee.
In fact it no where serves the purpose of ends of justice.
No process of law can be utilised for the purposes of granting an unfair advantage to any person including the department itself.
If the department has decided to commence the departmental proceedings and conclude them in the possible shortest period, in our humble view this would serve all intended purposes and achieve the object of basic rule of law rather than indefinitely postponing the fate of either of the proceedings.
7.
In view of our above discussion, we dismiss this petition is limine.
Petition dismissed.