SS Saron, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in the School of Management at the respondent-Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as "the Institute") vide appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-5).
During the period of probation a termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-9) giving him one month's notice for termination of his service was issued.
The main ground taken for issuing the said termination notice, though not mentioned in the notice, is that the Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management (hereinafter referred to as "PGDBM") done by the petitioner from the Apeejay School of Marketing New Delhi is not recognized as equivalent to the Masters of Business Administration (MBA - for short) degree.
Hence the present petition for quashing the termination notice.
Notice of motion was issued on 612003 and operation of the impugned notice was stayed meanwhile.
2.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri Manu K Bhandari Advocate for the petitioner contended that the certificate of PGDBM issued to the petitioner by the Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi, is recognized by the Government of India, Ministry of Education and is equivalent to that of MBA.
The official web site of the Ministry of Education also, it is stated, certifies this position.
The copy of the information which has been obtained from the web site has been appended as Annexure P-1.
Besides, it is the All India Council For Technical Education (AICTE - for short) which lays down the minimum standards and norms for the management education courses and it recognizes that PGDBM as equivalent to MBA.
It is also contended that though the impugned notice appears to be innocuous but the foundation of the same is that the petitioner does not have the requisite qualification and therefore, the principles of natural justice were liable to be followed before issuing the notice and non-compliance of the same warrants that the impugned notice be quashed.
This is moreso for the reason that there is nothing against the work and conduct of the petitioner.
Besides, the Head of the School of Management Mr. GK Srivastava is also similarly placed as the petitioner as he also has the same qualification as the petitioner i.e. PGDBM and, therefore, the action of the Institute is discriminatory and arbitrary.
It is further contended that the notice has been issued by an incompetent authority inasmuch as according to Rule 31(i) framed by the Institute, the Board of Governors is the competent authority to issue such notice.
The notice has been issued by the Registrar without any reference to the meeting of the Board of Governors whereby a decision may have been taken to dispense with his services.
3.
On the other hand, Shri PS Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri DS Patwalia, Advocate, for the Institute, contends that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualification for the post of lecturer as advertised on 532001 and that he did not give the correct picture regarding his qualification and he represented in his application form Annexure R-1/3 that he has done MBA in 1999 from Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi and that he secured first Division.
Therefore, it was taken that he had the necessary qualification and was appointed as lecturer on 312002.
It is in fact at a later point of time when he sought enrollment for doing Ph.
D. in his field that the Committee while considering his case pointed out that the PGDBM certificate from the Apeejay School of Marketing was not equivalent to MBA.
This was later confirmed by the Association of Indian Universities which is a recognized body of the Government of India vide their letter dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6).
It is further contended that the equivalence determined by the AICTE is inconsequential in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bharathidasan University and another v. All India Council for Technical Education and others, 2001(4) SCT 704 (SC) : (2001) 8 Supreme Court Cases 676.
Besides, the termination notice has been served on the petitioner during the period of probation in accordance with para 3(a) of his appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-5).
The same is an innocuous decision to terminate the services during the period of probation of the petitioner and, therefore, does not cast any stigma on him.
As such, the principles of natural justice, it is stated, are inapplicable.
The decision to terminate the services of the petitioner was taken as the Institute being a prestigious one, cannot afford to have teachers who do not have the prescribed qualifications as this would ultimately affect the students who undertake the course and also the degree which are obtained by them from the Institute, which is a deemed University.
As regards the order being passed by an incompetent authority i.e. the Registrar and nor by the Board of Governors, he has referred to Rule 38(ii) of the Rules of the Institute to contend that the Director has the power to take immediate action on any matter which is conferred on the Board and if it is necessary to do so he is to report to the Board of the action taken.
The matter was put up before the Director on 26112002 who after going through the records, recommended for termination of the appointment of the petitioner.
This was forwarded to the Chairman who granted the approval to terminate the services of the petitioner.
The Director and the Chairman have the powers to act for and on behalf of the Board of Governors under the rules.
Insofar as ratification by the Board is concerned, the matter would be put up before the Board of Governors in their next meeting as this is the normal course of business as the Board of Governors normally meet once or twice a year and it is in these circumstances that Regulations have been made delegating the powers of the Board of Governors to the Director as well as to the Chairman.
4.
In order to appreciate the contentions of the respective senior counsel appearing for the parties it may be noticed that the petitioner did his PGDBM from the Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi on 9101999.
In the year 2000 he did his Masters in Financial Management from the Kurukshetra University.
The petitioner was initially appointed as Lecturer on ad hoc basis with the Institute on 672000.
The Institute on 532001 (Annexure P- 4) advertised for appointment various posts of Lecturers in the School of Management being run by it.
The said advertisement indicated that the essential qualification, experience and scale of pay for the posts were to be the same as were approved AICTE and the Institute The petitioner alongwith two others was selected.
Accordingly, the petitioner joined the Institute as Lecturer in the School of Management.
5.
The petitioner in his application form Annexure R-1/3 for the post of Lecturer indicated that he had done MBA in 1999 from Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi and that he had secured first Division.
The perusal of the form shows that after writing "MBA", the petitioner had written below it "PGDBM" within brackets.
It is also indicated that the petitioner did his M.F.M.
(Masters of Financial Management) from the Kurukshetra University.
Since the petitioner had specifically averred in his application form that he had passed his MBA Examination in first Class, therefore, the Institute considered him to be fulfilling the qualifications as prescribed by the Institute Accordingly he was appointed as Lecturer vide letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-5).
In terms of the appointment letter, the petitioner was on probation for a period of two years and it was provided therein that his services could be terminated on either side by giving one moth's notice or payment of one month's pay in lieu thereof without assigning any reasons.
6.
The petitioner on 1172002 applied for doing PhD in his field and he was to get himself enrolled for the same.
Accordingly he asked the Apeejay School of Marketing from where he did PGDBM to certify that the said Course undertaken by him is approved by the AICTE.
The necessary certificate dated 1362002 (Annexure P-7) was issued by the Apeejay School to the effect that PGDBM Course undertaken by the petitioner was recognized and approved by the AICTE from the year 1993 and has since been accredited by the National Board of Accreditation.
As per the conditions laid down for doing PhD the minimum qualification is MBA.
The committee which was constituted for considering the case of the petitioner for admission to the PhD raised an objection to the effect that to their knowledge the degree which the petitioner was holding i.e. PGDBM from Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi was not equivalent of a MBA degree.
7.
To ascertain the position, the respondent Institute approached the Association of Indian Universities which is a body consisting of 19 Vice Chancellors of various Universities and is stated to be the only recognized body for determining equivalence of degrees as granted by the Universities and Institutions throughout the country.
This Association of Indian Universities is also stated to be recognized by the Government of India vide Notification dated 1331995 (Annexure R-1/4).
A Clarification vide letter dated 1872002 (Annexure R-1/5) was sought by the Registrar of the Institute from the said Association of Indian Universities as to whether various degrees/diplomas as indicated in the said letter including that of Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management from Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi are considered equivalent to MBA or not, in connection with registration of candidates for PhD The Association of Indian Universities vide their letter dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6) stated that the PGDBM of Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi was not considered to be equivalent to MBA Degree.
When this fact was brought to the notice of the Institute it came to light that the petitioner was not only ineligible to undertake his PhD course but in fact he was not fulfilling the minimum qualification for appointment to the post of Lecturer even as prescribed in terms of the advertisement dated 532001.
Accordingly, in terms of clause 34(i) of the Institute's Regulations as also in terms of condition No. 3(a) of his appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-5), termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-9) was issued.
8.
As already notice the challenge in this writ petition is to the issuance of the impugned termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-9).
The conditions of the appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-5) of the petitioner amongst others provides that he would be on probation for a period of two years from the date of joining which may be extended.
It is also provided that during the initial or the extended period of probation, the appointment is liable to be terminated on either side on one moth's notice or on payment of one month's salary in lieu thereof.
9.
This Court in exercise of its supervisory writ jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India is not to embark upon an inquiry to determine the equivalence of the certificate which the petitioner is having and to determine whether that is equivalent to MBA degree which was the requirement for seeking appointment as Lecturer in terms of the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-4).
This clearly is the domain of the expert bodies.
The reason for issuance of the termination notice is that according to the Institute, the petitioner does not have the necessary qualifications for undertaking the classes and course in the School of Management being run by the Institute During the hearing of the case it was suggested to the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Institute, that it should hear the petitioner and pass a fresh order to see the equivalence of the degree that the petitioner is having.
However, the learned Senior Counsel stated that this would be an exercise in futility as result would be the same and, therefore, this Court may examine the case on its own merit.
In any case, in order to satisfy ourselves we may notice the material on record for the limited purpose of appointment as Lecturer in the Institute in terms of the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-4), without giving any finding as a general proposition of law that the PGDBM certificate which the petitioner is having is equivalent or not to the MBA degree.
10.
The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has referred to the web site of the Ministry of Education which recognizes the institute and the PGDBM certificates equivalent to MBA.
Annexure P-1 relating to the said official web site reads as under :-  http://shikshanic.nic.in/aictg.htm Institute Name APPEEJAY SCHOOL OF MARKETING INSTITUTE ADDRESS SECTOR 8, DWARKA INSTITUTIONAL AREA, PAPANKALAN, NEW DELHI-1100045 Sr.No.
Course Name Intake Full/Part time Period of Approval Level of Course 1.
PGDBM 120 FU 96-99, 2000 MBA 11.
A perusal of the above does not depict much from which it can be said to be an official web site of the Ministry of Education or from which it can be deduced that the course of PGDBM is equivalent to that MBA.
All that it shows is that the level of course Apeejay School of Marketing is that of MBA.
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, however, also contends that as per the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-4) the essential qualification required was : "experience and scale of pay for all posts are as approved by AICTE and as approved by the institute".
The degree of PGDBM is stated to be recognized by the AICTE.
In support of this contention, the petitioner has placed reliance on the certificate dated 1362002 (Annexure P-7) which has been issued by Apeejay School of Marketing and reads as under :-  "APEEJAY SCHOOL OF MARKETING June 13, 2002 TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN This is to certify that Mr. Ashish Nehra, Roll No. 7188 was a student of Appejay School of Marketing Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management, two years full time course of the batch 1997-99.
This course is recognized and approved by the All India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi from the year 1993 F.No.
431/15-3/MCP (M)/94 and has since been accredited by the National Board of Accreditation.
Sd/- (Mahesh Guggri)" The above certificate has been issued by the Apeejay School of Marketing and it is stated that PGDBM, two years full time course of the batch 1997-99 is recognized and approved by the AICTE.
This according to Shri Rajiv Atma Ram learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, fulfills the requirement of the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-4).
We have considered this and find that in Bharathidasan University's case (Supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the question as to whether the Bharathidasan University should seek prior approval of the AICTE to start a department for imparting a course or programme in technical education or a technical institution as an adjunct to the University itself to conduct technical courses of its choice.
While considering the said question it was also observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in relation to the provisions of the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the university Grants Commission Act, 1956 that Section 10 of the AICTE Act, deals with the functions of the Council as also its duties and obligations to take steps for fulfillment of the same.
After noticing the provisions of the two Acts, it was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as follows :-  "A careful scanning through of the provisions of the AICTE Act and the provisions of the UGC Act in juxtaposition, will show that the role of AICTE vis-a-vis the Universities is only advisory, recommendatory and a guiding factor and thereby subserve the cause of maintaining appropriate standards and qualitative norms and not as authority empowered to issue and enforce any sanctions by itself, except submitting a Report to the UGC for appropriate action.
The conscious and deliberate omission to enact any such provision in the AICTE Act in respect of Universities is not only a positive indicator but should be also one of the determining factors in adjudging the status, role and activities of AICTE vis-a-vis Universities and the activities and functioning of its departments and units."
The above observations evidently show that the AICTE Act and the functions of the Council (AICTE) under the Act is only of an advisory and recommendatory nature.
As an authority, it is not empowered to issue and enforce any sanction by itself.
The Institute is a deemed University and subscribes to the norms laid down by the University Grants Commission (UGC - for short).
The role of the AICTE is limited to submit a report to the UGC for appropriate action as held in Bharathidasan University's case (supra).
The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on a letter dated 10.8.1998 (Annexure P-11) issued by the Apeejay School of Marketing which also indicates that the school offers a two years full time Post-Graduate Diploma in Business Management equivalent to MBA recognized by AICTE, Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India.
12.
As against this, the Institute has placed on record the letter dated 1872002 (Annexure R-1/5) whereby the Registrar of the Institute had sought clarification as to whether the degree/diploma indicated therein which includes the PGDBM from Apeejay School of Marketing, is considered to equivalent to MBA or not in connection with registration of candidates for PhD and for appointment of Lecturers.
In reply to the said letter, the Association of Universities vide their letter dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6) stated that the PGDBM from Ajeepay School of Marketing is not considered equivalent to MBA.
Besides, the Master of Finance Management of Kurukshetra University is a recognized postgraduate degree for its own area of specialization and as such it may not be considered equivalent to MBA.
Besides, the Institute has also by way of Civil Misc. No. 10259 of 2003 placed on record letters dated 2812003 (Annexure A-1), 3132003 (Annexure A-2) and 422003 (Annexure A-3).
The letter dated 2812003 (Annexure A-1) written by the Institute to the UGC is to the effect that at the time of recommending the persons for PhD, the Institute has to ascertain the equivalence of degrees given by the various Private Institutions like some of their faculty members wanted to apply for PhD and they had done only PGDBM from Institute which are non University organizations.
It was requested to let the Institute know whether the UGC has any system for giving equivalence or all cases are referred to Association of Indian Universities for the same.
The UGC vide its letter dated 3132003 (Annexure A-2) informed that PGDBM is not equivalent to Master's degree and that the Institute may approach the AIU (Association of Indian Universities) in the matter.
The letter dated 422003 (Annexure A-3) on the subject of central agency for giving equivalence of degree has directed the Institute to approach the Association of Indian Universities.
13.
From the above it may be noted that the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-4) envisages for experience and scale as approved by the AICTE and as approved by the Institute Therefore, from the web site Annexure P-1, the Certificate dated 1362002 (Annexure P-7) and the letter dated 10.8.1998 (Annexure P-11) issued by the Apeejay School of Marketing, when examined from the standpoint of the Institute, keeping in view the fact that the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-4) did provide for experience and scale not only as approved by the AICTE but also as approved by the Institute and also the letter from the Association of Indian Universities dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6) to the effect that the PGDBM of Apeejay School of Marketing New Delhi was not considered to be equivalent to MBA Degree, the action of the Institute in issuing the termination notice cannot be faulted with.
This, however, we may hasten to add is not the determination of equivalence or non-equivalence of the PGDBM certificate that the petitioner has with MBA degree.
It is only from the standpoint of the Institute keeping in view the larger public interest, which as contended by the Institute, would affect the course that is being undertaken by the students who are imparted lectures by the petitioner as also the ultimate degrees to be given to them on the completion of their course that we are of the view that the action of the Institute in issuing the termination notice cannot be faulted.
This is moreso for the reason that the petitioner was admittedly a temporary employee under probation and had no right to the post.
A temporary employee as is well known has no right to the post unless it matures into a permanent one.
The petitioner being a temporary employee, therefore, has to be held to have no right to the post both under the contract of his service i.e. condition No. 3(a) of his appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-5) and also in terms of clause 34(i) of the Institute's Regulations.
14.
The contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner not having the requisite qualification is the foundation of the impugned termination notice and not the motive and that therefore, the principles of natural justice were liable to be followed before issuing the notice and non-compliance of the same vitiates the impugned notice, as also the contention that the Head of the School of Management Mr. GK Srivastava is also similarly placed as the petitioner as he also has the same qualification as the petitioner i.e. PGDBM and, therefore, the action of the Institute is discriminatory and arbitrary are equally without any force.
It may be noted that the services of the petitioner are not being dispensed with on account of some misconduct, which can be said to be the foundation of the termination notice.
The notice has been issued for want of having the requisite qualification of MBA.
Therefore, the notice is an innocuous one without any stigma or evil consequences visiting on him.
It is not in dispute that under the contract of service as also the rules governing his services, the employer had the right to terminate his services by giving him one month's notice.
The notice is not founded on any misconduct.
It is only if the delinquency of a temporary employee that is taken as the operating motive in terminating the service, the order is not considered as punitive while if the termination order is founded upon it, the termination is considered to be punitive.
That is not the position in the case in hand as the termination notice is not based on any sort of punitive action and neither is it the case of the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner not having the requisite qualifications when examined from the standpoint of the Institute is the motive for the termination.
As such the principles of natural justice are inapplicable in the case of a temporary employee who is sought to be discharged in accordance with his contract of employment during the period of probation.
Besides, it is not a case where the petitioner is an employee holding a civil post under the Union or the State in which case the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India would be attracted.
Therefore, the contention of the petitioner for protection under Article 311 of the Constitution is not tenable.
15.
The position that others similarly situated as the petitioner are continuing in service is of no consequence as the same can, in the facts and circumstances of the case, cannot be a ground for issuing a writ in his favour on the alleged plea of discrimination.
There is no material before us to examine the qualifications of Mr. GK Srivastava who is stated to be similarly placed as the petitioner.
Besides, his continuation or appointment is not the subject matter of dispute.
The continuation of Mr. Srivastava may be legal and valid or it might not be.
This requires the investigation of the matter before it can be applied in the case of the petitioner.
If the continuation of Mr. GK Srivastava is found to be contrary to law, the same in any case cannot be made the basis for perpetuating a wrong and compelling the Institute to repeat the wrong.
16.
Therefore, keeping these circumstances in view, and the fact that this Court is not to embark upon any inquiry regarding equivalence of the PGDBM certificate with the degree of MBA and the fact that the Institute has satisfied itself after making its inquiries that the PGDBM certificate in possession of the petitioner is not equivalent to MBA degree and there is no bias or arbitrariness on the part of the Institute, its action cannot be said to be illegal or unwarranted in the facts and circumstances of the case.
As already noticed the petitioner himself while submitting his application Annexure R-1/3 had indicated his qualification to be MBA although below that he had written PGDBM.
The Institute acted on the representation given by the petitioner.
However, it is later when the petitioner sought registration for his enrollment to PhD that the Committee scrutinizing his documents found that he did not have the minimum qualification of MBA and thereafter it transpired that he also did not have the minimum qualification for appointment as Lecturer in the Institute pursuant to the advertisement dated 532000 (Annexure P-4).
It is, then that the termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-9) was issued.
This is evidently an innocuous letter of termination during the period of probation on the strength that the petitioner was not having the necessary qualification of MBA.
Therefore, we find nothing wrong with this action of the Institute specially when it is not based on any misconduct so as to make the order stigmatic.
17.
The other contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner regarding the competency of the Registrar in issuing the impugned termination order may be adverted to.
The learned senior counsel for the petitioner, as already stated above, has contended that the termination notice has been issued by the Registrar of the Institute who is not the competent person to issue such a notice.
In this regard it has been stated in the written statement that the Director of the Institute has power to take immediate action on any matter in exercise of powers conferred by Rule 38(2) of the Rules of the Institute Besides, in the meeting of the Board of Governors held on 1142002 the Chairman was delegated with the powers of Board of Governors to act on any matter and to act on behalf of the Board of Governors under Rule 14 (xxvi) of the Rules.
Rule 38(ii) of the Rules reads as under :-  "The Director, may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on the Board and shall report to the Board the action taken by him on such matter.
Provided that if the Board is of the opinion that such action ought not have been taken it may refer the matter to the President whose decision thereon shall be final.
Provided further that any person in the service of the Institute who is the aggrieved by the action taken by the Director under clause (ii) above, shall have the right to appeal against such actions to the Board within thirty days from the date on which such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Director".
18.
The delegation of powers has been done by the Board of Governors to the Chairman in its meeting held on 1142002 as follows :  "B. Delegation of powers to the Chairman, Board of Governors.
1.
Approval of the appointment of faculty and other in the equivalent scales, as per the recommendations of the duly constituted selection committee as per rules and regulations of the Institute Whenever in appointment to a post is proposed to be made by invitation, the matter shall be put up to the Board of Governors for consideration with the comments of the Chairman.
2.
Creation/argumentation/abolition of the posts below the level of Lecturer/Assistant Registrar.
3.
Revision of charges for various services rendered by the Institute Services include provision of hostel accommodation to the students, supply of electricity and water to the on-campus residents and other miscellaneous services.
4.
In case of temporary appointment for more than one year, the Chairman, will have the powers to approve such appointment on the recommendations of the Director".
19.
The matter regarding termination of the petitioner was put up before the Director on 26112002 who after going through the records recommended that the appointment of the petitioner may be terminated under the powers vested in Rule 38(ii) of the Rules and he recommended for the same.
This was also forwarded to the Chairman who was pleased to grant the approval to terminate the services of the petitioner.
In this manner, the Director and the Chairman had the powers to act for an on behalf of the Board of Governors under Rules.
It is also stated that the matter would be put up before the Board of Governors for ratification.
The learned Senior Counsel has placed before us the minutes of Board of Governors 69th Meeting held on 2442003.
At page 11 of the minutes under the heading : "To Report About Approvals Accorded by the Chairman and Director," it is mentioned that the Board ratified the approvals accorded by the Chairman on behalf of the Board as mentioned in item No. B 6931, which amongst others relates to termination of the petitioner as Lecturer.
It is also recorded that the Board took a note of the fact that the petitioner and Ms. Poonam Mohindru have approached this Court against their termination of service and this Court had granted an interim stay.
Therefore, there has been ratification of the action by the Board even.
20.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of the Marathwada University v. Seshrao Balwant Rao Chavan, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1582 the principles of ratification, apparently do not have any application with regard to exercise of powers conferred under the statutory provision and that the statutory authority cannot travel beyond the powers conferred and any action without power has no legal validity.
There is no dispute to the proposition of law enunciated therein.
In the said case, the respondent before the Supreme Court while working as Deputy Registrar of the Marathwada University was given additional charge of control of examinations.
There was delay of payment of bills to the person who was entrusted with the printing of works to conduct annual examination of the University.
This led to an inquiry as to whether the bills were deliberately kept pending with any ulterior motive.
The Executive Committee of the University appointed four-member Committee including the Vice Chancellor to enquire into the matter and after investigation it made some prima facie observations in its report regarding the respondent therein.
However, it desired to have the mater thoroughly examined by another committee which ws appointed and it made a detailed inquiry but found nothing against the respondent.
A report was submitted to the effect that there was no delay in clearing the bills and if there was any, it was justified in the circumstances.
The Executive Council placed this report of the second Committee before the Vice Chancellor without taking any decision thereon.
The Vice Chancellor who was present in the meeting agreed to take a decision in about a month's time.
However, he appointed an Inquiry Officer who framed three charges against the respondent therein.
The Inquiry Officer held the respondent guilty and after considering his reply the Vice Chancellor dismissed the respondent.
This dismissal was challenged before the Hon'ble Bombay High Court which directed that the entire matter be placed before the Executive Council for taking an appropriate decision.
The matter was placed before the Executive Council and it passed the resolution ratifying the action taken by the Vice Chancellor and confirming the dismissal of the respondent therein.
The High Court held that the action of the Vice Chancellor was without authority of law and as to the ratification made by the Executive Council, it was held that the acts done by the Vice Chancellor remain the acts without any authority or power and that defects cannot be cured by subsequent resolution.
Accordingly, the departmental proceedings taking action against the respondent as also the order of termination of his service were quashed.
The Marathwada University appealed to the Supreme Court and one of the contentions raised was that if the order of dismissal was defective or without authority, the ratification by the Executive Council had rendered it immune from any challenge.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the provisions of the Mrathwada University Act.
It was while considering this contention that their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the principle of ratification apparently to not have any application with regard to exercise of powers conferred under statutory provisions and that the statutory authority cannot travel beyond the power conferred and any action without power has no legal validity.
It is ab initio void and cannot be ratified.
Therefore, the position in Marathwada University's case (supra) is that the Vice Chancellor initially assumed jurisdiction which was not vested in him and passed certain orders.
Thereafter, the orders passed were got ratified.
21.
The same is not the position in the present case.
In the case in hand, as already noticed, it is on the recommendations of the Director of the Institute that the termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-9) was issued.
This was issued in exercise of powers conferred by rule 38(ii) of the Rules of the Institute a reference to which has already been made above.
Besides, in the case in hand, the Board of Governors under Rule 14(xxvi) have delegated certain powers to the Chairman Board of Governors.
Therefore, it is not a case where the Director has assumed jurisdiction in respect of which ratification is subsequently required.
It is a case where the order has been passed by the Director within the purview of Rule 38(ii).
Therefore, the ratio of the judgment in Marathawada University's case (supra) is inapplicable to the case in hand.
22.
For the foregoing reasons we find no merit in this writ petition.
The petitioner was on probation and the termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-9) was issued during the probation period.
The same was issued as in the opinion of the Institute the PGDBM certificate which the petitioner is having from Apeejay School of Marketing, New Delhi was found to be not equivalent to MBA.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.