GS Singhvi, J - Whether parity in the pay scales of Machine Tool Operators and Turners obtaining prior to 121968 could be disturbed by the employer, i.e., Bhakra Beas Management Board (respondent No. 1) at the time of revision of pay scales w.e.f.
121968 and whether appellants No. 2 to 4, who were holding the posts of Junior Machine Tool Operators, could be deprived of their legitimate right of promotion are the questions which arise for determination in this appeal filed by the appellants against the order of the learned Single Judge vide which he allowed C.W.P.
No. 2681 of 1985 - Bhakra Beas Management Board v. The Workmen, Bhakra Beas Management Board and others and quashed award dated 1221985 passed by Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2) in Reference No. 193 of 1981.
The Facts :  2.
Prior to the re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab under the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966 (for short, `the 1966 Act'), the civil works of Bhakra Beas Nangal Project was under the administrative control of Irrigation Department of the erstwhile Punjab Government and the electrical work was under the control of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
For the purpose of execution of the civil and electrical works, the Irrigation Department and Punjab State Electricity Board used to employ regular as well as work-charged employees.
The regular employees employed in relation to civil works were governed by the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules and the conditions of service of the work-charged employees were regulated by the Certified Standing Orders framed under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (for short, `the 1946 Act').
The regular employees employed for doing electrical works were governed by the Punjab State Electricity Board Service Regulations and the work-charged employees were governed by the 1946 Act.
After re-organisation of the State of Punjab w.e.f.
1111966, all the employees came under the control of the Board and by virtue of sub-section (5) of Section 79 of the 1966 Act, they became its employees.
Subsequently, the regular employees engaged against civil works were allocated to the Governments of the successor States of Punjab and Haryana and regular employees of the erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board were allocated to the successor State Electricity Boards of Punjab and Haryana.
However, the work-charged employees continued to work under the Board.
3.
The pay scales of the posts of Machine Tool Operators and Turners was Rs. 60-125/- prior to 121968 and those of Blacksmiths and Crane Operators were Rs. 90-110/- and Rs. 90-125/- respectively.
The pay scales of all the posts were revised w.e.f.
121968.
For the sake of convenient reference, the table showing the pre-revised and revised pay scales of different posts is given below :  S.No.
Name of category Pre-revised Scale Revised scale on 121968.
1.
Machine Tool Operators Rs. 60-125 Rs. 110-180 2.
Turners Rs. 60-125 Rs. 120-250  3.
Blacksmiths Rs. 90-110 Rs. 120-250 4.
Crane Operators Rs. 90-125 Rs. 120-250" 4.
The union represented to the management of the Board for revising the pay scale of Machine Tool Operators from Rs. 60-125/- to Rs. 120-250/- as was done in the case of Turners and other categories.
It also represented for promotion of appellants No. 2 to 4 from the posts of Junior Machine Tool Operators to the posts of Machine Tool Operators.
The Management of the Board did not accept the union's plea.
Therefore, by an order dated 22101981, the Central Government referred the dispute arising between the parties to Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh under Section 10(1)(d) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The terms of reference made by the Central Government read as under :  "1.
Whether the action of the management of Bhakra Beas Management Board in not giving scale of pay of Rs. 120-250 with effect from 121968 to their Machine Tool Operators when prior to revision, they were in the scale of Rs. 60-125 along with other Tradesmen like Turners/Blacksmith and Crane Operators is justified ?
If not, to what relief the workmen are entitled ?
2.
Whether the action of the management in not considering for promotions S/Shri Rulda Ram, Yog Raj and Mohinder Paul, Jr. MTOs with effect from 1.4.1978, 1778 and 1778 respectively when actually there was no charge of misconduct pending against them is justified ?
If not, to what relief these workmen are entitled ?"
5.
In the statement of claim filed on behalf of the union, it was averred that denial of revised pay scale of Rs. 120-250/- w.e.f.
121968 to Machine Tool Operators was arbitrary and unjustified because there was no difference in the nature of Job of Machine Tool Operators on the one hand and the job of Turners, Blacksmiths and Crane Operators on the other hand.
It was further averred that the job of Machine Tool Operators is superior and complicated in all respects as compared to the trades of Turners, Blacksmiths and Crane Operators.
The union also pleaded that denial of promotion to appellants No. 2 to 4, who were working as Machine Tool Operators for more than 5 years, was totally unjustified because their juniors had been promoted ignoring their candidature.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Board, it was averred that the dispute raised by the union was highly belated and the Central Government had made reference without applying mind to the facts of the case.
On merits, it was averred that the pay scales of Machine Tool Operator, Turners, Blacksmiths and Crane Operators were revised on the pattern obtaining in the Irrigation Department of the State of Punjab, which is a major industry in the northern region.
It was further averred that the duties of Machine Tool Operators are not superior or even equal to Turners, Blacksmiths and Crane Operations nor they are supposed to discharge responsibilities of the same nature which have been entrusted to employees of other categories and in fact, the duties of Machine Tool Operators are less arduous, exacting and skillful as compared to Blacksmiths, Turners and Crane Operators.
On the issue of denial of promotion to appellants No. 2 to 4, it was averred that this was done because they were awarded punishment as a result of disciplinary action.
At the same time, it was averred that if they continued to perform their duties satisfactorily and are not punished for any misconduct as defined in the Certified Standing Orders, then they will be given promotion against the next available vacancies.
7.
In support of their claim, the appellants filed affidavit of Bakshi Ram son of Garib Dass, Rulda Ram son of Gokal Chand (appellant No. 2), Yog Raj son of Rachhu Ram (appellant No. 3) and Mohinder Pal son of Mam Chand (appellant No. 4).
In paragraphs 2 and 4 of his affidavit, Shri Bakshi Ram made the following statement :  "2.
The grades of Machine Tool Operators, Turners, Blackmiths and Crane Operators were the same before 121968, i.e., ended up to last grade of Rs. 110/-, Rs. 125/- but after revision 121968 these were to Rs. 120-250 leaving the Machine Tool Operators to Rs. 110-180.
We are more than sixty Machine Tool Operators in the above reference.
4.
That the work and conduct of Machine Tool Operators are more arduous and skillful as compared to the work and duties of Blacksmiths, Turners and Crane Operators."
In the cross-examination, he stated as under :  "With effect from 121968, our pay scale was revised to Rs. 110-180.
But I did not offer any option.
However, I was granted the new scale.
I did not raise any protest at that time.
I raised the objection for the first time in the year 1974 when I found that the Turners who had earlier been equated with us were being paid more after the revision of pay scales.
As an MTO, I operate upon 6-7 different machines whereas the Turner Operator on one particular job.
There is only particular job which is common to us and the Turner otherwise, we are in different trade during different works.
Actually the operators like me, Turners, Blacksmith and Crane Operators are in different and distinct trades and, therefore, these posts are not inter- transferable."
8.
Shri Ram Lok, Sub Divisional Officer/P.A.
to Superintendent Workshop Division, Nangal Township filed affidavit on behalf of the Board.
In paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, he averred as under :  "2.
That M.T.Os.
prior to 121968 were given the pay scale under Bhakra and Schedule of wages which was Rs. 60-125 and in OSC scale was of Rs. 90-120 w.e.f.
16.8.67.
3.
That the pay scale of M.T.O.
's was revised to Rs. 110-180 with effect from 121968 by the Punjab Government along with other categories of work-charged establishment under G.S.R.
which was adopted by the BBMB for this class of employees as well as this was done with a view to bring uniformity in the matter of pay scales in respect of WC employees of all shades.
4.
That the BBMB in the matter of pay and allowances is following the Punjab Government pattern and accordingly the work charged employees including M.T.Os.
were allowed the pay scale of Rs. 110-180 w.e.f.
1268 after obtaining their options (sample option form enclosed)."
In his cross-examination, Shri Ram Lok made the following statement : "MTOs operate on various types of machine, drilling, rolling, punching, sheering, grinding, pressing, straightening, milling, cold-circular (saw), slaughter, shaper, bending, planners and lathes, are such machines.
I do not know the exact capacity of these machines.
I do not know whether these fall under the category of heavy machines.
The turner attends on the lathes machines and he also attends the duties on turning, boring and threading etc.
I cannot say whether his job is of a lighter nature as compared to that of an MTO.
The Blacksmith is entrusted with the duty of forging and ropesocket, filling besides beat (heat ?)
treatment, and other duties connected with the smithy shop.
Crane operators have to operate the crane, cranes of various size and type.
Some crane operators work in the workshop whereas some other work outside the workshops and those who work inside the workshop work independent of the blacksmith.
I am not certain whether the capacity of the crane varies from 2 to 10 tons.
The grades revised w.e.f.
1268 were released some time in or around the year 1974.
I do not recollect the exact date when the MTOs and other workmen were asked to give their options for the new grades.
I am not aware as to since when the turners were enjoying the old scale.
It is correct that initial revision of MTOs and turners was to the grade of Rs. 110-180.
After some time, the Govt. enhanced the scale of turners from 110-180 to Rs. 120-250 and we implemented it.
I cannot say whether there was no such instructions from the Government.
I understand that up to 1268 the turners and the MTOs were enjoying a common scale.
I am not ware whether the Punjab Government has also got a category of MTOs and such pay scales as given by us to the MTOs.
I do not know whether the BBMB adopts the Punjab Pay scales as they are formulated by them or whether the BBMB devises its own pay scales.
I do not have any letter showing the adoption of the Punjab Pay scale."
(Underlining is ours).
9.
After considering the rival pleadings and evidence, respondent No. 2 held that there was no justification to deny pay scale of Rs. 120-250/- to Machine Tool Operators because the duties of all the posts were similar.
He noted that at the time of revision of pay scales w.e.f.
121968, the pay scale of the post of Turner was revised to Rs. 110-180/- but, later on, it was enhanced to Rs. 120-250/-.
This is borne out from paragraphs 8 to 10 of the award which are reproduced below :  "8.
On a careful scrutiny of the entire available data and hearing the parties, I feel inclined to believe that the petitioners demand for a better pay scale is not without force because even though the Blacksmiths and Crane Operators earlier enjoyed a slightly higher scale yet according to the common case of the parties and as conceded by the Management's sole witness Sh. Ram Lok, there was no distinction whatsoever in the grades of MTOs and the Turners.
On behalf of the Management, it was argued that there was nothing in common between the aforesaid trades.
Rather, the employees were separately assigned to these Trades and for the proposition that their jobs were not inter-transferable, reliance was placed on the petitioners' admission during their cross-examination.
It was submitted that the duties of Blacksmiths and Crane Operators demanded higher professional skill and dedication which itself provided sufficient justification for their up-grading.
9.
Despite its seeming attraction the projected view point failed to carry conviction with me.
Of course, the trades of Blacksmiths, Crane Operators, Turners and MTOs are quite different and distinct, but all the same, we cannot lose sight of the Board's own policy that they usually follow the pattern evolved by the Punjab Government for its employees as per revelations in para Nos. 3 and 4 of the affidavit, Ex.M1 of Shri Ram Lok.
Otherwise also there is no gain saying that at the time of general revision of the pay scales every endeavour was made to reduce their number on clubbing various trades and categories carrying similar or near similar responsibilities and requiring professional skill of almost the same quality.
It was precisely for this reason that all these four trades were fixed up in the common scale of Rs. 110-180.
But then for no apparent justification the Board disturbed the arrangement by granting a higher grade to the Blacksmiths, Crane Operators and Turners.
There could be some logic in according a better scale to the Blacksmiths and the Crane Operators because even prior to the general revision, they were having a slightly higher grade than the petitioners but there was no warrant for down-grading the petitioners to the Turners because they had throughout been treated at par for all intents and purpose.
10.
It is against this backdrop that a deep insight into certain disclosures made by the Management's witness Sh. Ram Lok would be pertinent.
He admitted that the MTOs were required to operate on various types of machines, e.g., drilling, rolling, punching, sheering, grinding, pressing, straightening, milling, cold-circular (saw), slaughter, including rivets, hammer and lathes etc.
He had no idea about the exact capacity of these machines and expressed his inability to admit that they fall under the category of Heavy Machinery.
Elaborating Grade-wise duties, Sh. Ram Lok deposed that the Turners attend on the lathe-machines, Turning, Boarding (Boring ?)
and Threading etc.
But he could not say whether such duties were of a lighter nature as compared to that of an MTO.
In the same sequence, he threw some light on the job of a Blacksmith who worked on Forging and Rope-socket-filling besides Heat Treatment whereas the Crane Operators operated the Cranes of various size and types both outside and inside the workshops.
But no where could Sh. Ram Lok propagate that the duties of Blacksmith, Crane operator or Turners for that matter required any higher professional skill or dedication.
Similarly he could not provide any worthwhile data to draw an inference that there was lesser amount of professional hazard or risk in the MTOs trade and at the risk of repetition it may be pointed out that at least the Turners had throughout been treated at par with the MTOs.
Therefore, in the absence of any plausible explanation, I find no reason to discard the petitioners claim on this count."
(Emphasis supplied).
10.
The argument of the management of the Board that the workmen were estopped from claiming revised pay scales was rejected by respondent No. 2 with the following observations :  "I am not impressed with the logic because there is no evidence on record to show that the petitioners were duly apprised of the implications of the new scales or that they had ever given up their claim of being equated with the Turners, Crane Operators and Blacksmiths.
Accordingly, on sustaining their cause in its pith and substance and by necessary implication disapproving the action of the Management/Respondent in the context of pay revision, I direct the latter to grant the pay scale of Rs. 120-250 to the petitioner MTOs w.e.f.
121968."
11.
Respondent No. 2 then considered the financial implication of granting the benefit of revised pay scales to Machine Tool Operators and directed that the arrears shall be paid to them for the period up to 31.12.1977.
The reasons assigned by respondent No. 2 for doing so are contained in paragraph 12 of the award which is reproduced below :  "However, during the course of hearing before me I was informed by both the parties that there was yet another revision of pay scales from 1178.
Therefore, to make it an effective and practical proposition, I direct the Management to fix up the petitioners in the pay scale of Rs. 120-250 w.e.f.
1268 and they fix them in the new corresponding scale w.e.f.
1178.
But keeping in view the huge financial implications no backwages in the shape of arrears etc. shall be paid to them for the period up to 31.12.1977 i.e. concerning the first revision."
On the second issue, respondent No. 2 took notice of the averments contained in the written statement filed by the management of the Board and directed that appellants No. 2 to 4 be promoted as Machine Tool Operators against the first available opportunity.
12.
Respondent No. 1 challenged the award in C.W.P.
No. 2681 of 1985 mainly on the ground that Machine Tool Operators were not entitled to claim parity in the pay scales with Turners, Blacksmiths and Crane Operators as of right and respondent No. 2 erred in restoring the so-called parity in their pay scales simply because there was identity of pay scales of the posts of Machine Tool Operators and Turners prior to 121968.
13.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition by a rather brief order and without even going into the legality of the direction given by respondent No. 2 for promotion of appellants No. 2 to 4.
This is evident from the following extracts of the order under challenge :  "The only ground that was taken into consideration by the Labour Court for so equating the pay scales was that since the pay scale of two posts was the same at one time, the increase in the pay of one must necessarily attract similar hike in the other.
I have already held in Civil Writ Petition No. 2061 of 1992 (Sushil Kumar Soni v. State of Punjab and others) judgment in which, however, has yet to be pronounced that it is not necessary that two posts which at one time had same pay scale, increase in the one must necessarily attracted a similar hike in the other.
It is for the employer to see as to what pay scale is to be given.
It is possible that at one time two posts were such where the nature of duties or the responsibilities attached thereto were the same but it is always open to the employer to keep on adding or subtracting the duties and the nature of the work from time to time."
14.
We have heard Shri PS Patwalia, senior counsel for the appellants and Shri DS Nehra, senior counsel for respondent No. 1.
At one stage, we thought that the order under challenge should be set aside and the case be remanded for fresh adjudication of the writ petition filed by respondent No. 1 because we felt that the learned Single Judge was not, at all, justified in deciding the writ petition on the basis of order to be passed by him in C.W.P.
No. 2961 of 1992 - Sushil Kumar Soni v. State of Punjab and others (which was yet to be pronounced) by making peripheral observations about the employer's prerogative to prescribe different pay scales for different posts and without going into the issue whether the award passed by respondent No. 2 suffered from any jurisdictional infirmity or error of law and also because there is a complete absence of discussion on the legality of the direction given by respondent No. 2 for promotion of appellants No. 2 to 4, but with the consent of the learned counsel for the parties and keeping in view the fact that the matter has remained pending for last more than 22 years, we have thought it proper to decide the entire case on merits.
15.
Shri DS Nehra, learned senior counsel for the Board very fairly stated that in view of the averments contained in the written statement filed before respondent No. 2, he is not challenging the direction given by respondent No. 2 for promoting of appellants No. 2 to 4 as Machine Tool Operators against future vacancies.
He, however, submitted that the award passed by the said respondent for grant of the pay scale of Rs. 120-250 to Machine Tool Operators is liable to be set aside because it is vitiated by an error of law apparent on the face of the record.
Shri Nehra argued that onus to prove that revised pay scales were discriminatory squarely lay upon the workmen and as they failed to discharge the same, respondent No. 2 did not have the jurisdiction to issue the impugned direction.
In support of this argument, Shri Nehra relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, (1989) 1 SCC 121; State of MP v Pramod Bhartiya, 1993(1) SCT 138 (SC) : (1993) 1 SCC 539 and State of WB and other v. Hari Narayan Bhowal and others, 1994(3) SCT 707 (SC) : (1994) 4 SCC 78.
Shri Nehra then argued that the pay scales of various posts were revised by the management of the Board on the pattern of the pay scales of the employees of Irrigation Department of Punjab and no discrimination can be said to have been practised vis-a-vis Machine Tool Operators because the revised pay scale of their counterparts in Punjab was Rs. 110-180.
16.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned senior counsel for the appellants supported the award passed by respondent No. 2 and argued that the reasons assigned by him for restoring parity in the pay scales of the posts of Machine Tool Operators on the one hand and Turners, Blacksmiths and Cane Operators on the other hand do not suffer from any legal infirmity warranting interference by this Court.
Shri Patwalia further argued that even though there was some difference in the pay scales of the post of Machine Tool Operator, Blacksmith and Crane Operator, the pay scales of the posts of Machine Tool Operators and Turners were identical prior to 121968 and, therefore, there was no justification whatsoever to prescribe different pay scales for those posts after 121968.
He pointed out that even at the time of revision, the existing parity in the pay scales of the two posts was maintained, but later on, the pay scale of the post of Turner was further revised to Rs. 120-250/- without making corresponding change in the pay scale of the post of Machine Tool Operator and no explanation was offered by the management of the Board for introducing disparity in the pay scales of the two posts.
Learned counsel argued that the workmen had discharged the primary burden which lay upon them to prove the allegation of discrimination and it was for the management of the Board to justify its decision to prescribe different pay scales for the posts of Machine Tool Operators and Turners, which it failed to do.
In support of his submission, Shri Patwalia relied on the decision of The Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India Ltd and another v. Union of India and others, 1991(2) SCT 339 (SC) : 1991(2) SLR 131; GK Nagpal v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1998(1) SCT 694; and Pritam Dass v. State of Punjab, 2000(4) SCT 987.
17.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments and carefully perused the record.
18.
Historically, equal pay for equal work has been a slogan of the women's movement.
Equal pay laws, therefore, usually deal with sex-based discrimination in the pay scales of men and women doing the same or equal work in the same organisation.
For example, the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 provides for payment of equal remuneration to men and women workers and is meant to prevent discrimination on the ground of sex, against women in the matter of employment.
The Equal Pay Act, 1970 and the Equal Pay (Amendment) Regulations, 1983 in Great Britain are for a similar purpose.
The same doctrine has also sought to protect disadvantaged groups against similar discrimination.
The doctrine has been interpreted and applied even more widely to prevent discriminatory pay scales within an organisation which is owned by or is an instrumentality of the State, provided that the different pay scales exist in one organisation, are applied for employees doing the work of equal value, and there is no rational explanation for the difference.
"Equal pay for equal work for both men and women" has been accepted as a "constitutional goal" capable of being achieved through constitutional remedies.
Article 39(d) of the Constitution proclaims "equal pay for equal work".
This article and other like provision in the Directive Principles are "conscience of our Constitution".
They are rooted in social justice.
They were intended to bring about a socio-economic transformation in our society.
19.
In matters of employment, the Government of a socialist State must protect the weaker sections.
It must be ensured that there is no exploitation of poor and ignorant.
It is the duty of the State to see that under-privileged or weaker sections get their dues.
Even if they have voluntarily accepted the employment on unequal terms, the State should not deny their basic rights of equal treatment.
It is against this background that the principles of "equal pay for equal work" has to be construed in the first place.
However, the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be applied mechanically.
Rather, it is to be read as a part of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India which also permits reasonable classification founded on differential basis.
20.
Having discussed the theoretical aspect of the doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' and equality in the matter of pay scales, we may now advert to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties.
Shri Nehra's argument that the onus to prove the charge of discrimination lies on the person who alleges the same finds support from the judgments of the Supreme Court in State of UP v. JP Chaurasia (supra), State of MP v Pramod Bhartiya (supra) and State of West Bengal v. Hari Narayan Bhowal (supra).
In the last mentioned case, the Supreme Court negatived the claim of equality of pay and held as under :  "The principle of `equal pay for equal work' can be enforced only after the persons claiming satisfy the court that not only the nature of work is identical but in all other respects they belong to the same class and there is no apparent reasons to meat (treat ?)
equals as unequals.
Unless a very clear case is made out and the court is satisfied that the scale provided to a group of persons on the basis of the material produced before it amounts to discrimination without there being any justification, the court should not take upon itself the responsibility of fixation of scales of pay, especially when the different scales of pay have been fixed by Pay Commission or Pay Revision Committees, having persons as members who can be held to be experts in the field and after examining all the relevant material.
it need not be emphasised that in the process undertaken by the court, an anomaly in different services may be introduced, of which the court may not be conscious, in the absence of all the relevant materials being before it.
Till the claimants satisfy on material produced, that they have not been treated as equals within the parameters of Article 14, courts should be reluctant to issue any writ or direction to treat them equal, particularly when a body of experts has found them not to be equal."
This proposition has been reiterated in different words in the recent decision of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Bala Ram Sahu, (2003) 1 SCC 450.
21.
However, the proposition laid down in the above noted decisions cannot be applied with same rigour to the case in which the existing parity in the pay scales is disturbed at the time of revision.
In such cases, the onus to prove the charge of discrimination will be deemed to have been discharged once the employee shows that there exited parity in the pay scales and the same had been disturbed by the employer without any tangible reasons.
The onus then shifts on the employer to plead and prove that disparity in the pay scales had been introduced on account of change of qualifications, the nature of duties or the degree of responsibilities attached to the particular post.
If the employer fails to prove change in any of the above noted parameters or other factors relevant for determining the pay structure, its action is liable to be nullified on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 read with Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
In this connection, we may refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Alvaro Noronha Ferriera and another v. Union of India and others, 1999(2) SCT 685 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 1356.
The facts of that case were that parity in the pay scale of the Judicial Officers of territories of Goa, Daman and Diu with the officers of Union Territory, Delhi was disturbed w.e.f.
1982.
The High Court repelled the challenge by observing that no material has been placed on record to show that the nature of duties of officers of Delhi and Goa are identical.
While reversing the order of the High Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under :  "The parameters for invoking the said principles would include, inter alia, nature of the work and common employer.
There can be no two views that the nature of work of District and Sessions Judges is the same though in some areas pendency of cases would be higher than others.
Differences in the backlog are not uncommon even in two different stations of the some territory, nay, in two different Courts of the same station.
Such lopsidedness is hardly the ground to conclude that the nature of work done by one Judicial Officer at one place is different from other.
The duty hours would be substantially the same, the powers to be discharged are in no way different, whether they are District Judges in Goa or in Delhi.
It would be a futile exercise to make an endeavour for drawing a distinction between the work pattern at the two different places, for, such differences are discernible everywhere.
But that would not make the nature of work different.
It was not necessary to cast the burden of proof on the appellants to establish "the pendency of litigation or the norms fixed for disposal of cases by the Delhi Court to enable comparison between the nature of duties and the responsibilities carried by the officers of the Delhi Territory and the Goa Territory.
One admitted fact which looms large is that till hike in the pay scale was brought about in 1982 for Delhi Judges the parity maintained as between Union Territory of Goa and Delhi applied to the same cadre of Judicial Officers.
No body doubted till then that the nature and dimension of work discharged by the officers of the same cadre of Judicial Officers at two different territories were different from any perceptible standard.
It is for the contesting respondents to show that there was change in the nature of work which necessitated the Government to keep two different levels of pay to the same officers working at two different places."
(Underlining is ours).
22.
In GK Nagpal v. Punjab State Electricity Board (supra), a Division Bench of this Court restored the parity in the pay scales of the posts of Laboratory Assistant and Line Superintendent etc. and observed as under :  "We are conscious of the fact that a differential treatment in the matter of pay scales on the basis of educational qualifications and the nature of duties is permissible.
However, it is equally clear to us that if two categories of employees are treated as equal initially, they should continue to be so treated unless a differential treatment is justified by some cogent reason.
In a case where the nature of duties is drastically altered, a differential scale of pay may be justified.
Similarly, if a higher qualification is prescribed for a particular post, a higher scale of pay may be granted.
However, if the basic qualifications and the job requirements continue to be identical or as they were initially laid down, they the Court shall be slow to accept the action of the authority in according a differential treatment unless some good reason is disclosed.
In the present case, the only reason pointed out in the written statement is based on the qualifications and the job requirements.
There has been admittedly no change in either of the two parameters.
That being so, no new ground for creating a classification was made out."
23.
In the backdrop of the above discussion, we shall consider whether the award by respondent No. 2 is vitiated by any jurisdictional infirmity or error of law apparent on the face of the record.
A persual of the statement of claim filed by the union, written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 and the evidence produced by the parties shows that while the union had categorically averred that there was parity in the pay scales of the posts of Machine Tool Operators and Turners apart from Blacksmiths and Crane Operators and there was no justification to prescribe different pay scales for those posts w.e.f.
121968, respondent No. 1 tried to justify the prescription of different pay scales by asserting that this was done keeping in view the revised pay scales prescribed for the employees of the Irrigation Department of Punjab.
In his affidavit, Shri Bakhshi Ram (one of the Machine Tool Operators) reiterated that existing parity in the pay scales of the two posts had been violated without any rhyme or reason.
Shri Ram Lok, who appeared on behalf of the management, repeated the averments contained in the written statement.
However, in the cross-examination, he could not point out any distinction between the duties performed by Machine Tool Operators on the one hand and Turners on the other hand.
He also expressed his ignorance about the existence of cadre of Machine Tool Operators under the Government of Punjab.
Not only this, he candidly admitted that initial revision of the pay scale of Machine Tool Operators and Turners was in the grade of Rs. 110-180 but later on, the pay scale of the post of Turner was enhanced to Rs. 120-250/-.
It is, thus, clear that the workmen had discharged the onus which lay upon them to prove the charge of discrimination, but no explanation worth the name was given by the management of the Board to justify its decision to do away with the parity in the pay scale of the posts of Machine Tool Operators on the one hand and Turners on the other hand.
After taking note of this, respondent No. 2 held that denial of the pay scale of Rs. 120-250/- to Machine Tool Operators was arbitrary and discriminatory.
Before this Court, no material has been placed by the Board to justify its decision to disturb the existing parity in the pay scales of the posts of Machine Tool Operators and Turners.
Therefore, we do not find any valid ground to take a different view or hold that the direction given by respondent No. 2 for restoration of parity in the pay scale of the post of Machine Tool Operator vis-a-vis the post of Turner is vitiated by an error of law.
24.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the award passed by respondent No. 2 directing respondent No. 1 to fix pay of Machine Tool Operators in the grade of Rs. 120-250/- w.e.f.
121968 did not suffer from any legal infirmity and the learned Single Judge erred in quashing the same.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition filed by respondent No. 1 is dismissed.
Consequently, award dated 1221985 passed by respondent No. 2 shall stand restored.
Appeal allowed.