Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - The writ petition SWP No. 1534/98 filed by review petitioners was dismissed by the Ld.
Single Judge on 2481998 after observing that the petitioners casual laborers are not covered by SRO 64 of 94 for regularization and that they have no right to seek continuance as such casual labourers, though their continuance on need basis by the employer is permissible.
2.
Against this judgment, writ petitioners filed LPA 24 of 1998.
The Division Bench after taking note of salient features of the case, and material facts and circumstances having bearing on the question and on examination of provisions of the J&K Daily Rated Workers, Work Charged Employees (Regularisation) Rules 1994 (SRO 64 of 1994) on discussion, held :-  i) that the above rules (SRO 64) apply only to Daily Rated Workers and work charged employees and not to Casual labour/workers or seasonal labour/workers and, ii) the above rules do not confer any indefeasible right on a Daily Rated Worker to continue in engagement for 7 years to enable him to get a right to be considered for regularisation.
3.
This finding was in pare-materia with what was held in Rahinder Paul v. Shri Mata Vaishnoo Devi Shrine Board (1997 SLJ 131).
The decisions contrary to the above finding of the Division Bench by the Single Bench(s) in Smt. Sudesh Kapoor v. State (1995 SLJ 51), Abdul Hamid Shah v. State, 1999(1) SCT 842 (J&K) : (1998 SLJ 20), State v. Abdul Raheem Reshi, (1999 SLJ 488), Bashir Ahmad Dhobi v. State, 1999(3) SCT 341 (J&K) : (1999 KLJ 273) and Nasir Ahmad Dar v. State (1999 SLJ 536), were set aside and held not laying good law.
4.
On the aforesaid finding, the Division Bench found no merit in the appeal and therefore, appeal was dismissed.
5.
Against this judgment in the LPA, this Review Petition is filed.
The counsel, MA Qayoom, contends that in the event of finding of Division Bench, that the rules contained in SRO 64 of 94 are not applicable to applicants, as they are casual labourers, their cases are covered by Labour laws in as much as they are workmen having put in more than 240 days of service in one calendar year and thereby they cannot be removed from service.
He cites 1992 Vol. IV SCC 112, 114, 117 and 118 and ii) 2000 Vol.VII SCC 741.
6.
The counsel contends next that the applicants after initial disengagement, are working as Casual Labourer with Sheep and Health Department under the interim orders of the writ court and High Court and therefore, they have a right to continue and cannot be thrown out notwithstanding the final decision in the writ petition.
The counsel further contends that petitioner No. 2 has performed Election duty in 1996 on assurance of the Government that he would be absorbed and regularised.
7.
Mr. MA Rathore, AAG, contests the right to seek review by the petitioners.
He submits that none of the grounds available for review exists in this case.
Petitioners can not seek rehearing of the case on merits.
There is no error apparent on the face of record.
On consideration of petitioners' case and the legal principles that are to apply in their case, not only the writ court but even the LPA Bench has recorded a finding against the petitioners and rejected their case.
8.
It is found that the petitioners have filed the writ petition seeking the relief of quashment of the orders of disengagement of petitioners/applicants as Casual Labourers and a Mandamus, for allowing petitioners to function as such till they complete the period of seven years and on completion of seven years to regularize their services in terms of SRO 64 of 1994.
9.
In fact the whole case of the petitioners is that having been engaged as casual labourers in respective belts, their casual engagement could not have been put to an end by dis-enaging them, as is done by the impugned orders as they have a case of continuance for seven years and at the end of this period for regularization under the provision to SRO 64 of 94 (supra).
There is no allegation or plea taken even in the writ petition that the petitioners are workmen to be governed by the relevant labour laws.
10.
Even no argument thereto has been as such advanced before the writ court or before the LPA Bench Review appears to be wholly an attempt by petitioners to fish out a new case to continue as casual laborers, notwithstanding, the ultimate decision of the court.
The case pleaded and argued before the writ court and the Division Bench having been rejected on merits by the court, petitioners cannot be permitted to reopen the case in the guise of Review proceedings to press the points which were not taken up and argued, for whatever reason, at the time when the matter was heard and finally disposed of.
11.
It is now well settled that an interim relief in this case in the nature of provisional direction to respondents to continue petitioners as Casual Labourers is subject to final decision of the writ petition.
Such an interim direction cannot confer any right or status on a litigant unless he succeeds on merits and the court comes to the final conclusion that he has a right to the relief.
In N Mohanan v. State of Kerala and others, 1997(1) SCT 790 (SC) : (AIR 1997 SC 1896), while negating contention of regularization of provisional appointment based on an interim order of Court, the Apex Court observed :-  "It is then contended that even though the petitioner has no right to be appointed since he was appointed on the basis of the order of the court provisionally, the appointment already made should be allowed to be continued and should be regularized.
The High Court has negatived this contention, and in our view rightly.
The interim order is subject to result of outcome of the final decision.
If the petitioner is not successful in the final decision, the interim order would stand set aside.
So appointment by interim order does not create any right nor the petitioner gets any right to regularization on that basis."
In State of UP v. Raj Karan Singh, (1998) 8 SCC 529, the Supreme Court held :-  "11.
Thus it is apparent that a daily wager or casual worker against a particular post when acquires a temporary status having worked against the said post for specified number of days does not acquire a right to be regularized against the said post.
He can be considered for regularization in accordance with the rules."
12.
The ground of service rendered in elections of 1996 pressed in aid of prayed continuance and sought regularization has not been taken either in the pleadings or before the writ court or the Division Bench.
Therefore, the court had no opportunity to examine the premise of the submission on this count as to whether petitioner had any enforceable right on that score.
It again appears to be an attempt to bolster the case of review petitioners to continue as such Casual labourers notwithstanding that the court has rejected their cases for continuance and regularization on merits.
13.
Viewed from any angle, the Division Bench judgment in question given by the LPA Bench, does not suffer from any error apparent on face of record.
The whole attempt appears to get rid of the Division Bench order and to circumvent the operation of the court judgment.
There can not be re-hearing of the case once the case is finally disposed of on merits resulting in rejection of petitioners' case.
Under the guise of review, in absence of any ground much less good ground to warrant review, the matter cannot be reopened on projection of altogether a new case.
Petitioners are seeking re-hearing of the case which cannot be permitted.
Notwithstanding sought re-hearing and the projection of the fresh case, this review is beyond the scope of the Review proceedings for which no foundation and justification is laid on record.
In the above view of the matter, we dismiss the Review.
Petition dismissed.