Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - By this order we will dispose of CWP Nos. 6482, 6484, 6579 and 6613 of 2003.
2.
Notice to show cause.
Mr. CM Munjal, Additional Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for the respondents accepts notice.
With the consent of the parties, we proceed to finally dispose of this writ petition.
3.
The petitioners who are Assistant Sub Inspectors in the Punjab Police, have approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying that they be confirmed in accordance with the law laid down by this Court in the case of ASI Sarbjit Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, C.W.P.
No. 15685 of 1999, decided on 2952002 (Annexure P12) to the writ petition and further that they be deputed to the Upper School Course which has already commenced with effect from 2542003.
Their claim is also based on the ground that their juniors i.e. respondents No. 11 to 19 have already been deputed to the course and action of the respondents is arbitrary.
4.
Learned counsel appearing for the State very fairly stated that the relief prayed for by the petitioners is squarely covered by fact and law by the judgment rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of ASI Gurmit Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003, decided on 2242003, Annexure P.7 to the writ petition.
He further states that the State will have no objection to comply with the same directions in the present case.
It is also stated that the question of discrimination and juniors being deputed to the course in preference to the petitioners, shall also be looked into by the authorities concerned.
5.
In view of the above, we find hardly any issue survives for determination by this Court.
In Sarbjit Singh's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court had directed that the Police Officers who have successfully completed their probation period, should be confirmed in accordance with the rules and instructions issued.
The maximum period of probation was over in those cases in the year 1996.
We are informed that the Special Leave Petition preferred by the State against the order dated 2952002 (Annexure P12) of the Division Bench of this Court passed in ASI Sarbjit Singh's case (supra), has already been dismissed on 2842003.
However, we may notice that as per the law enunciated by the Apex Court in a recent judgment in the case of Commissioner of Police, Jubli v. RS More, 2003 SCC (L&S) 178 there cannot be deemed or automatic confirmation, if an action is required to be taken by the respondent-authorities as per rules.
Reference in this regard can also be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in High Court of MP v. Satya Narain Jhavar, 2001(3) SCT 1114 (SC) : (2001) 7 SCC 161.
6.
In view of the above, we refer to the directions contained in the judgment of this Court (Annexure P.7), Civil Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003, ASI Gurmit Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, decided on 2242003.
The detailed reasons in the said judgment recorded by us are also on record.
In this case, the concept of deemed confirmation and benefit accruing therefrom in favour of the petitioners was declined.
However, we have directed as under :-  "Keeping in view the urgency of the matter and for reasons to follow, we pass the following directions :- (1) The claim for deemed confirmation of the petitioners is rejected.
(2) The Government shall consider the case of the petitioners for confirmation in accordance, with the rules and the instructions issued, a copy of which has been annexed to the replication as Annexure P-10, as expeditiously, as possible.
(3) The petitioners shall be deputed to the Upper School Course commencing from 2542003 in their own seniority in the category of probation/officiating ASIs.
This order will not affect the rights of the private respondents as they are stated to have already completed their course.
Further, this order will not adversely affect the cases of any other persons."
7.
Learned counsel appearing for the State has already stated that the State would have no objection and would comply with the directions issued in ASI Gurmit Singh's case (supra).
We dispose of this petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners within a period of fifteen days from today in the light of the above observations and depute them to the Upper School Course if permissible even in the present case.
Order accordingly.