SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioners seek a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to grant the enhanced revised scale of pay of Rs. 700-1200 to the petitioner w.e.f.
111978 instead of Rs. 570-1080 as per order No. 51/PRC/Finance dated 1631982 as granted to all other Research Assistants doing the same work having same designation and integrated joint seniority list, on the analogy of "Equal Pay for Equal Work".
2.
All the petitioners are graduate and hold the qualification of B.Sc.
(Bachelor of Science).
They are employed as Research Assistants with the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as "the P.S.E.B.").
They were initially appointed as work-charged Research Assistants on 2591970 and 1531974 in the pay scale of Rs. 200-15-320-20-500.
The scales were later revised to Rs. 570-15-600-20-700/25-850/30-1000-40-1080.
The pay scales were granted w.e.f.
111978.
According to the petitioners, the minimum qualification on the post of Research Assistant was only graduate in Science as per rules/instructions at the time the petitioners were appointed on work- charged basis.
The Board has maintained a joint seniority list of Research Assistants.
On 21111980, the respondent-Board invited applications for 4 posts of Research Assistants in the scale of Rs. 570-1080.
The advertisement mentioned the qualification as B.Sc.
Civil Engineering.
In the note appended to the advertisement, it was mentioned that the incumbents working against the post of Research Assistants on work-charged basis in the P.S.E.B.
may also apply irrespective of their qualifications.
The petitioners applied in the aforesaid post and were selected.
They were appointed on regular basis w.e.f.
13281, 29382 and 27281 respectively.
The petitioners were given benefit of pay fixation for the earlier service rendered by them on work-charged basis.
The earlier service was also counted for computing the continuous length of service.
It is a case of the petitioners that prior to the issuance of advertisement, CRA-106, the minimum qualification for appointment on the post of Research Assistant was graduate in science.
But in the advertisement, the prescribed qualification for selection and appointment on the post of Research Assistant was B.Sc.
Civil Engineering.
It is also the case of the petitioners that all the Research Assistants of the Board perform the same duties having same designation and joint common seniority list.
They are further promoted to the post of Assistant Research Officer.
The promotion is on the basis of "seniority-cum-merit".
The pay-scale of the higher post is Rs. 825-1600.
All the three A.R.Os who have been promoted till date from the post of Research Assistants only possess the qualification of B.Sc.
The respondent-Board further enhanced the scale of pay of Research Assistant vide office order No. 51/PRC/Finance dated 1631982 from Rs. 570-1080 to that of Rs. 700-1200 w.e.f.
111972.
However, in Column No. 6, it is provided as under :-  S.No.
Designation of Post Scales of pay immediately before 111978 Revised Scale pay already notified w.e.f.
111978 Enhanced scale of pay now sanctioned w.e.f.
Remarks 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 2.
Research Assistant 200-500 570-1080 700-1200 For those possessing the prescribed qualification of BSc.
Civil Engineering For other, the scale would continue to remain Rs. 570-1080.
3.
It is the case of the petitioners that the grant of higher pay scale to the Research Assistants having the qualification of Degree in Civil Engineering is discriminatory and violative of principle of "Equal Pay for Equal Work".
4.
In the written statement, the respondent-Board has controverted the plea put forward by the petitioners.
It is stated that the minimum qualification for appointment on the post of Research Assistants in the regulations of the Board is B.Sc.
Civil Engineering.
In the advertisement.
CR-106 relaxation was given to the incumbent working in P.S.E.B.
on work-charged basis.
The scale in the advertisement against which the petitioners applied was Rs. 570- 1080.
It is further stated that the benefit of work-charged service was inadvertently given to the petitioners due to wrong interpretation of the rules.
The concession was specifically withdrawn so far as petitioners are concerned.
However, petitioner No. 3 has challenged the same in a civil suit which is still pending.
The relaxation in qualification was granted to the petitioners as a special concession because of their experience in the job.
It is stated that even persons recruited to a common cadre can be separately classified for the purpose of pay on the basis of their educational qualification.
It is admitted that common seniority list is maintained for both categories of Research Assistants.
5.
Mr. Sehgal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has vehemently argued that the respondent has not given any cogent reason for granting a lower scale to the petitioners and a higher scale to the other Research Assistants.
The duties performed by the petitioners are identical to that of other Research Assistants.
6.
Mr. Bakshi, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Board has submitted that special concession had been given to the petitioners in view of the work-charge service rendered by them.
The rule of qualification was, therefore, relaxed as a one-time measure.
The minimum qualifications prescribed under the rules for the posts of Research Assistants are B.Sc.
Civil Engineering.
He further submits that the Supreme Court in a number of cases has now recognised that different pay scales can be prescribed within the same cadre on the basis of educational qualifications.
In support of the aforesaid submission, learned counsel has relied on a number of decisions of the Supreme Court.
7.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the paper-book.
8.
I find much force in the submissions of Mr. Bakshi.
The petitioners do not possess the prescribed qualifications under the regulations.
They were employed on the post of Research Assistants on work-charged basis.
They have been selected regularly by relaxation of the minimum qualifications.
The respondent has taken a conscious decision that Research Assistants possessing the qualification of B.Sc.
in Civil Engineering would render better public service.
Their quality of work would be higher.
Therefore, they deserve a higher scale of pay.
The differentiation in the pay scale on the basis of educational qualifications or other rational criteria having a nexus with the object sought to be achieved has been repeatedly held to be valid and not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Only equals can claim to be treated equally.
There can be no equality amongst unequals.
Research Assistants are performing a highly specialised job.
It is the opinion of the Board that the Research Assistants possessing the degree in Engineering would be entitled to a higher pay scale.
Unless the aforesaid differentiation is proved to be arbitrary, the petitioners would not be entitled to the same scale of pay.
The judgments cited by Mr. Bakshi fully support the submissions made by him.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondent-Board relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Mysore and another v. Narsing Rao, (1968) I S.C.R. 407.
In that case the Supreme Court was considering the case of the respondent who was employed as a Tracer in the Engineering Department in the erstwhile Hyderabad State where the Cadre of Tracers consisted of both matriculates as well as non-matriculates and no distinction was made between them.
As a result of the re-organisation of States in 1956, he was allotted Mysore State where the cadre of Tracers was reorganised into two, one consisting of matriculate Tracers in a higher scale of pay and the other of non-matriculates in a lower scale.
The respondent was given the option either to remain in his old Hyderabad scale of pay or to accept the new scale applicable to non-matriculates.
He refused to exercise the option and claimed that the cadre of Tracers should not have been divided into two grades and that no distinction should have been made between matriculates and non- matriculates.
His claim was rejected by the authorities, which decision he challenged in the High Court by filing a writ in the nature of Mandamus to fix his pay in the scale prescribed for matriculate Tracers.
The High Court allowed the petition holding that there was no valid reason for making a distinction as both matriculate and non-matriculate Tracers were doing the same kind of work and the distinction made was in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The State of Mysore was in appeal before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court after considering the submissions held as follows :-  "The first question to be considered in this appeal is whether the creation of two scales of tracers in the new Mysore State who were doing the same kind of work amounted to a discrimination which violated the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
The relevant law on the subject is well-settled.
Under Article 16 of the Constitution, there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State or to promotion from one office to a higher office thereunder.
Article 16 of the Constitution is only an incident of the application of the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14 thereof.
It gives effect to the doctrine of equality in the matter of appointment and promotion.
It follows that there can be a reasonable classification of the employees for the purpose of appointment or promotion.
......The provisions of Art. 14 and Art. 16 do not exclude the laying down of selective tests, nor do they preclude the Government from laying down qualifications for the post in question.
Such qualifications need not be only technical but they can also be general qualifications relating to the suitability of the candidate for public service as such.
It is, therefore, not right to say that in the appointment to the post of tracers the Government ought to have taken into account only the technical proficiency of the candidates in the particular craft.
It is open to the Government to consider also the general educational attainments of the candidates and to give preference to candidates who have a better educational qualification besides technical proficiency of a tracer......" In our opinion, therefore, higher educational qualifications such as success in the SSLC examination are relevant considerations for fixing a higher pay scale for tracers who have passed the SSLC examination and the classification of two grades of tracers in the new Mysore State, one for matriculate tracers with a higher pay scale and the other for non-matriculate tracers with a lower pay scale is not violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution."
10.
I am of the considered opinion that the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The criteria laid down by the respondent is not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The Supreme Court has reiterated the aforesaid rule in the cases of The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 1, Randhir Singh v. Union of India and others, AIR 1982 Supreme Court 879.
In the case of Randhir Singh (supra) it has been held as under :-  "7.
........It is well known that there can be and there are different grades in a service, with varying qualifications for entry into a particular grade, the higher grade often being a promotional avenue for officers of the lower grade.
The higher qualifications for the higher grade, which may be either academic qualifications or experience based on length of service, reasonably sustain the classification of the officers into two grades with different scales of pay.
The principles of equal pay for equal work would be an abstract doctrine not attracting Art. 14 if sought to be applied to them."
11.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, I have no hesitation in holding that the petitioners have failed to establish a case of discrimination or violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in the prescription of different scales of pay as contained in order No. 51/PRC/Finance dated 1631982.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.