GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against order dated 2542000 and 18122000 vide which Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench (for short, `the Tribunal') allowed the Original Application filed by respondent No. 2 - Dr. Jagdish Chander for quashing the decision of the Union Public Service Commission (for short, `the Commission') not to consider him for selection to the post of Professor of Microbiology and dismissed the review application filed by respondent No. 5 - Dr. Rakesh Sehgal.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that in pursuance of advertisement No. 19 of 1998 issued by the Commission, respondent No. 2 - Dr. Jagdish Chander; respondent No. 4 - Dr. RM Joshi, respondent No. 5 - Dr. Rakesh Sehgal and one Dr. Surinder Kumar applied for recruitment to the post of Professor of Microbiology in the Government Medical College, Chandigarh.
The candidature of respondent No. 2 was rejected by the Commission on the ground that he did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility.
He challenged the decision of the Commission before the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal.
Likewise, Dr. Surinder Kumar whose candidature was also rejected, filed an application before the Principal Bench of the Tribunal at New Delhi.
The application filed by Dr. Surinder Kumar was dismissed by the Principal Bench by a brief order dated 12122000 (Annexure P2) with the observation that he had been interviewed by the Commission in pursuance of the interim direction and also because on the date of hearing, no one had appeared on his behalf.
3.
In his application, respondent No. 2 averred that the decision of the Commission not to interview him on the ground of lack of 12 years teaching experience was liable to be nullified because the qualifications prescribed by the Medical Council of India (for short, `MCI') required 12 years experience in the profession and not 12 years teaching experience and he possessed the required experience.
In support of his plea, respondent No. 4 relied on the contents of the advertisement and certificates issued by Pt. BD Sharma Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak and Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh and Additional Director (Administration), Government Medical College, Chandigarh.
4.
Respondent Nos. 7 and 8 controverted the claim of eligibility made by respondent No. 2.
They pleaded that the candidature of respondent No. 2 had been rightly rejected because he did not possess 12 years teaching experience.
5.
The Tribunal allowed the application of respondent No. 2 vide its order dated 2542000.
It held that the decision of the Commission not to consider him for appointment as Professor of Microbiology was arbitrary and violative of his fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In arriving at this conclusion, the Tribunal relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. RK Goyal v. State of UP & ors, 1997(1) SCT 448 (SC) : 1997(1) SLJ 225 (SC), letter Annexure P9 written by Chandigarh Administration treating respondent No. 2 eligible for the post of Professor of Microbiology and the decision taken by the Executive Committee of MCI.
The Tribunal further held that the decision of the Commission not to interview respondent No. 2 was discriminatory because in the case of Dr. BS Chauhan, experience gained during post graduation was counted as professional experience, but similar experience gained by respondent No. 2 was overlooked while considering the issue of his eligibility.
6.
Respondent No. 5 applied for review of order dated 2542000, but his prayer was rejected by the Tribunal vide order dated 18122000 passed in RA No. 23 of 2000.
7.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned orders mainly on the ground that the view taken by the Tribunal on the issue of eligibility of respondent No. 2 for recruitment as Professor of Microbiology is based on the erroneous interpretation of the qualifications prescribed by the MCI, which were incorporated in the advertisement issued by the Commission.
It was averred that the period during which respondent No. 2 had done post graduation cannot be counted as a part of the experience in the profession for the purpose of determining his eligibility for recruitment as Professor and the Tribunal committed a serious illegality by treating him eligible for that post.
It has further averred that the impugned orders may be quashed because they are in direct conflict with the order passed by the Principal Bench in Dr. Surinder Kumar's case.
8.
Shri Amarjit Singh reiterated the grounds taken in the writ petition and argued that the impugned orders may be quashed because the Tribunal committed a serious error by declaring respondent No. 2 eligible to be considered for recruitment as Professor of Microbiology despite the fact that he did not have the requisite experience.
He further argued that the case of Dr. BS Chauhan stood on entirely different footings, in-as-much as, he had gained experience during his two years residency leading to the award of Degree of MD, whereas respondent No. 2 did not acquire such experience and the Tribunal committed a serious error by equating the case of respondent No. 2 with that of Dr. Chauhan.
9.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the arguments of Shri Amarjit Singh and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches and also on the ground that the impugned orders do not suffer from any jurisdictional infirmity or legal error.
10.
In State of Madhya Pradesh and another v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered the issue of delay in filing writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and held as under :-  "The provisions of the Limitation Act do not as such apply to the granting of relief under Art. 226.
However, the maximum period fixed by the Legislature as the time within which the relief by a suit in a civil court must be brought may ordinarily be taken to be a reasonable standard by which delay in seeking remedy under Art. 226 can be measured.
The Court may consider the delay unreasonable even if it is less than the period of limitation prescribed for a civil action for the remedy but where the delay is more than this period, it will almost always be proper for the Court to hold that it is unreasonable."
If the ratio of the above noted judgment is applied to the cases involving challenge to the orders passed by the Tribunal established under the 1985 Act.
We have no hesitation to hold that a petition filed after a gap of more than one year of the passing of order under challenge is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
The 1985 Act was enacted by the Parliament for establishment of special adjudicatory forum to deal with the disputes and complaints in relation to service matters and keeping in view the long delays in the decision of such cases by ordinary Courts where the aggrieved person could file civil suit within three years, the Legislature prescribed the limitation of one year [Section 21(1)(a)] and extended period of limitation of one year and six months [Section 21(1)(b)] for the particular category of cases.
At the same time, jurisdiction of all Courts except the Supreme Court to deal with the service disputes/complaints was ousted (Section 28).
The jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution to deal with the service disputes/complaints of the employees has been partially restored by the judgment of seven-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in L Chandra Kumar v. Union of India & others, 1995(2) SCT 674 (SC) : JT 1997(3) SC 589, in-as-much as, the High Court can now entertain a petition against an order made by the Tribunal.
However, keeping in view the fact that an Original Application cannot ordinarily be entertained after expiry of the limitation prescribed under Section 21 of the 1985 Act, it must be held that a writ petition challenging the order of the Tribunal is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches unless it is filed within a maximum period of extended limitation prescribed under Section 21(1)(b) or delay in filing the petition is satisfactorily explained.
In this context, reference may also be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53 in which their Lordships held that the writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution in relation to service matters should be filed within a period of six months or at the best within a period of one year.
11.
The facts of the case in hand show that the Original Application filed by respondent No. 2 was allowed by the Tribunal vide order dated 2542000 and the writ petition which is shown to have been typed on 1212003 was filed on 2012003, i.e., after a gap of two years and 9 months.
The petitioner has not offered any explanation whatsoever for this long delay in filing the writ petition.
Therefore, keeping in view the scheme of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short, `the 1985 Act') and the fact that the Legislature has deliberately prescribed a far shorter period of limitation for filing an Original Application before the Tribunal as compared to a civil suit, we are convinced that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
12.
Even on merits, we are satisfied that the reasons assigned by the Tribunal for granting relief to respondent No. 2 do not suffer from any error of law warranting interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It is an undisputed position that the Commission had treated Dr. BS Chauhan eligible for appointment as Professor of Psychiatry by treating the period of his post graduation as teaching/professional experience.
An attempt was made on behalf of some of the officials respondents to distinguish the case of respondent No. 2 vis-a-vis that of Dr. BS Chauhan on the presumption that in the application submitted for recruitment, Dr. Chauhan had described himself as Residence Teaching Fellow, whereas the petitioner had shown himself as MD Student.
The Tribunal considered this aspect of the matter in detail and rejected the plea of the official respondents by recording the following observations :-  "We find that certain confusion prevails in the mind of the respondents due to the Scheme known as Residency Scheme introduced in the year 1992, benefit of which was given to one Shri BS Chauhan while counting his period spent while doing his Post-graduation between January, 85 to December, 87 which was also an experience gained by the applicant during his postgraduation.
They have tried to make a distinction between the case of the applicant and Shri BS Chavan on the ground that applicant described himself as MD student, whereas, the said Shri Chavan in his application has described himself as Resident Teaching Fellow during his Post-graduation.
Annexure A/16 is a certificate issued in his favour.
Annexure A/17 is a letter issued by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India, dated 561992 which clarifies regarding introduction of the Residency Scheme.
It has been mentioned in it that on the recommendations of Kartar Singh Committee, Govt. of India has introduced a system of six years Residency Scheme comprising of Junior Residents Doctors and Senior Resident Doctors in place of then existing system of House Surgeon, Postgraduate Students and Registrars in all Central institutions/hospitals etc. etc. (emphasis supplied).
To us the only interpretation to be given after reading this Scheme is that persons who were Postgraduate students have been re-designated under this Scheme as Junior Resident Doctors or Senior Resident Doctors after introduction of this Scheme.
Description of Dr. Chavan as a Resident Teaching Fellow while doing Postgraduation has been understood to count that period while the same experience gained by the applicant by misinterpreting the term MD student or Resident Teaching Fellow.
No attempt has been made by Respondent No. 4 to actually consider the nature of duties and the import of MCI circular dated 4974 (Annexure A/15).
We uphold the objection taken by the applicant that Respondent No. 4 has discriminated him while counting the experience required by ignoring his teaching experience gained during the Postgraduation, done by him while the same benefit was given under the same advertisement for the post of Professor (Psychiatry).
Stress has been laid by Respondent No. 4 on Annexure A/18, copy of which has been produced by them as Annexure R/III, which is minimum qualifications prescribed for Teachers in Medical Institutions Regulations, 1998 issued by MCI.
Even reading of this shows that Tutor/Resident for students of MBBS have been included in the categories of persons who fall under Regulation 3 under the title of minimum qualification for appointment of teachers.
Under the Residency Scheme, a Resident is a person who is doing Postgraduation and earlier was described only as a MD student.
Applicant would, thus, be covered even under Annexure A/18 (Ann.
R/III) and would fulfil the requisite experience of standing at the profession as required under Annexure A/3."
13.
We entirely agree with the Tribunal and hold that respondent No. 2 was eligible to be considered for selection for appointment on the post of Professor of Microbiology and the Commission had illegally rejected his candidature.
14.
As regards order dated 18122000 passed in RANo.
23 of 2000 filed by respondent No. 5, it is sufficient to observe that the petitioners do not have the locus to challenge that order because they had not applied for review of order dated 2342000.
15.
Before concluding, we may mention that C.W.P.
No. 1302-CAT of 2003 filed by Union Territory, Chandigarh, and Director Principal, Government Medical College, Chandigarh was dismissed by this Court on 27.1.2003.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.