Swatanter Kumar, J - Ex. Gunner Raj Singh has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for quashing the order, dated 10th November, 1998, passed by the respondents discharging the petitioner from Army service under Army Rules 13(3)(iii)(v) being an undesirable soldier.
2.
The facts giving rise to the present petition are that the petitioner was enrolled in Army on 23rd March, 1985 as a Gunner.
The petitioner claims to have served to the satisfaction of all concerned till the year 1998.
On 14th October, 1998, he fell ill and was admitted to Government Medical College and Rajindra Hospital, Patiala.
The respondents wrote a letter dated 3rd October, 1998 to the wife of the petitioner that he was missing from the location of the Unit since 24th September, 1998 and he should report for duty.
He recovered from the illness and reported in his Unit for resuming his duty on 28th October, 1998.
Vide letter/order dated 10th November, the petitioner was discharged from army service being undesirable soldier, copy of the order has been placed on record as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The petitioner served a legal notice through his counsel upon the respondents in April, 2001.
As the respondents did not take the petitioner on duty, the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents have filed a detailed reply.
They have stated that the petitioner has no locus standi to file the writ petition.
No right of the petitioner has been infringed.
It is stated that the order of discharge was passed against the petitioner after giving him a show cause notice dated 7th September, 1998, to which the petitioner submitted a reply practically admitted the case against him on 22nd September, 1998.
Copies of the show cause notice and reply to the show cause notice have been placed on record as Annexures R-I and R-II, respectively, with the written statement.
Thereafter, the petitioner was discharged from army in accordance with the relevant rules.
4.
It is contended that various punishments have been awarded to the petitioner during the period of his service and he had failed to improve despite grant of opportunity.
The provisions of Army Rule 13(3)(iii)(v) are squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case and services of the petitioner were no longer required.
The learned counsel for the petitioner while relying upon a judgment of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Chaukas Ram v. Sub-Area Commander, Allahabad and another, 1991 Labour Industrial Cases 1056 and a Single Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Nafe Singh v. Union of India, 1997(1) Services Cases Today 416, contended that the action of the respondents in discharging the petitioner from army service, is violative of the principles of natural justice, the procedure provided therein has not been followed and furthermore, the petitioner has been discharged after he had put in long years of service and, as such, it was not fair and proper to discharge him from service.
It is also contended that the order has to be a speaking order.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Cpl.
Kumar v. Union of India and others (C.W.P.
No. 3106 of 2000) decided on 29th August, 2000 and in the case of Union of India and others v. Corporal AK Bakshi and another, 1996(2) SCT 287 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1368 to contend that the discharge is simplicitor on the ground of unsuitability and is not by way of punishment.
He also placed emphasis on another Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Shashi Singla v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(2) R.C.R.
(Civil) 259 : 1998(2) Punjab Law Reporter 81 to argue that the petitioner has suppressed the material facts and, as such, is not entitled to the discretionary relief under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
6.
On these aspects, there can hardly be any dispute in regard to the principles of law stated in these judgments.
The Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Chaukas Ram stated that discharge is a drastic action and at the fag end of service of army personnel such action if avoidable should be avoided, if not necessary in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Where such an action may be necessary, the order could be passed after following the prescribed procedure.
7.
However, the petitioner has certainly withheld important facts from the Court which have a direct bearing on determination of the matter in the controversy.
The petitioner never placed Annexure R-I, the show cause notice and reply submitted by him to the show cause notice on record while filing the writ petition.
In fact, he has referred to a letter of 3rd October, 1998, written to his wife and has attempted to create a story which is contrary to the record maintained by the respondents in the normal course of their business.
The show cause notice was served upon the petitioner on 17th September, 1998.
It will be appropriate to refer to the show cause notice itself which was issued by the competent authority on 17th September, 1998 :  "SHOW CAUSE NOTICE 1.
It has been brought to my notice that you are a regular offender and are indisciplined in nature.
You have been awarded the following punishments in your service in the Army from 23 March, 85 to date : Sr. No.  AA Section Punishment awarded Date of award.
(a) AA Secs.
39(b) & 39(a 14 days RI 08 April, 89.
(b) AA Secs.
48 & 39(a) 28 days RI and 14 days detention 27 Jan., 92.
(c) CC Sec. 48 07 days pay fine 20 Jul, 92.
(d) AA Sec. 48 07 days pay fine 17 May, 95.
(e) AA Sec. 39(a) 07 days RI 02 Jan., 97.
(f) AA Secs.
48 & 39 (a) 28 days RI and 14 days detention 07 Nov, 97.
(g) AA Sec. 39(b) 14 days RI 09 Sep., 97.
2.
Your retention with a persistently bad record (i.e., Five Red ink entries and two black ink entries) is not conducive to the efficiency of the service and only results in waste of Government money.
You are required to be discharged from the service under item III(v) of table annexed to Army Rule 13(3) as service no longer required being undesirable/inefficient vide Army HQ letter No. A/13210/159/AG/PS(2) dated 28 Dec, 88.
3.
In view of the above, you are required to show cause as to why you should not be discharged from service.
4.
Your reply should reach me through your CO. by 24 Sep, 98 failing which it will be presumed that you have no reasons to submit.
Sd/- (AK Lamba) Brig Cdr."
8.
The petitioner submitted the following reply to the said show cause notice on 22nd September, 1998 :  Reply to show cause notice.
Respected Sir,  1.
Please refer to your office letter No. 403503/A dated 17 Sep, 98.
2.
I, No. 1610276OH Gnr/GD Raj Singh of 1752/175 Fd Regt is hereby requesting that I may please be given a chance to improve myself.
I assure you Sir, that I will never do any kind of indiscipline in near future.
I wish to get some pensionary benefits from the service.
Your held will go a long way to comfort my families.
3.
Thanking you in anticipation Sir,  Yours faithfully, Sd/- No. 1510276OH Gnr/GD Raj Singh".
9.
The bare reading of the show cause notice and the reply submitted thereto show that petitioner had not even challenged the correctness of seven punishments awarded to him right from the year 1989 to 1997.
This shows that the authorities concerned provided every opportunity to the petitioner to improve his conduct and performance but the petitioner persisted that activities not desirable and expected from a disciplined member of the armed forces.
After taking into consideration the reply, which was apparently an admission of the averments made in the show cause notice, the order was passed by the respondents discharging the petitioner from army.
The petitioner has not placed on record even a single document to show that he was sick during the period alleged in the year 1998 and he had made no attempt to inform the authorities concerned of his sickness.
It is a matter of common knowledge that a person belonging to the armed forces can report to any army hospital in any part of the country.
No justification has been placed on record why the petitioner did not report to such hospitals.
The entire conduct of the petitioner clearly demonstrates that he has not approached the Court with clear hands.
To claim equitable jurisdiction, a person must do equity to approach the court with clean hands.
These essentials are certainly missing in the pleaded case of the petitioner.
The petitioner is guilty of withholding material and correct facts from the Court.
The petitioner had ample opportunity to explain his conduct.
He submitted his reply to the show cause notice and, in fact, admitted the averments of the show cause notice.
Thus, there was hardly any occasion for passing the detailed order of discharge.
The judgment of Chaukas Ram's case (supra) relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner, thus, is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
The order has been passed in consonance with Rule 13(3)(iii)(v) of the Army Rules which requires the authority to pass an order after serving the show cause notice upon the petitioner.
Thus, there is a substantial compliance to these provisions.
The order of discharge was in consonance with the rules in the facts and circumstances of the case.
It was not mandatory for the authorities to resort to departmental inquiry or conduct a court of inquiry against the petitioner.
The punishments awarded to the petitioner earlier had been accepted by the petitioner.
They have attained finality.
These punishments related to different kind of charges and there were five Red Ink entries and two Black Ink entries and which obviously were not conducive to the efficiency of service.
The order passed by the authorities neither suffers from the vice of arbitrariness nor is violative of the prescribed procedure.
For the reasons afore-stated, we find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed.
However, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.