GS Singhvi, J - Chopping of the dead word/weeding out dishonest and retention in service of only those who are efficient and whose integrity is beyond doubt is the primary object of the rule which empowers the State to retire an employee before attaining the age of superannuation.
This object can be achieved by the government/public employer by scrutinising the records of the employees after a particular age or on completion of the particular years of service with a view to determine whether retention of the particular officer is in the interest of service and/or public interest.
The Courts have also recognised the right of the government to weed out those who are inefficient and/or whose integrity is doubtful.
Judicial review of an exercise undertaken by the government/public employer to prematurely retire an employee is permissible on very limited grounds, such as order being mala fide or having been passed by the authority not competent to do so.
In Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada, 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : 1992(2) SCC 299, their lordships of the Supreme Court reviewed a large number of judicial precedents on the subject including Shyamlal v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another, AIR 1954 SC 369, Union of India v. Col. JN Sinha, (1970) 2 SCC 299 and Union of India v. ME Reddy, AIR 1978 SC 568 and culled out the following propositions :  "(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the Government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a Government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the Government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice has no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean the judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide, or (b) that it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisition opinion on the given material in short; if it is found to be perverse order.
(iv) The Government (or the Review Committee as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their stating, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it, uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference."
The issue was again considered by a two-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M Patel, 2001(2) S.C.T.
339 : (2001)3 SCC 314 and the following principles were laid down :  "(i) whenever the services of a public servant are no longer useful to the general administration, he can be compulsorily retired for the sake of public interest.
(ii) Ordinarily, the order of compulsory retirement is not to be treated as a punishment coming under Article 311 of the Constitution.
(iii) For better administration, it is necessary to chop off dead wood, but the order of compulsory retirement can be passed after having due regard to the entire service record of the officer.
(iv) Any adverse entries made in the confidential record shall be taken note of and given due weight in passing such order.
(v) Even uncommunicated entries in the confidential record can also be taken into consideration.
(vi) The order of compulsory retirement shall not be passed as a short cut to avoid departmental enquiry when such course is more desirable.
(vii) If the officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the confidential record, that is a fact in favour of the officer.
(viii) Compulsory retirement shall not be imposed as a punitive."
2.
In State of UP v. Vijay Kumar Jain, 2002(2) SCT 408 (SC) : 2002(3) SCC 641, the Supreme Court considered the ambit and scope of the employer's right to retire an employee and observed as under :-  "If the conduct of a government employee becomes unbecoming to the public interest or obstructs the efficiency in public services, the Government has under FR 56(c) read with Expln.
(2) an absolute right to compulsorily retire such an employee in public interest.
The Government's right to compulsorily retire an employee is a method to ensure efficiency in public service and while doing so the Government is entitled under Fundamental Rule 56 to take into account the entire service record, character roll or confidential report with emphasis on the later entries in the character roll of an employee.
In fact, entire service record, character roll or confidential report furnishes the materials to find out whether a government servant has outlived his utility in service.
It is on consideration of totality of the materials with emphasis on the later entries in the character roll that the Government is expected to form its opinion whether an employee is to be compulsorily retired or not."
3.
In Bishwanath Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar, 2001(1) SCT 328 (SC) : 2001(2) SCC 305, a three-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court highlighted the distinction between compulsory retirement brought about as a measure of punishment and one brought about in public interest in the following words :  "Compulsory retirement in service jurisprudence has two meanings.
Under the various disciplinary rules, compulsory retirement is one of the penalties inflicted on a delinquent government servant consequent upon a finding of guilt recorded in disciplinary proceedings.
Such penalty involves stigma and cannot be inflicted except by following procedure prescribed by the relevant rules or consistently with the principles of natural justice if the field for inflicting such penalty be not occupied by any rules.
Such compulsory retirement in the case of a government servant must also withstand the scrutiny of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Then there are service rules, such as Fundamental Rule 56(j) of the Fundamental Rules, which confer on the Government or the appropriate authority, an absolute (but not arbitrary) right to retire a government servant on his attaining a particular age or on his completing a certain number of years of service on formation of an opinion that in public interest it was necessary to compulsorily retire him.
In that case, it is neither a punishment nor a penalty with loss of retiral benefits.
Compulsory retirement in public interest under service rules is like premature retirement.
It does not cast any stigma.
The government servant shall be entitled to the pension actually earned and other retiral benefits.
So long as the opinion forming basis of the order for compulsory retirement in public interest is formed bona fide, the opinion cannot be ordinarily interfered with by a judicial forum.
Such an order may be subjected to judicial review on very limited grounds such as the order being mala fide, based on no material or on collateral grounds or having been passed by an authority not competent to do so.
The object of such compulsory retirement is to weed out the worthless who have lost their utility for the administration."
4.
I have prefaced the disposal of this petition by making reference to the judgments of the Supreme Court because the main thrust of the petitioner's plea for invalidation of Annexure P4 dated 13121993 vide which he was retired by the State Government under Rule 532 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II read with Rule 326(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, as applicable to the State of Haryana, is that his service life has been curtailed by the State Government in an arbitrary manner and also on the ground that the exercise undertaken by the competent authority for evaluation of his record is vitiated due to mala fides.
5.
Now a few facts :  The petitioner joined service as Civil Assistant Surgeon on 2261961 in the erstwhile State of Punjab.
At the time of re-organisation, his services were allocated to the newly created State of Haryana.
He was promoted as District Malaria Officer on 2011978.
He was allowed to cross Efficiency Bar w.e.f.
141983.
He would have superannuated w.e.f.
26.2.1996 on attaining the age of 58 years but the State Government had something else in mind and on a review of his record, he was retired vide order Annexure P4, the relevant extracts of which are reproduced below : "Whereas the Governor of Haryana is of the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire Dr. Dharamvir Sharma, HCMS-I from service after attaining the age of 55 years.
2.
Now, therefore, in pursuance of the provisions contained in the note below Rule 532 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. II Rule 326(d) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, Part-I, as applicable to the employees of the State of Haryana, the Governor of Haryana hereby gives him a notice of three months from the date of issue of this communication to him on the expiry of which he shall stand relieved from service under the State Government."
6.
While the petitioner has averred that his service record has been clean throughout and there was no tangible material which could justify formation of an opinion that he was no longer fit to be retained in service, the respondents have come forward with the plea that he was retired prematurely after the competent authority had, on an objective evaluation of his entire record, formed an opinion that his retention in service was not in public interest.
According to the respondents, the petitioner had earned adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Reports pertaining to the years 1985-86, 1987-88, 1988-89, 1991-92 and 1992-93 which were duly communicated to him and he was also administered a recorded warning vide order dated 2511991 passed by the Secretary to Government, Health Department at the conclusion of the proceedings held under Rule 8 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
The respondents have relied on the instructions circulated vide letter Annexure R.7 dated 1681983 which envisage retention is service of only those who have 70% or more Good confidential reports.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
At the out-set, I consider it appropriate to mention that the judgment of the Division Bench in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) RSJ 193, which was been relied upon by the petitioner in support of his plea that the instructions contained in Annexure R.7 could not have been invoked by the State Government for his premature retirement, was over-ruled by the Full Bench in Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) S.C.T.
423 : 1995(2) S.C.T.
433 : 1995(2) RSJ 55 and, therefore, the petitioner cannot derive any strength from that judgment.
The Full Bench analysed the provisions of the relevant rules and held as under :  "The phraseology used in Rule 326(d) is entirely different though the element of public interest is prominent therein also.
An absolute right has been given to the Government if it is of the opinion, in the public interest to retire an officer who completes the age of 55 years in class I and II service or after completing service of 35 years of service to compulsory retire the Government servant.
This opinion is subjective but formed on data, i.e. on appraisal of the entire service record especially service record of the later years.
The use of the word "absolute right" is significant that no Government servant can claim that he must be retained in service beyond the prescribed time as mentioned therein upto the age of 58 years only when the action of the State Government is considered arbitrary or mala fide that the same can be questioned in the Court of law.
Since the State has absolute right to retire any Government employee, it is taken that the State Government can issue instructions on this subject which would be in the nature of guidelines for the competent Authority to be kept in view while passing orders under this Rule.
The instructions of the Government issued in 1983 that retention beyond 55 years be granted to officers having 70% or above good record in the last ten years do not infringe rule 326(a) or (d).
The approach of the Division Bench in KK Vaid's case that the instructions of 1983 aforesaid were against the letter and spirit of Rule 326(a) as mentioned in para 9 of the judgment, cannot be accepted as laying down good law.
The concept of weeding out dead wood as embedded in Rule 326(a) or (d), is inherent but that is not the only ground available therein to pass order.
The same is to be read along with the other grounds as mentioned in JN Sinha's case and Baikunth Nath's case i.e. the object of these rules is also to maintain high standard of efficiency and initiative in the State Services.
There should be spirit of dedication and dynamism in the working of the State Services, Officers who are lax, corrupt, inefficient or not upto the mark and have outlived utility should be weeded out.
Thus the view expressed that Rule 326 will be attracted only to chop off dead wood is not correct.
There may be varied reasons to be taken into consideration, that would constitute public interest that an order as required under Rule 326 (d) can be passed as briefly noticed above.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Thus we conclude that the decision in KK Vaid's case does not lay down good law and the instructions, issued by the State on August 13, 1993, that the extension beyond the age of 55 years be granted to the officials/officers with the condition that more than 70% of the last ten years confidential reports are good, are not contrary to Rule 326(a) or (d) of the Rules, as discussed above."
8.
On merits also, I do not find any valid ground to interfere with the exercise of power by the State Government under Rule 532 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II read with Rule 326(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I because there was sufficient material available with the competent authority for forming an opinion that petitioner's further retention in service was not in public interest.
A bare reading of the entries recorded in the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioners for the years 1985-86, 1987-88, 1988-89, 1991-92 and 1992-93, which were duly communicated to him vide Annexures R.2 to R.6, showas that while assessing his efficiency and professional knowledge as good, the concerned authority had consistently made adverse comments on his administrative abilities, lack of aptitude, neglect of work and bad behaviour and also observed that he had failed to achieve the targets.
These entries coupled with the warning administered to him vide order dated 2511991 could, in my opinion, be legitimately taken into consideration by the government for formation of a bonafide opinion that further retention of the petitioner was not in public interest.
This Court cannot exercise appellate jurisdiction in such like matters and cannot re-evaluate the record with a view to find fault with the opinion formed by the competent authority, more-so because the petitioner has not made any allegation of bias, ill-will or mala fides against any particular officer involved in the decision-making process.
On the basis of above discussion, I hold that premature retirement of the petitioner is not vitiated by arbitrariness or mala fides.
9.
Hence, the writ petition is dismissed.
10.
Before parting with this case, I consider it necessary to observe that while admitting the writ petition on 2281994, a Division Bench had stayed, the operation of Annexure P4 and by virtue of that order, the petitioner continued in service till the age of superannuation.
During this period, he must have discharged his duty and earned his pay and allowances.
Therefore, it will not be just and proper to allow the government to recover the amount paid to him in the form of salary and allowances.
Ordered accordingly.
However, it is made clear that the said period shall not be counted as a part of his service for the purpose of retiral benefits.
If the petitioner has already received retiral benefits by counting that period as a qualifying service, then the government shall be free to recover the amount so paid.
Petition dismissed.