GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against order dated May 13, 1993 of the learned Single Judge vide which he allowed C.W.P.
No. 7091 of 1992 and directed that the writ petitioner (respondent herein) should be permitted to withdraw the resignation dated 2341991 and also quashed the letter vide which his resignation was accepted.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the appeal we may briefly notice the facts.
While working as Clerk in the Treasury Office, Karnal, respondent-Suresh Kumar resigned from service on April 23, 1991 and deposited three months pay in lieu of notice.
This he had done with a view to contest the forthcoming Assembly Elections.
His resignation was accepted by the competent authority vide order dated April 25, 1991.
Having lost the election, he submitted an application dated June 27, 1991 for permission to withdraw the resignation but no decision was taken on his request.
He then invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the non-petitioners (appellants herein) to permit him to withdraw the resignation dated April 23, 1991 and quash the order of acceptance of resignation.
He claimed that in similar cases, the State Government had allowed other unsuccessful candidates to withdraw the resignation from service and allowed them to rejoin duty.
The learned Single Judge accepted the plea of discrimination and quashed the order vide which the resignation of the respondent was accepted.
The relevant extracts of the order of the learned Single Judge read as under :-  "Since no order rejecting the petitioner's request had been conveyed to him and no reason had been disclosed in the written statement for declining his representations, I have called upon Mr. Jaswant Singh to indicate the reasons on perusal of the original record.
On examining the record, he has pointed out that on October 15, 1991, the office had put up a note that keeping in view that fact that the petitioner had served for 17 years and he was only 38 years old and had already crossed the age for entering the Government service, his request for withdrawal of resignation and condonation of break be accepted.
This request was endorsed by the Deputy Director, Treasuries but was declined by the Director, Treasuries and Accounts with the following order :- "He should not be taken back in service.
FCFS order dated 8791 (Page 57 ante) may also please be seen.
Sd/- 29/10."
At page 57, the observation was as under : "I think permission to rejoin government service should not be given.
However, advice of CS may be sought."
A perusal of the above note indicates that no reason whatsoever was assigned for rejecting the petitioner's claim.
Further, it also deserves notice that the petitioner has made a categorical averment in paragraph 9 of the petition that similarly situated persons have been permitted to withdraw their resignations and allowed to continue on the posts held by them.
Reference has been made to the case of Mr. Ram Singh of Haryana Revenue Department.
In reply, the averment has been merely denied for want of knowledge.
On a perusal of the pleadings of the parties, it is clear that the specific averment of the petitioner has not been specifically denied.
Denial for want of knowledge is no denial.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jahuri Sah and others v. Dwarika Prasad Jhunjhunwala and others, AIR 1967 SC 109 wherein their Lordships were inter alia pleased to observe that Order VIII R 5 C.P.C. "provides that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary implication or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of the defendant shall be taken to be admitted, to say that a defendant has no knowledge of a fact pleaded by the plaintiff is not tantamount to a denial of the existence of that fact, not even an implied denial".
It is thus apparent that the averment has not been specifically denied.
In fact, it amounts to having been admitted.
Still further, it is not unlikely that if resignations are allowed to be withdrawn easily, a large number of Government servants may try to enter politics and then seek to rejoin Government service after losing the election.
Such a course of action will neither promote discipline nor be in the interest of public servants.
However, the fact remains that the Government has issued instructions governing the withdrawal of resignation.
It was incumbent on the respondents to examine the case in the light of those instructions and the petitioner's claim could have been rejected only for some valid reason.
Without going into the merits of the case, the Director, Treasuries and Accounts passed a one line order to the effect that the petitioner's request is declined.
This was neither fair nor just.
Even while filing a reply to the writ petition, no specific answer was given to the petitioner's averment that persons who were similarly situate had been given the requisite relief.
Consequently, in view of this peculiar situation, it appears just and reasonable to set aside the order passed by the respondents.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed."
3.
Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana invited our attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana and another v. Ram Kumar Mann, 1997(3) SCT 135 (SC) : 1997(2) R.S.J.
520 and of this Court in Kartar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(2) SCT 750 (P&H) (DB) : 1998(2) R.S.J.
596 and argued that in view of the reversal of the judgment of the Division bench in Ram Kumar Mann's case, which constituted the foundation of the order of the Single Bench, the appeal may be allowed and the writ petition of the respondent may be dismissed.
He further argued that wrong decision taken in the case of one or more than one persons, who had contested the election after resigning from service, could not be made basis for issuance of a writ by invoking Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
We have given serious thought to the arguments of the learned counsel.
In C.W.P.
No. 1154 of 1984 - Ram Kumar Mann v. State of Haryana, decided on 1081984, a Division Bench had taken the view similar to the one expressed by the learned Single Judge and directed the State Government to permit the withdrawal of the letter of resignation.
This was also the order dated 14.5.1996 passed by a learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 956 of 1986 - Sukhdev Singh Chauhan v. State of Punjab and others.
The decision of the Division Bench in Ram Kumar Mann's case (supra) was reversed by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana and another v. Ram Kumar Mann (supra) and it was held that one wrong order passed by the government in favour of an employee cannot give a cause to another employee to seek a similar direction from the Court.
Some of the observations made in the judgment of the Supreme Court are reproduced below :-  "On and from that date, the relationship of employer and the employee between the respondent and the State ceased and thereafter he had no right, whatsoever, either to claim the post or a right to withdraw his resignation which had already become effective by acceptance on May 18, 1982.
It may be that the Government for their own reasons, given permission in similar case, to some of the employees mentioned earlier, to withdraw their resignations and had appointed them.
The doctrine of discrimination is founded upon existence of an enforceable right.
He was discriminated and denied equality as some similarly situated persons had been given the same relief.
Article 14 would apply only when invidious discrimination is meted out to equals and similarly circumstanced without any rational basis or relationship in that behalf.
The respondent has no right, whatsoever and cannot be given the relief wrongly given to them i.e., benefit of withdrawal of resignation.
The High Court was wholly wrong in reaching the conclusion that there was invidious discrimination.
If we cannot allow a wrong to perpetrate, an employee, after committing mis-appropriation of money, is dismissed from service and subsequently that order is withdrawn and he is reinstated into the service.
Can a similar circumstanced person claim equality under Section 14 for reinstatement ?
Answer is obviously `No.' In a converse case, in the first instance, one may be wrong but the wrong order cannot be the foundation for claiming equality for enforcement of the same order.
As stated earlier, his right must be founded upon enforceable right to entitle lion to the equality treatment for enforcement thereof.
A wrong decision by the Government does not give a right to enforce the wrong order and claim parity or equality.
Two wrongs can never make a right.
Under these circumstances, the High Court was clearly wrong in directing reinstatement of the respondent by a mandamus with all consequential benefit".
In Kartar Singh's case (supra), the Full Bench of this Court noticed the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ram Kumar Mann's case and also the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Rajinder Bhushan Assistant Press Operator v. The State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 248 (P&H) (DB) and held as under :-  "(1) In view of the judgment of the Apex Court in Ram Kumar Mann's case (supra) no legal and enforceable right is conferred on such persons, who have submitted their resignation from service in order to contest an election and the same having been accepted by the State, the State is not bound to permit the withdrawal of resignation.
(2) The second question is answered in the negative.
The State's refusal to exercise the discretion does not amount to discrimination and is, therefore, not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India."
In Rajinder Bhushan's case (supra), the Division bench interpreted Rule 75 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I and rejected the argument of the learned counsel based on the decisions of the Single Benches in Sukhdev Singh's case (supra) and Suresh Kumar v. State of Haryana and others (C.W.P.
No. 7091 of 1991, decided on 3051991).
The reasons assigned by the Division Bench for not accepting the views of the Single Benches read as under:-  "We do not accept the contention of Mr. Malik.
A careful reading of the above rule shows that the guiding principle underlying the above rule is public interest.
Sub-clause (i) of clause (4) further shows that the rule has been framed in order to deal with cases of resignation which a Government employee has submitted "for some compelling reasons" and "request for withdrawal of the resignation has been made as a result of a material change in the circumstances which originally compelled him to tender the resignation."
Sub- clause (ii) further gives an indication that in the interregnum period i.e. from the resignation till the date on which request for withdrawal is made, the conduct of the person was in no way improper.
We find it almost impossible to hold that contesting the State Assembly elections would amount to a compelling reason for submitting the resignation within the meaning of the above rule.
In our view, it would be ridiculous that a Government servant submits resignation, contests the State Assembly elections and on losing the same reports back and insists that he shall be taken back into service with continuity as referred to go in sub-rule (6) reproduced above.
Nor can the conduct of an officer to contest elections while being in Government Service be considered to be not improper.
We may also point out that the petitioner has not assailed the order whereby his application for withdrawal of the resignation was rejected.
As there is no challenge to that order, it is not necessary to deal with its validity.
The Division Bench also rejected the plea of discrimination and observed as under :-  "Lastly, it was submitted by Mr. Malik that the resignation was allowed to be withdrawn in the case of Dhawa Ram, Sub-Inspector, Cooperative Societies, referred to in Sukhdev Singh's case (supra) and it will be a case of discrimination to arbitrarily reject the petitioner's request for withdrawal of resignation.
We do not have the precise details of the case of Dhawa Ram before us.
We are further of the view that two wrongs do not make a right.
If in a particular case, a decision contrary to the statutory rules has been taken, no one acquires a right to perpetuate the wrong interpretation of the rules on the ground of invidious discrimination.
For these reasons, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs."
5.
Apart from the precedents relied upon by Shri Jaswant Singh, we may refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Chandigarh Administration and another v. Jagjit Singh and another etc., 1995(2) RRR 291 (SC) : JT 1995(1) SC 445; M/s Faridabad Ct. Scan Centre v. DG Health Services and others, 1997(4) SCT 463 (SC) : JT 1997(8) SC 171 and The Secretary, Jaipur Development Authority, Jaipur v. Daulat Mal Jain etc., 1997(1) RCR(Civil) 379 (SC) : JT 1996(8) SC 387 in which it has been consistently held that one wrong order passed or action taken by the State can not be made basis for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus to public authority to pass wrong orders in other cases.
6.
On the basis of the above discussion, we allow the appeal and set aside the order of the learned Single Judge.
As a result, the writ petition of the respondent shall stand dismissed.
7.
The question which remains to be considered is as to what should be the fate of the service of the respondent, who, according to the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, re-joined in pursuance of the order of the learned Single Judge.
A perusal of the averments contained in the writ petition shows that before resigning from service, the respondent had served for a continuous period of 17 years.
After the decision of the Single Bench, he is in service for the last about nine years.
Therefore, it will be wholly inequitable to permit the appellants to shunt him out of service and deprive him and his family of the only source of subsistence.
Rather, we feel that the ends of justice would be adequately met by directing that the respondent should be allowed to continue in service subject to the condition that he shall get service benefits strictly in terms of instructions issued by the State Government vide letter No. 13(1)80-2 G.S.
III dated October 21, 1980 and nothing more.
Ordered accordingly.
Appeal allowed.