Swatanter Kumar, J - On 2361968 the petitioner was commissioned as an officer in the Indian Army.
He successfully worked to the satisfaction of all his superiors and was promoted to the rank of Lt.
Colonel by selection in the year 1987.
The petitioner picked up the rank of full Colonel in the year 1990 and thereafter on the basis of his service profile was promoted o the rank of Brigadier by the competent authority upon due selection.
Presently, the petitioner holds the same rank in the Army Aviation Corps.
According to the petitioner his service career and profile is that of distinction and during the period of service has given following awards :-  26.1.1988 Mention-in-Despatches.
26.1.1990 Sena Medal (Gallantry).
2611994 Vishisht Seva Medal.
25.1.1996 Chief of Army Staff's Commendation Card.
2.
On 17.4.1997 Military Secretary's Branch, Army Head Quarters, New Delhi issued a circular which was further brought to the notice of the said authority "for creation of permanent cadre from Aviation Corps in the Indian Army".
By and large this new Corps was created out of the Artillery Corps of the Army.
Amongst other officers, the petitioner also submitted an application for conversion to Army Aviation Corps on 14121997 in furtherance to the call for submission of such application issued by the competent authority on 191997.
The petitioner was permanently converted to the Army Aviation Corps on 6111998.
The claim of the petitioner in the present writ petition is that he is the senior-most Brigadier in the Army Aviation Corps and is entitled to be considered for promotion to the rank of Major General in the same corps.
The respondents cannot bring officers from the other corps to head the Aviation Corps.
He submitted a non-statutory complaint on 112002, but the same was not decided, thus, compelling the petitioner to file CWP No. 6558 of 2002 wherein a Division Bench of this Court on 29.4.2002 directed the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner and pass appropriate orders.
This complaint was rejected by the competent authority, on 1062002 in furtherance to the order of the Court giving rise to the filing of the present writ petition.
3.
The respondents resisted the claim of the petitioner on various grounds.
According to the respondents no rule or regulation has been infringed, so the petitioner cannot claim any remedy.
Non-consideration or non-filling of the post of Major General in the Aviation Corps does not give any cause of action in favour of the petitioner.
On merits, it is contended that the Army Aviation Corps is not authorised in filling the post of Major General.
The petitioner was fully aware that the Aviation Corps does not have a post of Major General and he will not be considered for promotion to that rank.
The expected strength of the officers in the Army Aviation Corps has not been raised for variety of reasons including non-availability of Air-crafts and other sophisticated weaponry.
There are only 40 officers on the cadre strength and as such the post of Major General to that cadre has not been allocated by the Chief of Army Staff.
According to the respondents, the petitioner has a choice of reverting back to his parent cadre of Artillery and there he would be considered as and when his batch-mates of 1968 are considered for promotion to the rank of Major General.
Brigadier BS Panwar, whose reference has been made by the petitioner in the writ petition had come to Army Aviation but preferred to revert back to his parent cadre, wherein he has been considered and promoted to the post of Major General.
The request of that officer for reversion was accepted and has been promoted in the Regiment of Artillery.
The respondents plead that no right of the petitioner has been infringed and he has no right to claim the reliefs prayed for in the present writ petition.
4.
Main thrust of the submissions on behalf of the Union of India in denying to the petitioner's consideration to the selection post of Major General in the Army Aviation Corps is founded on two factors : (a) There is no post of Major General allocated to the Aviation Corps and as such the relief claimed cannot be granted; (b) Petitioner can revert back to this present cadre of Artillery Corps and seek consideration for selection to the post of Major General along with his batch mates in accordance with the rules.
5.
We would deal with these two aspects of the matter before we proceed to examine the application of the judgments cited on behalf of the respondents to the facts of the present case.
6.
There is no dispute to the fact that petitioner has a reasonably good service profile and has been awarded various distinctions as noticed in the judgment above.
He had been promoted upon selection to the rank of Brigadier in the Corps of Artillery in the year 1997.
Applications for conversion to Army Aviation Corps were invited by the respondent in response to which the petitioner submitted application on 14121997.
The petitioner was permanently converted to the Army Aviation Corps on 16111998.
We may notice that before the petitioner was permitted to convert his Corps from Artillery to Aviation, he was required to exercise his option only in terms of the letter issued by the Military Secretary Branch Army Head Quarters dated 2851977.
The condition precedent specified in this letter related to career progression which in turn included induction and criteria appointments.
The relevant clause reads as under :-  "Career Progression 4.
Induction.
Initial induction into Avn.
Corps will be on voluntary basis with an irrevocable one time option i.e. an officer will have no option to revert to his parent Arm after induction.
The detail ORs for this will be worked out in consultation with ADG Avn by MS-6.
Eligible cases will be screened by No. 2 SB alongwith other IAST cases.
5.
Criteria Appointments.
Aviation officers will be groomed in stipulated criteria appointments.
Due career protection will be given to those posted in "hi-tech" appointments like test pilots.
The criteria appointments are as follows :- (a) Major IR Pilots (b) Col. Aviation Sqn.
Cdrs.
(c) Brigs.
Brig Aviation staff.
7.
On the basis of the above clear mandate, the petitioner had applied for conversion to the Aviation Corps on permanent basis.
The petitioner obviously considering various aspects including the chances of future promotion in the Aviation Corps came out of his permanent corps.
At that time the fate of the post of Major General in the Aviation Corps was still to be decided.
The process of exercising an option was irreversible one and the officer was left with no option to revert back to his parent Corps.
The parties were given an option, but the option once exercised could not be altered.
8.
The petitioner had made a non-statutory complaint which was responded to by the respondents vide letter dated 1062002 stating therein that there is no appointment of Major General authorised to Army Aviation Corps permanent cadre and, therefore, selection cannot be held to that rank in the Aviation Corps and the officer may be requested for his reversion back to the regiment of Artillery.
We find this view of the authorities unreasonable and arbitrary.
Whether by that time a post of Major General was allotted or not, we shall shortly proceed to discuss, but on the principles of equity and fairness requiring the officer to revert back to his parent cadre as a compulsion before his consideration to the higher rank in his parent Corps, to say the least, is misplaced.
9.
The principle of estoppel would operate equally to the parties and it cannot be enforced unilaterally to induct despite objection by the officer was certainly the prerogative of the authorities, but having permitted his induction now, they cannot be permitted to operate to the prejudice of the officer concerned.
Whatever be the fate, the petitioner has a legitimate right to remain in Aviation Corps and request for his consideration for promotion to the higher rank in accordance with law if the post is available.
10.
Upon the creation of permanent cadre for Aviation Corps the vacancies were allocated.
While providing for distribution of vacancies, the Army Head Quarters vide its letter dated 2851997 clearly stated that initially the cadre would be in the ratio of 15% permanent and 85% borrowed cadre and will be built up in a graduated manner to 100% permanent cadre.
This clearly provided that the entire Corps of Aviation shall be of permanent cadre in view of its own strength.
Under Clause (2) of the said instructions there were to be eight Brigadiers, 4 to permanent cadre and 2 from initial induction.
In regard to the post of Major General, under this very head it was stated as under :-  Total auth Total permanent  Str Cadre induction  (a) Maj Gen. ---- To be decided later ---  11.
The petitioner has stated that the post of Major General has duly been allocated to the Aviation Corps and is being manned by an officer from an other Corps.
To substantiate this fact, the petitioner has placed on record a letter dated 272001, Annexure P/7 to the writ petition, wherein Major General Charanjit Singh, as Additional Director General, Army Aviation Corps, has written a letter to the petitioner in regard to certain management aspects of Army Aviation and difficulties in regard to providing of certain services to the Army Commander.
The petitioner has also averred that at present strength of 46 officers is the permanent cadre strength with a total strength of officers in the cadre as 522.
According to him the wings like Army Intelligence Corps and Dental Corps where the officers strength is 435 and 400 respectively, 2 Major Generals posts have been allocated to each of the said Corps while only 1 post has been allocated to the Aviation Corps.
12.
In the year 1997 the post of Major General was prescribed for as permanent strength of the Aviation Corps, but was to be decided subsequently.
Vide letter dated 1482001, Annexure R.1 to the reply of the respondents, it is clear that Government of India, Ministry of Defence, had relegated to the Army Head Quarters the administrative powers in relation to the subjects listed in Annexure-1 to the said letter.
At Serial No. 5 Change of Arms/Service or branches of officers was delegated to the Army Head Quarters.
Furthermore vide letter dated 27111997 the Government of India conveyed the sanction of the President for approval of the establishment of Army Aviation.
Under Clause (3) of the same letter, the post of Major General was sanctioned and provided in the following manner:-  3.
The selection grade ranks will be provided as under :- (a) Maj Gen - 1 (offset provided Ex Pay Commission Cell) 13.
Furthermore, in Appendix to this letter, the post of Additional Director General was to be manned by the officer holding the rank of Major General and one such post was allocated and marked for Aviation Corps.
According to the respondents, it is an unspecified vacancy and it is not necessary that only officers from the permanent cadre of Army Aviation Corps should hold the hold post.
The post of Additional Director manned by Major General could be held by an officer from other Corps as it is an unspecified vacancy.
14.
We are unable to find any substance in this submission.
The cumulative effect of reading of the document in conjunction with the pleadings of the parties is that the post of Major General has already been ear-marked and specified for Army Aviation Corps, to which sanction of the President of India has already been conveyed.
The language of the letters do not in any way suggest that Army Aviation Corps has no specified vacancy in the rank of Major General.
As a matter of policy the respondents feel that Army Aviation Corps because of its short strength does not require heading of the Corps by an officer of the rank of Major General or it so require.
But once this principle decision is taken in which the Court cannot have any interference, then the respondents must act fairly and free of arbitrariness.
It will be unfortunate that after creating a permanent cadre and specifying the post of Major General in the Aviation Corps the respondents, without any justification, permit the same as an unspecified vacancy to be manned by an officer from the other Corps.
The inevitable effect would be to mar the chances of promotion of the officers belonging to this Corps.
15.
If the decision of the authorities is not to provide for and keep and a rank of Major General in Aviation Corps, then there is no occasion for the respondents to bring an officer from other Corps to head the Aviation Corps in the rank of Major General, as is clear from Annexure P/7.
It is not even disputed before us that as a matter of policy the Army Head Quarter has provided a post of a Major General in the Army Aviation Corps, but treating as unspecified vacancy it has been given to the officers of other Corps.
16.
The respondents placed heavy reliance upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the cases of Dharam Pal and others v. Food Corporation of India and others, 1998(1) SCT 116 (SC) : 1997(7) SLR 15; SP Shivprasad Pipal v. Union of India and others, 1998(2) SCT 376 (SC) : (1998)4 Supreme Court Cases 598 and Union of India and others v. Avtar Singh and others, 2001(4) SCT 341 (SC) : Civil Appeal No. 7698 of 1996, decided on 2982001 and the judgment of the Delhi High Court in the case of Col. Jit Singh Brar v. Union of India and others, CWP No. 5439 of 2000, decided on 232001 and contended that in regard to creation or formation of cadre, the Court should not interfere.
It is for the Government and Army Head Quarters to make policy, qualifications and criteria for management of the such high posts.
The Court cannot sit over the afore-stated decision of the Government in review as it is a policy decision.
He also contended that chance of promotion is not a condition of service, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any benefit.
17.
As far as the proposition of law, as argued by the counsel for the respondents is concerned, there can hardly be any dispute.
Chances of promotion cannot be termed as a condition of service.
However, the employee can also not be denied that right of consideration for promotion to the higher rank in accordance with law without any basis.
In the case of Avtar Singh (supra) before the Supreme Court, the vacancy was never sanctioned to the Corps nor was it is allocated by the Chief of Army Staff while providing the strength of cadre.
The vacancy was pleaded to be unspecified vacancy which was to rotate alternatively between the officers from ASO and A.O.C.
while the case of Col. Jit Singh, the challenge was to the policy framed for promotion to the rank of Brigadier in different categories of the SL Officers and in alternative for a direction for creation of post in the rank of Brigadier.
Nether of them is the situation before us in the present case.
Thus, the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for Union of India hardly have any application on ratio decidendi to the facts of the present case.
18.
In the case before us, the post has already been ear-marked/allocated by the Army Head Quarters for which sanction of the President of India has already been conveyed.
Once the post is that of the Corps, the respondents would be obliged to consider all the eligible officers.
Another plea taken by the respondents, which we are unable to appreciate, is that if the petitioner is entitled to be considered and promoted to the rank of Major General in his present Corps, that is Artillery, why cannot he be considered in his present corps.
Once an officer is due for consideration for promotion to the rank of Major General, why should be respondents ask him to revert back to his present cadre, particularly when the post of Major General has been provided for and to be off-set Ex-Pay Commission Cell.
19.
In view of our discussion afore-stated, we are of the considered view that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion to the rank of Major General in accordance with rules and on his own service profile in the Army Aviation Corps.
To state the direction of the Court and avoiding ambiguity we reiterate that it is the right of consideration for which we have granted the relief to the petitioner.
His actual promotion would obviously depend upon the respondents.
The writ petition is allowed to the above limited extent, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.