NN Mathur, J - The instant writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been preferred by the Union of India seeking direction to quash the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhur Bench, Jodhpur dated 06122001 whereby it allowed the Original Application of the second respondent Kumari Prabha Joshi and directed the petitioner to consider her application for appointment on compassionate ground.
2.
Two brothers namely deceased Gopal Lal Joshi and Shyamlal Joshi were working with Railways.
Gopal Lal Joshi who was working on the post of Gateman at, Nawa Railway Station in district Nagaur expired on 21st October, 1994.
The second respondent Kumari Prabha Joshi, moved an application in the year 1999 claiming herself to be an adopted daughter of her uncle deceased Gopal Lal Joshi for appointment on compassionate ground.
The competent authority ordered an enquiry into the matter.
The Enquiry Officer submitted the report which reveal that natural father of the girl was working as Booking Supervisor in Railways and up till death of Gopal Lal Joshi, Shyam Lal Joshi took all the privilege passes for his family along with Kumari Prabha Joshi, whereas, deceased Gopal Lal Joshi took privileges passes for himself only till 10061994.
The adoption deed alleged to have been executed on 09.06.1994.
It was also found that Kumari Prabha Joshi was residing with her natural father.
She never stayed with deceased Gopal Lal Joshi.
Thus, the application for compassionate appointment was rejected and the decision was communicated by letter dated 29082000.
3.
The second respondent aggrieved of the order of the Railway Administration, preferred an Original Application before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowed the original application and directed to consider the case of Kumari Prabha Joshi for appointment on compassionate ground.
4.
We have heard Mr. Manoj Bhandari, learned counsel for the Railway Administration and Mr. SK Malik, learned counsel for the second respondent.
Having read the judgment of the Tribunal, we are of the view that it is not sustainable for the reason that it is contrary to the view taken by the Apex Court in catenaof decisions.
The consistent view of the Apex Court and this Court is that the appointment on compassionate ground is intended to enable the family of the deceased employee to tide over sudden crisis resulting due to death of the bread earner who had left the family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
The latest decision in this line is Sanjay Kumar v. State of Bihar and others, reported in 2000(4) SCT 323 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 2782.
In State of UP and Others v. Paras Nath reported in 1999(4) SCT 292 (SC) : 1998(2) SCC 412 the employee expired in the year 1969.
In the year 1996, the son of the deceased moved an application for appointment on compassionate ground.
It was averred that at the time of the death of his father, he was only two years old.
On attaining majority, he again moved an application for appointment on compassionate ground.
The department rejected the application.
However, the High Court granted the relief, but, the Supreme Court set aside the order of the High Court and observed that the purpose for providing the employment to a dependent of a government servant dying in harness in preference to anybody else, is to mitigate the hardship caused to the family of the employee on account of his unexpected death while still in service.
The Court further observed that the purpose is to provide immediate financial assistance to the family of a deceased government servant.
The Court relied on its earlier decision in Union of India v. Bhagwan Singh, reported in 1995(6) SCC 476.
In the said case the Court observed, "the reason for making compassionate appointment, which is exceptional, is to provide immediate financial assistance to the family of a government servant who dies in harness, when there is no other earning member in the family."
5.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on the decision of the Apex Court in Balbir Kaur and Another v Steel Authority of India Ltd and Others, reported in 2000(2) SCT 899 (SC) : 2000(6) SCC 493.
It was a case of Family Benefit Scheme and not of compassionate appointment, as such, it does not advance the case of the second respondent.
The learned counsel has also relied upon a circular of the Railway Board with respect to the appointment on compassionate ground which reads as follows :-  "104.
Sub :- Appointment on Compassionate Grounds-Delegation of Powers.
Ref :- (1) Board's letter No. E(NG)II/84/RC-1/26 dt. 6.10.95.
(2) Board's letter No. E(NG) II/99/RC-1/Gen/23 dt. 301199.
Attention is invited to Board's letter No. E(NG)II/84/RC-1/26 dt. 6.10.95 in terms of which the GMs are empowered to consider time barred cases which are upto 20 years old from the date of death of the Railway employee, provided appointment is sought for the first son/first daughter and that application for appointment is submitted within 2 years of attaining the age of majority by the candidate.
These powers have since been redelegated to DRMs/CWMs/HODs vide Board's letter dated 301199.
2.
The matter has been further considered by the Board and it has been decided that the General Managers may also be authorised to consider the requests of compassionate appointments in respect of cases up to 20 years old in the following types of cases subject to the condition that these powers will be exercised by him personally and not be delegated further :- (i) Compassionate appointment of first son/first daughter where request has been made after a period of 5 years from the date of medical invalidation.
(ii) Compassionate appointment of other than first son/first daughter where request has been made after a period of 5 years from the date of death.
(iii) Consideration of application submitted more than 2 years after the candidates became major.
3.
While considering such requests for compassionate appointment, the General Manager should satisfy himself on the basis of a balanced and objective assessment of the financial condition of the family, that the grounds for compassionate appointment in each such case is justified, having regard to the number of dependents, assets and liabilities left by the Railway employee, income of any member of the family, as also his liability, including the aspect of whether the earning member is residing with the family of the deceased employee and whether he provides any support to the other members of the family, so that the facility of appointment on compassionate grounds is not circumvented or misused by putting forward the ground that the eldest son of the employee is staying separately and not supporting the family.
6.
The appointment on compassionate ground makes a departure from the general provisions providing for the appointment on the post by following a particular procedure.
The doctrine of equality before law and equal opportunity in the matter of employment, enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India demand appointment in public service strictly on the basis of the open invitation of application and merit.
Any rule providing appointment in violation of the doctrine of equality is ultra vires and not required to be followed, except in exceptional cases, on strict construction of the rule or circular, only to meet a contingency at a particular moment.
Thus, a public authority or court to tribunal while considering a case for appointment on compassionate ground in public service should keep in mind that such an appointment being exception to the general rule, they need not be extra benevolent for an individual, at the cost of thousands of meritorious unemployed youth.
7.
In Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others, reported in 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 138 the Apex Court has held that the public services on compassionate ground has been carved out as an exception in the interest of justice to the general rule that appointment in the public services should be made strictly on the merit and no other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
The court further held that a compassionate appointment is made out of humanitarian consideration with a view to provide livelihood to the family of the deceased so that they are able to make both ends meet.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
8.
Thus, the Railway Board's circular, referred to above, which empowers the authority to give appointment even after 20 years of the death of employee is contrary to the general provision providing appointment, to the extent it travels beyond providing appointment to as member of the family of the deceased to tide over the sudden crisis, such appointment interferes with the right of other persons who are eligible for appointment to seek employment against the post which may be made available to them.
The Apex Court in Director of Education (Secondary) and Another v. Pushpendra Kumar and others reported in 1998(2) SCT 790 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 192 dealing with such a situation observed :-  "On such a construction, the said provision in the Regulations would be open to challenge on the ground of being violative of the right to equality in the matter of employment inasmuch as other persons who are eligible for appointment and who may be more meritorious than the dependents of deceased employees would be deprived of their right of being considered for such appointment under the rules."
9.
Thus, the circular relied upon by the second respondent unduly interfere with the right of other persons who are eligible for appointment, is arbitrary and discriminatory to the extent indicated above.
Thus, we are of the view that the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur has committed serious illegality in adopting a very generous, general and causal approach and thereby issuing directions to the appellant to consider the case of the respondent for appointment on compassionate ground.
10.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed, the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal dated 06122001 is quashed and set aside.
The Original Application of second respondent before the Central Administrative Tribunal is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.