Swatanter Kumar, J - By this judgment we propose to dispose of above mentioned nine writ petitions.
Out of them six writ petitions i.e. CWP Nos. 12753 of 1999, 2220, 2453, 2490, 2491 and 8519 of 2001 have come up for hearing after notice, while three others being CWP Nos. 15862 of 2002, 5518 and 5487 of 2002 have been listed for preliminary hearing.
A common question of law, (sic) facts and circumstances, arise for consideration in all these writ petitions, therefore, we consider it appropriate to deal with and dispose of all these writ petition by this common judgment.
2.
The petitioner in all the petitions had joined the Education Department (sic) Mistresses, Teachers, Lecturer on contract basis in different schools and college in the State.
All the petitioners are ladies and have been continuing in employment for a considerable period as they were appointed during the period 1997-98 and their terms for appointment was extended on different occasions.
These petitioners claim that they are entitled to get service benefit particularly the maternity leave benefit which has been allowed to the teachers similarly placed alike the petitioners.
For this purposes they reply upon judgment of a Division Bench of this court in the case of Polu Ram and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(4) R.S.J.
152, the Special Leave Petition against which is admittedly pending but interim stay was vacated by the Hon'ble Apex Court on 22112000.
Another judgment relied upon by the petitioner is of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Uma Rani v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 2375 of 2000, decided on 572001, where similar relief was granted to the petitioner by the Court.
In these writ petitions the petitioner are only claiming relief of maternity leave in accordance with rule and which their counterparts as members of regular cadre on ad hoc service or otherwise are entitled to.
3.
Upon notice the respondents filed a detailed reply.
It is stated that the petitioners were appointed on contractual basis for 86 days only and as such are not entitled to any service benefit which (sic) of the cadre are entitled to.
The Government (sic) department after due consideration of the matter and keeping in mind the judgments afore-referred that the contractual employees/the employees working on 89 days would not be entitled to other service benefits including maternity leave.
4.
We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties at some length.
Reliance upon the policy decision of the Government does not advance the case of the State any further because the stand of the Government in Polu Ram case and Uma Ranj's case (supra) was also identical.
There is hardly any distinction between an ad hoc employee and a contractual employee.
Both are engaged for a definite term as may be specified in the letter of appointment.
So far they are performing the same duties and functions and are holding the same posts, it will be very difficult to draw the fine line of distinction between these two classes.
The learned Counsel for the State fairly stated that the ad hoc employees and even the daily rated workers have been granted such reliefs by Court.
In the light of this, it is very difficult for this Court to hold that contractual employees would not be entitled to the relief prayed for.
5.
Different Division Benches of this Court had granted relief to the petitioners who were similarly placed alike the present petitioners.
Reference can be made to CWP No. 2783 of 1996 titled as Sunita Rani v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 12121996; Vijay Bala and others v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 5277 of 1999, decided on 2072000 and Uma Rani (supra).
In the case of Popu Ram (supra) it was held that the practice of giving 89 days appointment was illegal and unconstitutional and offended Articles 14, 16 and 39-B of the Constitution of India.
Direction was given to continue the petitioners till regular, selected candidates were appointed and they were directed to be paid regular pay scales.
The special leave petition filed in the case of Uma Rani (supra) was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court 5.10.2001.
6.
In the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Female Workers (Muster Roll) and another, 2000(2) S.C.T.
258 : 2000(2) R.S.J.
131, the Hon'ble Apex Court while dealing with the female workers working on muster roll in the Municipal Corporation, Delhi held that the Municipal Corporation was an industry.
The Court held as under:-  "It is in the background of the provisions contained in Aritlce 39, specially in Articles 42 and 43, that the claim of the respondents for maternity benefit and the action of the petitioner in denying that benefit to its women employees has to be scrutinized so as to determine whether the denial of maternity benefits by the petitioner is justified in law or not.
Since Article 42 specifically speaks of "just and humane conditions of work" and "maternity relief", the validity of an executive or administrative action in denying maternity benefit has to be examined on the anvil of Article 42 which, though not enforceable at law, is nevertheless available for determining the legal efficacy of the action complained of.
The Parliament has already made the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
There is no dispute that the benefits available under this Act have been made available to a class of employeed of the petitioner-Corporation.
But the benefit is not being made available to the women employees engaged on muster roll, on the ground that they are not regular employees of the Corporation.
As we shall presently see, there is no justification for denying the benefit of this Act to casual workers of workers employed on daily wage basis."
".............In the meantime, the benefits under the Act shall be provided to the women (muster roll) employees of the Corporation who have been working with them on daily wages."
7.
A Single Bench of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Dipikaben R Parmar v. State of Gujarat, 1999(2) SCT 847 clearly held while relying upon different judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court that lady employees appointed on ad hoc basis are entitled to maternity leave.
8.
In the case of Rattan Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1985(3) SLR 548 while requiring the State to be a modal employer and not to deny benefits to the adhoc teachers in an unfair way held as under :-  "We strongly deprecate the policy of the State Government under which `ad hoc' teachers are denied the salary and allowances for the period of the summer vacation by resorting to the fictional breaks of the type referred to above.
These ad hoc teachers shall be paid salary and allowances for the period of summer vacation as long as they hold the office under this order.
Those who are entitled to maternity or medical leave, shall also be granted such leave in accordance with the rules."
9.
In view of the above well settled principles of law we are of the considered view that the policy decision of the Government dated 2992000 denying benefit of maternity leave to the petitioners offends the law of land as declared by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
The Government has a duty to prevent un-necessary litigation.
While it takes policy decision, it is the inherent duty of the concerned quarters to take into consideration the effect of various pronouncements of the Apex Court and the High Courts.
Such approach on the part of the State, on the one hand, would prevent frivolous litigation, while on the other, would further the cause of justice.
It would also enlarge the image of the State as a modal employer.
10.
For the reasons afore-stated we see no reason to deny the relief claimed by the petitioners in these petitions.
Consequently, these writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to grant the benefit of maternity leave to the petitioners.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.