SS Nijjar, J - I have perused the entire record and heard the learned Counsel for the parties at length.
2.
The judgment under the appeal was rendered on 10121998.
Thereafter, it appears that three officials of the Improvement Trust colluded with the respondent and did not care to obtain certified copy of the judgment within time.
Although the copy was prepared on 1721999, it was not taken by the Improvement Trust till 841999.
For this delay, Bahadur Singh, Clerk is clearly responsible.
In the meantime, the decree-holder filed an execution application on 16.1.1999.
This execution application was to the knowledge of Bahadur Singh, Clerk, who had put a note to the Superintendent (L) in reference to the execution application and mentioned that the next date is 12.6.1999.
He again did not mention as to whether the appeal had been filed against the original judgment datd 10121998.
In fact, it appears that he tried to side-line the matter.
Thereafter, it appears that the Superintendent (L) also did not take any action for filing the appeal again the decision dated 10121998.
The execution application file was dealt with by a number of legal assistants, namely, Dev Raj Sharma, RS Ratol and DK Malhotra.
It was only on 24101999 that Mr. Malhotra gave an opinion that regular second appeal be filed in the High Court alongwith an application for condonation of delay.
The case was thereafter marked to Superintendent (L), Shri Raj Kishan on 29101999 for filing the regular second appeal but he again did not pursue the matter till 29.12.1999.
Ultimately on 412000, the case was sent to Mr. HS Bakshi, Advocate, High Court for filing regular second appeal.
Mr. Bakshi, promptly wrote to the Trust on 712000 and pointed out that the appeal is barred by limitation.
However, out of abundant caution, he filed an appeal on 1112000 without the application for condonation of delay.
As anticipated the appeal filed by Mr. Bakshi was returned with the objection that the appeal be refiled alongwith an application for condonation of delay.
Again on the insistence of Mr. Bakshi, ultimately, the trust supplied the grounds for condonation of delay.
These grounds were not received by Mr. Bakshi till 2092000.
The appeal was refiled on 13102000.
From the above, it is abundantly clear that the three officials of the Improvement Trust, namely, Bahadur Singh, Clerk, Kamta Parshad, Junior Assistant and Raj Kishan, Superintendent were squarely responsible for the deliberate delay in filing the regular second appeal.
When the matter came up for motion hearing, this Court had noted the submission of Mr. Bakshi, who had candidly stated that the delay in filing the appeal took place because certain officials of the Improvement Trust had colluded with the respondent.
Some time was granted to Mr. Bakshi to place on record the preliminary enquiry report in this regard.
It appears that merely as formality and to protect the erring officials, a letter was issued to the aforesaid three officials by the Additional Director, Local Government, Punjab, Chandigarh which is attached with the civil miscellaneous application No. 2107-C of 2002 at Annexure P-2.
The letter is undated.
In this letter the Additional Director has been pleased to warn the aforesaid officials and has directed them to perform their duties carefully in the future.
From the aforesaid facts and circumstances, it becomes abundantly clear that in spite of the best efforts of Mr. Bakshi, the filing of the regular second appeal was delayed by the aforesaid three officials.
Mr. Bakshi has also pointed out that on merits, the appellant has a fairly sound case.
3.
On the other hand, Mr. Chaudhary, learned Senior Advocate has submitted that the respondent does not deserve any leniency.
It is submitted that a perusal of the letter Annexure P-2 shows that no punishment has been meted out to the concerned officials.
Rather, Raj Kishan has been further promoted to the post of Executive Officer.
According to the learned Counsel, this is sufficient to dis-entitle the Trust from any relief in the application for condonation of delay.
4.
I am of the considered opinion that the Improvement Trust which is a public body, cannot be made to suffer from the dereliction of duties of the aforesaid three officials.
The decision of a case on merits cannot be sacrificed at the altar of the law of limitation.
In this view of mine, I find support from the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag and another v. Mst.
Katiji, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 1353.
In paragraph 3, the Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "3. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  1.
Ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by lodging an appeal late.
2.
Refusing to condone delay can result in a meritorious matter being thrown out at the very threshold and cause of justice being defeated.
As against this when delay is condoned the highest that can happen is that a cause would be decided on merits after hearing the parties.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  When substantial justice and technical considerations are pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice deserves to be preferred for the other side cannot claim to have vested right in injustice being done because of a non-deliberate delay."
Consequently, the applications for condonation in filing and refiling of the RSA are allowed.
5.
Before parting with the judgment, it is necessary to place on record the displeasure of the Court of the manner in which the Additional Director has dealt with the delinquent officials.
I am of the considered opinion that the conduct of the aforesaid three officials needs to be properly inquired into by an official higher than the Additional Director.
These kind of officials if found guilty, have to be suitably punished to act as a deterrent to other delinquent public officials.
Consequently, the office is directed to send a copy of this order to the Secretary, Local Government, for further necessary action in accordance with the directions issued by this Court.
Appeal be fixed for motion hearing on 1292002.
6.
Mr. Bakshi is also directed to bring to the notice of the Secretary the proceedings in the Court in passing the present order.
Order dasti to Mr. Bakshi.
Order accordingly.