Amitava Lala, J - This is an application for recalling the order dated 11th June, 1999 passed by this Court in disposing of the writ petition.
On 11th June, 1999 this court was pleased to hear out the main writ petition in merit upon being satisfied with the service of notice upon the respondents, specially, the School Authority.
In merit, the case of the petitioner was termination of an employee in a school on probation without following the sub-rules (7) and (8) of Rules 28 of the Management Rules of Recognised Non- Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969.
The Court thought such termination of service of the petitioner being Annexure `E' to the petition is not sustainable and, therefore, the same was set aside.
2.
The applicant of this application is the Secretary of the School Therefore, he is the representative of the school on which the notices were directed to be served before hearing the writ petition and from the original affidavit of service it appears that the same was refused to be accepted as per the postal endorsement.
Refusal is a good service in accordance with law.
It appears from paragraph 3 of this application that a statement has been made on oath by a registered clerk of the Learned Advocate appearing for the applicant that the notice was served to defend the case by the school and one of the learned Advocates of this Court, Mr. Ujjal Kr.
Dutta started following the list regularly so that if the matter appears before the Court he can attend the hearing.
It is a surprise to this court that when the applicant refused to receive the service which became part and parcel of the record of this Court how he can engage the aforesaid learned Advocate to follow the list and to attend the matter when it will be called on.
Therefore, the statement as made in paragraph 3 of the application cannot be said to be a correct statement if this Court uses the mildest language in this respect.
On top of it, the application has not been made by the applicant being aggrieved by or dissatisfied with the order of the Court but by the registered clerk of the Advocate.
Therefore, such application cannot be acceptable in the eye of law.
The scope and ambit of Order 9 Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, principally which applies in this case, specifically tells that a party who was not served with the summons or who was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the matter was called on for hearing, can made such application.
Therefore, in this case when a party refused to accept the summons cannot be said to be not duly served and when such party does not appear before this court to explain the position how he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the matter was called on for hearing, this application is non est in the eye of law.
3.
Inspite of the same, this Court thinks, for the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of process of Court of Law, Court should deal with the subject-matter of the application.
In addition to the aforesaid facts of engagement of one Mr. Ujjal Kumar Dutta, learned Advocate as aforesaid, the fact has bee stated hereunder that on 23rd May, 1999 such advocate met with a road accident and got several injuries in his body including the fracture of right wrist.
In addition to the same, such Advocate fell seriously ill due to stomach infection for high dose medicine just after two days therefrom and he was totally confined to bed till 27th June, 1999.
Due to such illness of the Advocate of the applicants, he could not attend the court.
4.
Further, it is stated that due to non-recovery of the illness for such long time of the said Learned Advocate on 23rd June, 1999 the applicant engaged his senior, Mr. Dipak Kumar Mukherjee, learned Advocate in the subject-matter.
Being engaged, the said Mr. Mukherjee contacted Mr. Dutta, learned Advocate on record, on 25th June, 1999 and enquired about the enlistment of the matter when he came to know that the writ petition had already been disposed of by this Court on 11th June, 1999.
Due to illness of the learned Advocate, Mr. Dutta he was not able to attend the hearing of the case on 11th June, 1999.
The photocopies of all the medical prescriptions are annexed as mark `A' to the application.
5.
Since the petitioner's Advocate's case is supported by the photocopies of the concerned medical document it is duty incumbent upon the Court to look into it in the proper perspective of the subject-matter in issue.
The subject-matter in issue is that the learned Advocate on record was prevented from appearing in the case on 11th June, 1999, irrespective of the facts as aforesaid, due to his illness etc. from 23rd May, 1999 to 27th June, 1999.
Therefore, it can be presumed that the documents as annexed should be confined specially for such period.
But I find from the collective annexure `A' to the petition that the first document is dated 27th August, 1999 advice of a Doctor of a Nursing Home appears to be given for some orthopaedic problem but the second document is dated 2nd June, 1999, the third document is dated 6th June, 1999, the fourth and fifth documents are dated 8th June, 1999 arising of a Doctor's prescriptions and test regarding stomach problem.
Therefore, even the fact of meeting with a road accident on 23rd May, 1999 and following stomach infection only after two days therefrom due to high dosage medicine i.e. on 25th May, 1999 cannot be believed by the Court of law in view of such contradictions.
Hence, these documents are not at all acceptable in the eye of law even for the ends of justice.
6.
It is further significant that a bold statement is made about prevention of Mr. Dutta, learned Advocate on record on the date of hearing i.e. on 11th June, 1999 inspite of engagement due to his illness.
Therefore, it is also duty incumbent upon the Court to look into the date of filling of the `vakalatnama' by such advocate.
I find from the record that such `vakalatnama' was filed in the Court on 28th June, 1999, long after the date of passing of the order on 11th June, 1999 and also after the period of the incident in between 23rd May, 1999 and 27th June, 1999.
It is also surprising that on the one hand, under paragraph 5 of the writ petition, a statement is made of illness of the Advocate on record till 27th June, 1999 but on the other hand, the senior Advocate was getting information from such Advocate on record on 25th June, 1999 a period when he was confined to bed.
Therefore, factually too, the case as made out cannot earn any sympathy of the Court for the purpose of ends of justice.
As it appears that the process of the court has been seriously abused by the clerk of the Advocate in making such application so boldly without ascertaining the seriousness of consequences.
In any event, the questions of law as agitated by the parties are required to be discussed in this respect.
7.
The learned Counsel appearing in support of the respondent/writ petitioner raised a question of maintainability of this writ petition by showing judgment reported in 1995(5) Supreme 49 (Sri Budhia Swain v. Gopinath Deb).
According to him, since the original order was passed in disposing of the writ petition in merit upon taking into consideration all aspects of the same, no one can seek recalling of the same because by such recalling the order originally passed in disposing of the writ petition in merit will be vacated and the vacation of the judgment and order has lost its force by waiver, estoppel and acquiescence.
The proper remedy in such case would have been by way of an appeal or revision which was available but was not availed.
According to me, the learned Counsel wanted to say that the matter is now hit by the principle of `fait accompli'.
8.
He further cited a judgment reported in 1993 CWN 1158 (State of West Bengal and others v. Hari Prasad Singh and others) to establish that in view of the embargo under Section 141 about applicability in Article 226 of the Constitution of India, an application cannot be made under Order 9 Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure for the purpose of recalling of the order as already passed finally and that too in merit.
Therefore, at best, the only principle that can be applicable in Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
If such principle is to be applied then the same will be sparingly utilised for the interest of justice in a given situation.
9.
On the other hand, learned Counsel appearing in support of the applicant/respondent School Authority cited a judgment reported in 2000(2) RCR(Civil) 161 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 1221 (GP Srivastava v. RK Raizada and others) which is related to the application under Order 9 Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure and contended before this Court that a narrow and technical approach in dealing with the matter is not to be taken by the Court.
The proper approach would be that, for the ends of justice, one is allowed to give opportunity to prove his case within a reasonable time.
It is to be noted here that such judgment related to an ex parte decree in connection with a suit and not in connection with an application in which the order was pronounced upon giving reasons on merit when a party refused to accept the service.
The motive or intention of the party is to be adjudged properly on the basis of the fact/situation alone.
One case may differ from other.
In the instant case, the happenings are already discussed.
I do not think this is the subject-matter where the liberal approach should be made.
10.
He has also cited another judgment reported in JT 2000 (Supp.2) SC 546 (Roman Services Pvt. Ltd. v. Subhash Kapoor and others) whereunder it is stated that in a condition when the Advocate is prevented from attending the Court a litigant should not be made to suffer.
In answering to such judgment I should say that the present position of the case does not at all fit with such judgment as alleged or at all.
11.
In any event, without showing the full judgment he has also referred note to JT 1999(10) SC 406 (Narmada Nursery KG and Junior School MP v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner) to establish that for the interest of the litigant the order of the Court should be restored on payment of cost to the other party.
So far as the judgment is concerned, I have no knowledge as to what is the factual position because the head note from the special index has been shown before this Court.
12.
However, this court is not all concerned in respect of such sympathetic situation in which definitely an order can be passed for the purpose of interest of justice taking a sympathetic view.
There is no quarrel in respect of such principles.
But each and every court, in coming to a conclusion pass through various fact situations.
Can it be said, upon going through the factual position as narrated by me in this judgment that Court should take any sympathetic view either towards the applicant to towards the Advocate on record of the application on towards his registered clerk ?
13.
My answer is "No".
According to me, in view of the circumstances, the Court should not take the matter lightly but to prevent the abuse of the process of Court the application is liable to be dismissed with cost.
Therefore, accordingly the application is dismissed with cost assessed at 100 GMs which according to me, is the minimum level of cost in this respect.
Such cost is to be paid to the respondent/writ petitioner within a week from date.
Let an urgent xeroxed certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the parties within two weeks from the date of putting the requisites.
Application dismissed.