Amitava Lala, J - The aforesaid writ petition was placed with WP No. 9236(W) of 1999, WP No. 9951(W) of 1999, WP No. 9205 of 1999, WP No. 9227(W) of 1999, WP No. 17203(W) of 1999, WP No. 16273(W) of 1999 and WP No. 9204(W) of 1999 because all the matters are similarly placed for analogous hearing.
Therefore, by consent of the parties, the matters are placed for analogous hearing.
I have narrated the facts of the first matter because facts of the other matters might have been different on account of various dates and figures but not in substance.
2.
The petitioner under the writ petition attained the age of superannuation on 26th July, 1998 and she applied for extension of her service beyond 60 years of age on 4th February, 1998 followed by a reminder dated 17th July, 1998.
Although such application was made before six months of the normal age of superannuation but the concerned District Primary School Council did not consider the same.
3.
Extension of service of the Primary School teachers is governed by Rule 4A of the rules framed under Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930 which is as follows :  "A teacher appointed by the Board may be retained in service upto the age of 60 years, but the Board may, if it thinks fit, grant thereafter extension of service of a teacher on a year to year basis upto the age of 65 years, provided the teacher continues to be physically fit and mentally alert.
Explanation - The continuous period of service extended beyond the age of 60 years of the teacher will count towards increment in the scale of pay, terminal benefits and other benefits with the approval of the Government."
4.
Rule 4A was amended on 27th April, 1992 and a condition was imposed to the effect that if a primary teacher opts for scale of pay for the period of 1st April, 1986 he/she can get extension of service on year to year basis upto 65 years.
If such teachers opt for scale made for 1990 he/she will have to retire at 60 years of age.
Such amended rule is as follows :  "4A.
(1) A teacher appointed by the Primary School Council or the District School Board, as the case may be, shall retire at the age of 60 years.
(2) The Primary School Council or the District School Board, as the case may be, may, if it thinks fit, extend the service of a teacher, who was in service on the 31st December, 1985, but did not opt for the revised scales of pay introduced with effect from the 1st January, 1986, or having opted for such revised scales of pay, subsequently withdrawns such option in terms of any order of the State Government in this behalf, beyond the age of 60 years, being the age of superannuation, on a year to year basis but not beyond the age of 65 years :  Provided that the teacher concerned is physically fit and mentally alert :  Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-rule, such teacher may opt for any revised scale of pay under any subsequent pay revision scheme, if he agrees to retire in superannuation for the time being in force where there is no such term.
2.
This notification shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of August, 1991."
By order of the Governor  Sd/- UK Ray  Secy.
to the Government of Wet Bengal" 5.
The petitioner alleged that so far as the question of option is concerned, no opportunity was given to the primary school teachers to file the same as the primary teachers challenged the amendment dated 27th April, 1992 by which optees of the new scale were denied the extension of service.
6.
The case of the primary teachers' association challenging amendment of the Rule 4A as above was allowed by a Single Bench of this Court in C.O.
No. 15619(W) of 1992 and the said amendment was set aside.
The State Government preferred an appeal which was finally decided by a Division Bench of this Court on 12th February, 1996.
Their Lordships recorded that it was argued by the State Government that the teachers who will be opting for higher scale of pay will retire at 60 years of age and who will retain old scale will be governed by old rules of retirement i.e. upto 65 years of age.
The Division Bench was pleased to hold that the teachers who will opt for new scale will retain new scale and can go beyond 60 years of age on extension upto 65 years.
The revised pay scale under GO No. 33-Edn.
(B) dated 7th March, 1990 contains a Clause that whoever opts for the revised pay under the said Government order will have to retire at 60 years of age.
The extension of service of the primary school teachers was governed by statutory Rule 4A and until such rule was amended the right of extension of service of the primary teachers would not have been taken away.
So the option for new scale in terms of GO No. 33-Edn.
(B) dated 7th March, 1990 theft (left ?)
no impression on the right of extension of primary teachers.
Rule 4A was amended on 27th April, 1992 and since then no opportunity to file option was given to the primary school teachers by the State Government.
7.
By an order under Memo No. 845-SE(P)/55-88/96(P) dated 12th August, 1998 the respondent No. 2 i.e. Joint Secretary, School Education Department Primary Branch, Government of West Bengal directed that the primary teachers will be at liberty to file options as follows :  (a) The primary teachers who got revised pay under 33-Edn(B) and received new pay scale upto 60 years and worked beyond 60 years in 1981 scale, may exercise option to retain the new scale and get pension on new scale provided the salary received by such teachers beyond 60 years of the age is refunded.
(b) The primary teacher who filed option under 33-Edn(B) and got revised pay and served beyond 60 years from 1, 2, 3 or 4 years of more on old scale of pay and whose services were discontinued by the respective Primary School Council beyond their attaining the age of 65 years in terms of order dated 12296 of the division bench of Supreme Court dated 1141996 may at their option get their pension etc. settled in pre 1186 scale of pay on the length of approved service they actually rendered, in such case, the salary overdrawn in the revised pay scale shall have to be refunded to the Government.
8.
The petitioner challenged such departmental order by saying the same is illegal, arbitrary and bad in law of the following reasons :  (a) The said order dated 12898 was in violation of the amended Rule 4A as the said rule permits the teacher to serve upto 65 years after withdrawing option under 33-Edn (B) and the present circular prohibits teachers to complete 65 years of age even if such teachers intend to withdrawn option filed under 33-Edn.
(B).
(b) The said order dated 12898 forces the teachers to compulsorily retire at an age beyond 60 but not at 65 and in the mid-day of service without any sanction of law.
(c) The demand for the refund of pay disbursed against service beyond 60 years of age is violative of Article 23 of the Constitution of India.
(d) The respondents acted malafide and arbitrarily by holding that the primary teachers were discontinued in service by orders of Court dated 12296 and dated 11496 although none of the primary teachers who were working beyond 60 years of age was discontinued in service by any order of Council or Government nor the court did not pass any such order permitting the respondents to discontinue services of primary teachers.
(e) The order passed 12898 is violative of orders dated 12296 of High Court and 11496 of Supreme Court.
9.
The petitioner is still working in the school as before and discharging the function of the head teacher.
The petitioner opted for refund of the scale of pay under Edn (B) and to retain per April, 1986 scale to get the opportunity of extension of service but the respondents have not taken any steps for granting opportunity of extension of service.
10.
The petitioner has stated in this petition that she is physically fit and mentally alert to continue in her service.
Unless the respondents are directed to extend the service of the petitioner in terms of amended Rule 4A the petitioner will suffer irreparable loss and injury.
11.
Under such circumstances, the writ petition was moved praying Inter alia the writ was in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondent to rescind and cancel Memo No. 845-SE (Pry) dated 12th August, 1998, particularly Clause A(3) and for further issuance of fresh order strictly in terms of the directions contained in the judgment of the Appeal Court dated 12th February, 1996 and to allow the petitioner teacher who opts for pre Ist January, 1986 scale to get extension of service upto age of 65 years in terms of Rule 4A as amended by notification dated 27th April, 1992 and not to interfere in the service of petitioner and for further incidental order or orders in connection thereto including writ of certiorari.
12.
In the course of discussion following judgements were referred to understand the position and coming to a conclusion in this respect.
As a result whereof the following judgments were referred : 1990(1) CLJ 511 (West Bengal Headmasters Association & Ors v. State of West Bengal & Ors), 1991(2) CLJ 188 (West Bengal Headmasters Association and Ors v. State of West Bengal and Ors) the unreported decision in CO 8845 (W) of 1996 (Prathamik Sikshak Kalyan Samity & Ors v. State of West Bengal) with C.O.
No. 9000(W) of 1996 (Arun Kumar Das v. State of West Bengal with FMAT No. 1997 of 1995 (State of West Bengal v. West Bengal Primary Teachers Association) with FMAT No. 2047-50 of 1995, FMAT No. 2274 of 1995 and 1998(2) CHN 276 (Srimanta Kumar Mondal & Ors v. The State of West Bengal & Ors).
13.
It was held in the first decision that age of superannuation of 60 years is best practice followed under the administrative umbrella and such also is the position with regard to extension of service upto 65 years which State Government is within its right to modify by another administrative order.
14.
In the second judgement the Appeal Court considered the issue afresh where it was held that an administrative order can only supplement and not supplement a statutory provision and if both cannot co-exist, then the administrative order has to give way to the statutory provision.
15.
So far as the fourth judgment is concerned, the same is very much pertinent to the question of options in respect of amended Rule 4A of the said rules whereunder the consideration was made in respect of the judgment reported in 1990(1) CLJ 511 (supra).
A Division Bench under the aforesaid judgement considered that a Single bench of this Court as reported in 1990(1) CLJ 511 (supra) had categorically stated that if the Rule 4A of the rules for the primary teachers was amended there was two difficulty for the State to enforce the age of retirement under the concerned memorandum and in ordering portion it was directed that the aforesaid memorandum dated 31st July, 1981 shall not be operative in case of those primary teachers who are covered by the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930 until the existing Rule 4A, framed under the said Act of 1930, is suitably amended which has been already amended, and shall be applicable to them as well with all its course.
The said rule was amended and the judgment and order reached its finality since neither of the parties preferred an appeal against such order.
In next judgment reported in 1991(2) CLJ 188 (supra) the Court did not find that there is any substance to hold that by amending Rule 4A right of extension of service beyond 60 years would not be taken away.
In that case, there was no alternatives provided under the amended Rule 4A.
Those who want to come under the old administrations they are entitled as a matter of right to retain that, on the contrary, those who will be exercising option for revised pay scale will have no right to extension of service beyond 60 years.
The most important thing is that the age of retirement has not been changed or altered.
The age of the retirement was fixed 60 years and still remains fixed at 60 years.
The only thing that is sought to be taken away is the right for consideration of service for extension beyond the age of 60 years upto the age of 65 years on certain terms and conditions.
The State Government had kept both the avenues open and it was for the teachers to exercise their options or not.
Under such circumstances, the Division Bench held that they did not find anything illegal or wrongful on the part of the State Government in amending Rule 4A.
Rule 4A cannot be said to be ultra vires inasmuch as Section 106 of the Primary Education Act provides a general power to make rules for the purpose of this Act and it is well settled by several rules of Privy Council and Supreme Court that without the general power any rule can be framed travelling beyond the particular power conferred under the sub-section (2).
Accordingly, the Division Bench did not find any substance with regard to the question of vires of Rule 4A of the said rules.
It was held therein that it is a well settled principle that nobody has any right to protest against the rule of retirement.
One of the conditions of service is the age of retirement, and there is no estoppel against statute and/or any restriction on the power of the employer to change the terms and conditions of service.
16.
The State Government has clearly provided that those who will be opting for the revised pay scale will have to retire at the age of 60 years.
One cannot be allowed to have the advantage of both the benefits.
The two groups are quite distinct and not similarly situated.
It was not a case of any of the rights or privileges of the existing teachers being taken away.
There cannot be any restriction in respect of the power of amendment, unless it is established that the amendment is ultra vires and violative of provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was already held by the Division Bench that the amendment is not ultra vires.
17.
A teacher can exercise option for the new revised pay scale and if he exercises that option he will have to accept both the advantages and disadvantages of that formula.
One cannot browbeat (approbate ?)
and reprobate at the same time.
A teacher who would not be opting for a revised pay scale would be allowed to be governed by the old rules of retirement.
Ultimately it was held by the Division Bench that the teachers who were governed by the old terms and conditions are entitled to keep and preserve the same in full and there was no difficulty.
The teachers cannot be allowed to put their luck on two different boats.
In view of such judgment the impugned departmental order being Memo No. 845- SE(Pry)/5S-88/96(Pt.) dated 12th August, 1998 was issued.
The impugned part of the impugned memorandum is Clause (A)(3) which is as follows :  "The primary school teachers who had opted for the revised pay scale in terms of GO No. 33-Edn(B) dated 7.3.90 and took pay in that pay scale upto 60 years of age, but continued beyond 60 years and served for varying periods of 1, 2, 3 or 4 years or more on old scale of pay and whose services were discontinued by the District Primary School Council before their attaining the age of 65 years in terms of the aforesaid orders of the Learned Division Bench dated 1221996 and also the order of the Supreme Court of India dated 11496 may, at their option :  Either refund to the Government, the salary drawn in the old pay scale, for their service beyond 60 years of age in order to be eligible for consideration of pension etc. in the revised pay scale.
or get their pension etc., settled in the pre 1186 scale of pay on the length of approved service they actually render.
In such case, the salaruy overdrawn in the revised pay scale shall have to be refunded to the Government."
18.
In the last judgment a Special Bench of this Court also held that earlier judgement having attained finality it is not necessary to question correctness or otherwise of the said decision relating to the interpretation made by the Court as regards necessity to amend Rule 4A of 1940 rules in view of the fact that the said judgment had been accepted by all concerned and Rule 4A stood amended.
When such an amendment had taken place, the vires, therefore, cannot be questioned particularly when a statutory instrument, viz., the notification issued in the year 1991 and another notification dated 27th April, 1992.
Therefore, these writ petitions before this Bench cannot look into the question whether the amendment was ultra vires or not.
Hence it is intra vires.
Since it is so, the scope of the application is very limited in nature.
The petitioners' contention is that in view of the unreported judgement of the Appeal Court the aforesaid teachers who will opt for new scale will retain new scale and also can go beyond 60 years of age on extension upto 65 years.
But as per the impugned memorandum the same was taken away in view of GO No. 33-Edn (B) dated 7th March, 1990 which contains a Clause that whoever opts for revised pay under the said Government order will have to retire at 60 years of age.
The extension of service of the primary school teachers was governed by the Statutory Rule 4A and until the same was amended the right of extension of service of primary teachers would not have been taken away.
So the option for new scale in terms of GO No. 33-Edn (B) dated 7th March, 1990 left no impression on the right of the extension of service of the primary teachers until the Rule 4A was amended on 27th April, 1992 and since then no opportunity of filing option was given to the primary school teachers by the State Government.
Hence, incorporation of option under 33-Edn(B) dated 7th March, 1990 in Memorandum No. 845-SE(Pry) dated 12th August, 1998 is illegal, arbitrary and bad in law.
19.
The Division Bench of this Court under the unreported judgement as aforesaid has observed and inferred that fixation of age of retirement does not amount to removal or termination of service within the meaning of Section 311 of Constitution of India had further exercise of option does not mean that there was a contract, whereby a limitation was put on prescribing the age of superannuation.
The teachers who exercised the form of option were subject to change.
That being the position, it is too late to contend that a teacher will be entitled to draw the revised scale of pay in accordance with the Clause of memorandum dated 7th March, 1990 and at the same time he will not accept the age of superannuation and will be opting for revised pay scale.
The State Government has not taken away the existing rights and privileges of the teachers concerned.
The rights of those teachers who want to be governed by the old rules of retirement have not been disturbed or taken away and that they would be retiring at the age of 60 years and they will have a right of consideration for extension of service upto 65 years.
20.
In this case, the State Government have introduced two formulas; under one formula, the primary teachrs who do not want a change in the terms and conditions of service, could remain at the old pay-scale with the right of getting extension of service, upto 65 years, beyond 60 years.
That right had not been touched or taken away, on the contrary, it has been preserved in full.
For teachers who would be opting for the revised pay-scale, would have to exercise undertaking that they will have to retire at the age of 60 years and they will have no right of extension in service beyond 60 years.
21.
The claim of the writ petitioners, is that they should enjoy the revised pay-scale and also enjoy their right of extension of service beyond 60 years, upto the age of 65 years.
In other words, they want to take the advantage of both the schemes which are advantageous to them.
They want to approbate and reprobate at the same time, to accept what is beneficial to them and not to accept anything which is prejudicial to them.
A person cannot be allowed to ride parallel horses or travel in two boats at the same time.
He has to exercise option keeping his eyes open that if he opts for a revised scale of pay, he has to retire at the age of 60 years and if he does not, he can remain at his old pay-scale with the old conditions of retirement at the age of 60 years with the right of extension of service upto 65 years.
22.
According to me, the position has not been changed even after the issuance of the impugned memorandum under challenge under 845-SE (Pry) dated 12th August, 1998.
Let us confine my discussion to the relevant changes of the Rule 4A of the rules made for the appointment under the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930 and continued with introduction of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973.
Such Act under Section 106 gives power to the State Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
23.
Earlier rule provides that a teacher appointed by the Court may be retained in service upto the age of 60 years, but the Board may, if it thinks fit, grant extension year to year basis upto 65 years provided the incumbent is physically fit and mentally alert.
The explanation with regard to the same prescribes that continuous period of service extended beyond the age of 60 years will count towards increment of scale of pay, terminal benefits and other benefits with the approval of the Government.
Such Rule 4A was substituted on 27th April, 1992, by introducing following schemes thereunder :  (a) A teacher appointed by the Primary School Council or District School Board as the case may be, shall retire at the age of 60 years;  (b) If one is in service as on 31st December, 1985 such service can be extended by the aforesaid bodies, but he cannot opt for the revised scales of pay introduced with effect from 1st January, 1986;  (c) Having opted for such revised scale of pay, cannot withdraw such option in terms of any order of the State Government in this behalf, beyond the age of 60 years, being the age of a superannuation on a year to year basis but not beyond the age of 65 years;  (d) Such extension is dependent upon the condition that the teacher is physically fit and mentally alert;  (e) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-rule (2) of Rule 4A a teacher may opt for a revised scale of pay under any subsequent pre-revision scheme, if he agrees to retire in accordance with the terms of such scheme or at the age of superannuation for the time being in force where there is no such term;  (f) This notification shall depend on a retrospective effect and deemed to be come into force on 26th August, 1991;  24.
The Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court under the unreported judgment dated 12th February, 1996 in the matter of the State of West Bengal v. West Bengal Primary Teachers Association, in F.M.A.T.
No. 1997 of 1995 and Ors dealt with the situation extensively and ultimately held that one has to exercise option keeping his eyes open that if he opts for a revised scale of pay he has to retire at the age of 60 years and if he does not he can remain at least in the old pay scale with the old conditions of retirement at the age of 60 years with the right of extension of service upto 65 years.
It is categorically held that a person cannot be allowed to ride parallel horses or travel in two boats at the same time.
25.
In compliance with such judgment and order as passed on 12th February, 1996 a Memorandum No. 845-SE(Pry) dated 12th August, 1992 came into the light and the same has been challenged under the writ petition.
First point came in the mind of this Court how the single Bench can go beyond the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench in this respect.
Therefore, the same can not be done.
Hence the only remaining question is whether the impugned memorandum has been issued in compliance with the judgment and order of the Division Bench or Not.
A Special bench of this Court as reported in 1998(2) CHN 276 (Srimanta Kumar Mondal and ors. v. The State of West Bengal and Ors) held that in view of the fact that the said judgment had been accepted by all concerned and Rule 4A stood amended.
When such an amendment had taken place the vires thereof cannot be questioned particularly when a statutory instrument viz., notification issued in the year 1991 and another notification dated 27th April, 1992.
While considering this issue, the Special Bench was also pleased to take into account to view of this Division bench of this Court.
Firstly the Special Bench in this regard held that from the judgment and order of the Division Bench a special leave petition was moved which was summarily dismissed.
So far as the merit is concerned the Special Bench ultimately held that despite not being in the State service the teaching staff of the non-aided schools could not claim as a matter of right, both higher scales of pay i.e. equal to those of the teaching staff under the public management as also the superannuation age upto 65 years whereas the age of superannuation in respect of teaching staff of the school under public management was merely 60 years.
Thus, the approach of the State to bring parity in the condition of service of both groups of teachers cannot be said to be unreasonable.
The teachers in terms of 1990 notifications had thus two options viz. (1) to agree with the age of retirement at 60 years and to opt for the new scale of pay, or (ii) to agree with the old scale of pay and continue to serve the institution upto 65 years upon obtaining extension in their service.
They, thus, were in fact and substance given an option to opt for the old scale of pay in the event they wanted to serve upto 65 years.
The notification in question had to be issued keeping in view of the various decisions of this Court.
Ultimately the Special Bench accepted the view of the decision of the West Bengal Headmasters Association v. The State of West Bengal, reported in 1991(2) CLJ 188 as aforesaid, whereunder as regards the determination of age.
Therefore, I find that there is no anomalous situation in respect of condition of service upto 60 years or condition of service beyond 60 years.
There is an uniform stand as regards the same followed in numerous occasions by our High Court even by the Special Bench as above.
Such judgment was delivered on 2nd of July, 1998.
The impugned memorandum in terms of the judgment dated 12th February, 1996 was issued on 12th August, 1998.
The basic complaint of the petitioners/herein is as regards introduction of Clause (A)(3) as above.
But I do not find any reason to interfere with the same since according to me the memorandum is a true reflection of the judgment and order of the Division Bench of this Court.
For the sake of repetition I say that purpose of making applications galore on different occasions, similarly with the present applications, are to get opportunity of extension of service and benefit of new scale of pay at a time, therefore, taking plea that they have got no opportunity to file their option is fictitious.
If one chooses to challenge the amendment before the Court of law obviously they will not get the opportunity.
But now more interesting aspect is there either all of or many of the writ petitiones have already given their options in terms of Memo No.
845-SE(Pry.
)/5S-88/96 Pt. dated 12th August, 1998 on one hand but on the other hand challenged the issue.
Particularly, the first petitioner on which much the stress has been given by the Learned Counsel I find such document in the annexures.
26.
Under such circumstances, now at this stage there is hardly any scope to reopen inviolable or sacrosanct state of affairs in this respect.
Further discussion in this regard will be far more academic.
This being the position, I dismiss this application of the writ petitioners.
Interim orders stand vacated.
No order is passed as to costs.
This order will govern all the connected matters as aforesaid.
27.
Let an urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the parties within two weeks from the date of submitting of the requisites.
Petition dismissed.