M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The instant writ application is filed questioning the letter dated 1511996 of the respondent Assistant Security Commission, calling upon the petitioner to resume duty failing which disciplinary action would be taken against the petitioner (Annexure `D').
Directions have also been sought for in the writ application restraining the respondents for drawing up any proceedings pursuant to the said letter dated 1511996 (Annexure `D').
By the application CAN 476 of 1999, petitioner prayed for amendment of the writ application by adding the reliefs of cancellation of the charge sheet dated 1431996 being Annexure `J' to the amendment application, the enquiry officer's report dated 26496, the show cause notice dated 17696 and the final order of punishment dated 10996 being Annexures `Q' and `S' respectively.
2.
Brief facts leading to the filing of the instant writ application are that the petitioner is a Constable in the Railway Protection Force (for short RPF).
On 2831995, petitioner was granted one day's casual leave and was to resume duty on 29395 but the petitioner reported sick from 29395 under South Eastern Railway Hospital at Garden Reach.
Is is the case of the petitioner that the Doctors at South Eastern Railway Hospital, Garden Reach decided on 22.8.95 that the petitioner should be de-categorised due to his mental imbalance.
Thereafter, his case was referred to Central Institute of Psychiatric, Kankey, Ranchi where he was admitted on 24.11.95 and was released on 30.11.95.
According to the petitioner, the Chief Medical Officer certified the petitioner fit for light duties (without arms) on 2.12.95 but the respondents despite the opinion of Doctors, the petitioner was made "fit to join duty as Constable in RPF" vide letter dated 271295 of the Medical Director, Central Hospital, Garden Reach, (Pg.
24).
3.
The case of the respondent, however, is that upon his release on 30.11.95 by the Central Institute, Psychiatric, Kankey, Ranchi and as per the advice of the Medical Officer of the Institute who declared the petitioner fit for duty without arms, respondent authorities asked the petitioner to resume duty immediately after taking fitness certificate from Hospital, Garden Reach.
Thereafter, the petitioner was asked to resume duty and he failed to do so.
4.
The case of the petitioner is that after receiving the impugned letter dated 15196, the wife of the petitioner on 24196 informed the respondent that the petitioner is still under treatment and is not in position to resume duty at present and prayed for sympathetic consideration.
Questioning the said letter dated 15196, the writ application was filed at that stage.
Thereafter, it appears that on 22396, the petitioner was served with a charge sheet under Rule 153 of RPF Rules, 1987 whereby the petitioner was inter alia informed that an enquiry officer has been appointed to conduct the enquiry against the petitioner and the petitioner was instructed to attend the enquiry on 28396 and to inform the name of his defence friend, if any, within 25396.
5.
The charge levelled against the petitioner was that of neglect of duty and disobedience of the orders in that the constable SK Das (petitioner) was absenting himself from duty with the effect from 9196 without any authority and intimation.
In the statement of allegations contained in the charge sheet, it was stated that DMO, G Rc.
after examining declared the petitioner fit for duty and notices were issued and sent to his home address directing him to report to duty but the petitioner did not report to duty nor sent any authority/intimation and thus he was absenting from duty from 9196 which amounted to neglect of duty and disobedience of orders (Annexure `J').
6.
In reply to the said charge sheet, petitioner by his letter dated 25396 (Annexure `K') complained that he had not been afforded an opportunity to submit his reply for consideration before the enquiry was initiated and, therefore, the respondent authorities could not have formed an opinion that an enquiry should be at all held or the charge of unauthorized absence be dropped.
The enquiry officer, by the said letter, was requested to stay his hands in the matter until the writ petition is not admitted and a further prayer was made that in view of the Court case pending in the matter of "joining duty" in a de-categorized or ministerial post, no imputation of unauthorized absence should be made against the petitioner or be enquired into at that stage.
7.
Thereafter, by a letter (Annexure `L') dated 25396, the petitioner was informed that no directions from the Hon'ble High Court at Calcutta have been received for stopping the proceeding enquiry and, therefore, the enquiry will be held on 28396 as per the previous intimation.
The petitioner through his lawyer by letter dated 27396, Annexure `M', informed the respondent authorities as also the enquiry officer that the writ petition was pending in the High Court at Calcutta and the direction of the respondents to the petitioner to resume duty was sub judice and as such, the charge sheet issued was arbitrary and illegal.
The proposed enquiry should not be proceeded with, inasmuch as, unless the question of de-categorized had not been decided in the said matter, enquiry cannot be proceeded with.
Request was made not to proceed with the enquiry till the hearing of the instant writ application to avoid further litigation.
Reference was made to the opinion of Doctors for de- categorization of the petitioner and, therefore, the charge levelled against the petitioner was baseless, mala fide and motivated and the enquiry, it was stated, was without jurisdiction and mala fide.
8.
By their letter dated 12496, Annexure `O', the petitioner was informed that twice he was asked to attend enquiry on 28396 and 12496 but he failed to attend on both the occasions.
He was, therefore, given a last chance to attend the enquiry on 25.4.96 failing which the enquiry will be conducted ex parte.
9.
In reply, the wife of the petitioner wrote to the enquiry officer to consider the case of inability of the petitioner to attend before the enquiry officer.
It appears that the enquiry officer refused to receive the said letter of the petitioner's wife.
Thereafter, the petitioner was served with a letter dated 17696, Annexure `Q', enclosing therewith a copy of the enquiry officer's report and intimating the petitioner that if he wish to make any representation or submissions against the findings of the enquiry officer, he may do so in writing within 15 days.
10.
In reply thereto, the wife of the petitioner submitted a representation dated 19/31.7.96, Annexure `R' wherein it was stated that after the letter dated 9196 whereby the request was rejected and the petitioner was asked to resume duty, the petitioner's mental problem intensified.
His psychiatric condition deteriorated alarmingly after the petitioner went through the letter dated 15196.
Petitioner's condition further aggravated after he received the letter dated 19396 appointing the enquiry officer to enquire into the charges.
Reference was made to the correspondence and to the medical certificates as also to the letter of the lawyer of the petitioner, referred to supra and it was prayed to help the petitioner by allowing him to have proper treatment and to join a de-categorized post after he becomes fit to resume duties in a categorized post.
11.
By the order dated 3996, Annexure `S', the petitioner was imposed the punishment of removal of service.
The aforesaid proceedings have been questioned by amendment of the writ application.
The case of the respondents as setout in affidavit-in-opposition is that after release of the petitioner on 30.11.95, Medical Officer of the Institute examined the petitioner and declared him fit for light duty without arms.
The petitioner was asked to resume duty immediately after taking fit certificate from OPD, G Rc.
and accordingly, the petitioner was asked to resume duty with fit certificate but he has not yet resumed duty.
The petitioner was discharged from out-door sick list by the DMO, OPG, G Rc.
on 9196 and discharged certificate was sent to the respondents.
It is further stated that the Constable in Special Intelligence Branch (SIB) used to perform duty without arms and, therefore, the petitioner being posted in SIB need not be de-categorized, inasmuch as he can perform his duty in SIB without arm.
It has been denied and disputed that the certificate issued by the Assistant Security Commissioner, Intelligence, RPF whereby the petitioner was intimated that he should collect fit certificate from the OPD, G Rc.
was contrary to the opinion of experts.
12.
As regards to the departmental proceedings, the stand of the respondents is that the same was conducted in accordance with the rules and the petitioner had been afforded every opportunity to participate in the enquiry and having chosen not to participate in the said enquiry, failed to avail of the opportunity of presenting his case.
The enquiry having been thus conducted in compliance with the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner having been found guilty of the charges levelled against him, no fault can be found with the orders of the respondents impugned in the writ application.
13.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. SK Dutt that the respondents being fully aware of the mental condition of the petitioner and the certificate issued by the authorities of the Central Institute of Psychiatric, Kankey, Ranchi whereby petitioner was declared fit to resume light duties without arms, the respondent authorities could not and should not have called upon the petitioner to join duty in the post of Constable RPF by their letter dated 15196 impugned in the writ application.
The petitioner having questioned the aforesaid action of the respondents in the writ application, the further action taken by the respondents of issuing the charge sheet conducting enquiry which the petitioner could not attend, in view of his mental condition, as informed to the enquiry officer and the respondent authorities by the wife of the petitioner, the enquiry proceedings leading upto the dismissal order are vitiated and liable to be set aside.
14.
On the other hand, the contention of Mr. S Sen, learned counsel for the respondent authorities is that the petitioner is serving in the SIB and, therefore, the question of the petitioner being asked to join in duty with arms does not arise despite the discharge from the Central Institute of Psychiatric and even as per the certificate issued by the said authority, the petitioner was declared "fit to resume light duties without arms".
The petitioner did not join duty despite opportunity having been afforded to him and instead when the letter was issued to the petitioner to join duty, he questioned the same by filing writ application and despite no interim orders having passed thereon, the petitioner did not join duty.
Consequently, action as per law was initiated and the petitioner was afforded every opportunity to participate in the enquiry which he failed to avail and, therefore, no fault can be found with the action of the respondent authorities in passing the orders subsequently impugned by amendment application.
15.
There is no dispute that the petitioner was suffering from mental illness and was referred to the Central Institute of Psychiatric, Kankey, Ranchi.
The petitioner was admitted to the said institute on 24.11.95 and discharged on 30.11.95.
The discharge certificate, being Annexure `C' (at pg.
23), certifies that the petitioner has no psychiatric features at present.
It was further certified that :  "he is fit to resume his duties without arms."
The word `normal' was struck off in the said certificate by the Medical Officer.
The Medical Director, Central Hospital, Garden Reach by his letter dated 271295 at pg.
24 certified that the petitioner was admitted on 24.11.95 and discharged from the Central Institute of Psychiatric on 30.11.95 and thereafter he was examined by the Chief Medical Director, SE Railway on 20.12.95. he was certified to for join duty as Constable in RPF.
The Medical Director informed the ASC, Intelligence to send the petitioner to OPD to collect the fitness certificate.
By Annexure `D', ASC, Intelligence directed the petitioner to collect fitness certificate from OPD, R Rc.
and join duty as Constable in RPF.
16.
The petitioners's wife by her letter dated 91196 replied to the same and therein, it is stated that the Constables in Railway Protection Force have to perform duties with Rifles always in trying situation and relapse of mental order might result.
It was in this context that the Doctors had diagnosed and recommended petitioner for medical de-categorization.
Prayer was made to appreciate the issue and take up the matter with the Chief Medical Director of Railway for proper treatment and medical de-categorization of the husband of the petitioner.
In reply thereto by the impugned letter dated 15196, the petitioner was advised to resume duties failing which the disciplinary action would be taken against him, it was intimated.
The petitioner was thereafter proceeded with departmentally and removed from service.
17.
A perusal of the enquiry report would disclose that the charge levelled against the petitioner was of neglect of duty and disobedience of orders.
In the statement of allegations particulars have been mentioned with regard to the petitioner being referred to Central Institute of Psychiatric, his discharge certificate dated 2.12.95, certificate of DMO, CRC declaring the petitioner fit for duty with the effect from 9196.
Notices having been issued and sent to home address of the petitioner, he neither reported to duty nor sent any intimation and thus absented from duty from 9196 which amounts to neglect of duty and disobedience of orders being a member of disciplined force.
The enquiry officer found the petitioner guilty of the charge levelled against him which was accepted by the disciplinary authority and order of removal was passed.
18.
It was the contention of the learned advocate for the petitioner that the question of neglect of duty does not arise as the petitioner even according to the substance of the charge never reported to duty.
The petitioner could not have been charged or proceeded against for `neglect of duty'.
19.
Section 17 of the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 provides for the penalty for neglect of duty etc. Sub-section (1) thereto reads as under :  "17.
Penalties for neglect of duty, etc. --  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in Sec. 9, every enrolled member of the Force who shall be guilty of any violation of duty of wilful breach or neglect of any rule or lawful order made by a superior officer, or who shall withdraw from duties of his office without permission, or who, being absent on leave, fails, without reasonable cause, to report himself for duty on the expiration of the leave, or who engages himself without authority for any employment other than his duty as an enrolled member of the Force, or who shall be guilty of cowardice may be taken into Force custody and shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one year."
Rule 153 prescribes the procedure for imposing major punishment.
The substance of the charge as noticed above would fall within the ambit of Section 17 of the Act and more particularly to the following :  "who shall withdraw from his office without permission or who be absent on leave, fails without reasonable cause to report himself for duty on the expiration of the leave."
There is, therefore, no force in the contention of the learned advocate for the petitioner that the petitioner could not have been charged with neglect of duty.
20.
The petitioner was on leave and had been referred to the Central Institute of Psychiatric wherefrom he was discharged.
The certificate of fitness was granted by the said authority and thereafter by the Director Medical Hospital, Garden Reach.
The petitioner was afforded an opportunity to join duty.
He did not report for duty despite such communication.
A prima facie opinion could, therefore, be formed by the respondent authority as to unauthorized absence from duty.
The petitioner made himself liable to be removed from service in terms of Rule 156.
Clause (b) of Rule 156 read as under ;  (b) Removal from service :  (i) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  (ii) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  (iii) absence from duty without proper intimation or overstay beyond sanctioned leave without sufficient cause."
Under the said Rule 156 power has been conferred to award punishment of dismissal or removal to any member of the force in the cases specified therein.
21.
Under Rule 272 procedure is prescribed for placement of the members of the Force on sick list.
The said Rule 2721 to the extent relevant reads as under :  "2721 : No member of the Force shall be taken on sick list by any Railway Medical Officer unless such member comes with a written reference known as `Sick Memo' from his controlling officer and also gives declaration in triplicate as per the pro forma at Annexure `A'.
The Controlling Officer shall issue `Sick Memo' to the member of the Force on demand, whether such member is on duty or on leave at the Headquarters.
While issuing such memo, the Controlling Officer shall mention on it, if the member is required/detailed for Special duty, under transfer orders, facing DAR action and avoiding to attend departmental enquiry or is habitual of reporting sick, etc.
In case such member is taken on sick list by Railway Medical Officer, the member shall intimate within 48 hours his Controlling Officer about his being taken on sick list and submit the Railway Medical Certificate to him."
The petitioner could not be considered to be on the sick list as the provisions of Rule 272 had not been complied with.
The petitioner neither obtained a `Sick Memo' from his Controlling Officer nor gave a declaration as per proforma.
22.
Either the petitioner was fit for duty or unfit to join duty.
It is not the case of the petitioner that he had been declared `unfit for duty' by any medical authority.
The specific case of the petitioner is that the medical opinion was that he was fit for joining duty/light duty without arms.
The petitioner ought to have joined duty without first insisting upon being de- categorized.
The petitioner failed to join duty.
It is not his case that he applied for medical leave and the same was not granted.
The communications relied upon by the petitioner sent by his wife do not show that the petitioner was seeking extension of leave or applied for leave.
The insistence appears to be for de-categorization before insisting upon the petitioner to join the duty.
23.
In the circumstances, no infirmity can be found in the impugned order dated 15196 of the Assistant Security Commissioner (Intelligence) whereby the petitioner was advised to resume duty failing which the disciplinary action would be taken against the petitioner.
It has, therefore, to be held that the respondent authorities were justified in holding the department enquiry.
Once it is found as above that the authorities were justified in holding the departmental enquiry, the question as to the validity of the departmental enquiry and the order of the disciplinary authority based thereon needs to be examined.
24.
As already noticed supra, the petitioner had been issued with the chargesheet statement of allegations, list of documents by which articles of charge proposed to be sustained and list of witnesses by whom the articles of charges are proposed to be sustained.
The petitioner did not participate in the said enquiry only on the ground that the matter was sub-judice in Court in the instant writ petition with regard to the joining of duty.
No directions had been issued by the Court in the instant writ application and there was no legal impediment in proceeding with the enquiry.
The petitioner was afforded ample opportunity of participating in the enquiry.
From Annexure `O' dated 12496, it will be seen that the petitioner was asked to attend enquiry on 28396 and 12496 but he failed to attend on both the occasions and a last chance was given to him to attend enquiry on 25.4.96.
The receipt of the said letters is not disputed on the contrary request was made by the wife of the petitioner to consider the case of the petitioner's inability to attend office for 10 days to come.
It is noteworthy that the petitioner filed the writ application on 7.3.96 but did not choose to himself reply to the letters of the respondent authorities or the enquiry officer when the enquiry was fixed on 28396 and on 12496.
I am, therefore, not prepared to accede to the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner that the proposed enquiry suffers from violations of principles of natural justice.
Every opportunity had been afforded to the petitioner to participate in the enquiry.
The enquiry was even adjourned on two occasions for the aforesaid purpose.
The petitioner failed to avail of the said opportunity.
25.
Based on the material on record, the enquiry officer held the charge proved in the following terms :  "It has been proved that though the delinquent received the notices and orders time to time, but he did not show any interest of joining of duty and also to appear in the enquiry, though he was given opportunities three times and he received all the notices in time.
He did not submit any appeal or reply against his charges."
Keeping in view the limit, scope and jurisdiction of a Writ Court exercising powers of judicial review under Art. 226, it is well settled that the jurisdiction is supervisory and the Court exercising it is not entitled to act as an Appellate Court.
It means that the findings of fact reached by the disciplinary authority as a result of appreciation of evidence cannot be reopened or questioned in writ proceedings.
An error of law, which is apparent on the face of record can be corrected by a Writ Court but not an error of fact.
In regard to a finding of fact a writ of certiorari can be issued, if it is shown that in arriving at the said finding the authority had taken into account irrelevant matters or failed to take into account relevant matters or the findings of fact is based on no evidence, that would be regards as an error of law whcih can be corrected by a writ of certiorari.
The adequacy or sufficiency of evidence led on a point and the inference of fact to be drawn from the said findings are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the authority and the same cannot be agitated before a Writ Court.
26.
Judged in the light of the above, no legal infirmity can be found with the conclusions arrived at by the enquiry officer based whereupon the disciplinary authority passed the order of removal from service impugned in the instant writ application.
It must in the facts of the instant case be held that the departmental enquiry was competent and had been conducted in a fair and proper manner.
Petitioner was afforded an opportunity of submitting his representation against the enquiry officer's findings, a copy whereof had been served upon the petitioner.
The disciplinary authority accepted the said findings and passed the impugned order of removal from service.
Such order was within the competence of the respondent authority upon the establishment of the charge levelled against the petitioner.
27.
As to the quantum of punishment, it must be stated that such punishment could have been awarded to the petitioner upon the establishment of the charge levelled against the petitioner in terms of Rule 156(b)(iii).
It is now fairly well settled that where an administrative decision relating to punishment in disciplinary cases is questioned as arbitrary under Article 14, the Court is confined to Wednesbury principles.
The Court while reviewing the punishment and if it is satisfied that Wednesbury principles are violated, it is normally to remit the matter to the administrative authority for such decision as to quantum of punishment.
28.
Judged in the light of the same, I find no illegality in the award of punishment nor can it be said that the punishment awarded was shockingly disproportionate.
29.
In the circumstances, the writ application deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed, however, without any order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this judgment and order be furnished to the appearing parties, if applied for, on priority basis.
Petition dismissed.