Amar Dutt, J - Samat Rai Sharma has filed the present writ petition for issuance of a direction to the respondents to release pension and pensionary benefits to him which have been denied to him despite the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
2.
Briefly stated the facts necessary for the decision of the petition may be recapitulated as under :-  3.
The petitioner had joined the Electrical and Mechanical Department of Government of Rajasthan on 4.12.1996 and continued as Junior Engineer till 1951963.
On 20.5.1963, he was appointed as Assistant Engineer (Civil) on temporary basis with the Border Roads Development Board (in short `the Board').
He was then treated as quasi-permanent with effect from 20.11.1969 and thereafter appointed on permanent basis on 381972.
His duties with the GREF required him to work at high altitudes where the temperature fell to Zero degree's Celsius and on account of this, he had become sick and contracted intestinal disease.
He was hospitalised in Military Hospital Jalandhar and on 31.5.1967 the Medical Board after examining him opined that the disease was not attributable to service conditions.
The petitioner submits that the Board was of the opinion that the disease could recur in case he is required to resume his duties at high altitudes but the respondents had ignored the medical advice and continued to post him in such areas.
Consequently, the petitioner started remaining seriously ill since 1971 on account whereof he required constant treatment and medical care.
In 1973 during the course of another check up done by the Medical Board he was placed in medical category III and this Board also opined that the disease of the petitioner was aggravated and directly attributable to conditions of the service.
He had eventually submitted his resignation with effect from 191974.
4.
In the petition, it was further stated that the conditions of the service of the employees of the Border Roads Organisation were in addition to the civil service rules, governed by Army Act, as a result whereof in December, 1976 a desertion roll was issued against the petitioner in exercise of the provisions of the Army Act.
On coming to know of this development, the petitioner reported for duty on 171977 and as he continued to be in Medical Category III he requested the respondents not to send him in a field area.
This request was not acceded to and after five months service in the field, he suffered an attack of Haemstemesis (blood vomiting) and had to be removed to the Military Hospital, Jammu.
He was eventually discharged form the hospital on 15.2.1977 and at that time he was again put in Medical Category III (P).
The petitioner submits that there is no provision for this category and he ought to have been put in Medical Category IV and consequently on discharge he had applied for two months leave.
The respondents were not satisfied with this conduct and had again issued a desertion roll in respect of the petitioner on 3111978.
The result was that the Commanding Officer, Military Hospital, Pathankot had approached the respondents to issue a discharge notice in respect of the petitioner, to which respondent No. 2 wrote back that the petitioner was a case of chronic intestinal amoebiosis, and he should be declared fit for resuming duties.
In response to this communication Military Hospital has reiterated its stand regarding placing the petitioner in Medical Category IV.
Inspite of the recommendation, the petitioner was not being boarded out and the petitioner's representations against the stand taken by the respondents were not being heard.
The petitioner consequently was left with no alternative but to approach the civil Court to challenge the action of the respondents, by which he had been declared as a deserter.
The Sub Judge, Gurdaspur in the suit filed by the petitioner had restrained the respondents from taking action on the basis of desertion roll.
The petitioner was approached on behalf of the Chief Engineer of respondent No. 2 who offered that the desertion roll would be withdrawn if the petitioner applies for retirement under Rule FR-56K of 1965 Rules.
The petitioner agreed to this and his case was recommended by the Chief Engineer.
Thereafter, the petitioner withdrew the Civil suit.
The petitioner further stated that it was evident from Annexure P6, the petitioner's request for retirement was not accepted despite the repeated representations being made and ultimately the petitioner had approached this Court through C.W.P.
No. 2637 of 1981 for issuance of a direction for his retirement/invalidation and for quashing the desertion roll.
In that petition, this Court was pleased to stay the desertion roll and issued notice of motion to the respondents but the writ was eventually dismissed on the ground that the petitioner was governed by the provisions of Army Act and was amenable to its discipline.
The petitioner then filed another C.W.P.
No. 5206 of 1982, which was also dismissed.
Whereupon the petitioner moved C.W.P.
No. 5421 of 1983 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Apex Court issued notice in the following terms :  "Issue notice returnable within 2 weeks.
Pending notice, interim relief is granted to the petitioner to the extent that he shall not be arrested on the ground that he is a deserter."
5.
Upon appearance of the respondents, the Apex Court passed the following order :  "Mr. Goving Dass, learned counsel for the Union of India states that the suggestion made by this Court to consider the question of accepting the resignation tendered by the petitioner Shri Sampat Rai Sharma has been sympathetically considered and the same has been accepted which is evident from the letter dated Sept 6, 1984 written on behalf of the Director General, Border Road informing the learned Advocate on record Shri RN Paddar that on careful consideration of the case, the competent authority has accepted the resignation of Shri Sampat Rai Sharma (AE) with immediate effect.
In view of the resignation accepted by the competent authority nothing is left to be done in the petition.
Letter is placed on the record.
Both the writ petition and the SLP are disposed of accordingly."
6.
The petitioner further submits that he had applied for regularisation of his period from 191974 to 3061977 and then from 16121977 to 3.9.1984 and vide order dated 2541986 the respondents while regularising the aforesaid period did not finalise the case of the petitioner for grant of pension and other pensionary benefits.
Because of this grouse, the petitioner had moved C.W.P.
No. 1539 of 1986, which was disposed of by the apex Court with the following term :  "We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
In paragraph 25 of the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated as follows :  "The orders regarding his period of absence without leave have now been passed based on available records and his case for admissibility of pension shall be submitted to CDA (Pension), Allahabad, if his service is found to be satisfactory, as and when the application alongwith other connected record are received from the petitioner."
In view of the above statement, we feel that the case should be disposed of by asking the petitioner to apply to the concerned authority for payment of pension admissible to him under the rules and in accordance with law after furnishing of the necessary particulars required for the computation of the pension.
If the petitioner has not been paid salary in respect of any period during which he has served he may apply to the authority concerned for payment of such arrears of salary.
This authority concerned will consider the application for payment of pension and also application for payment of arrears of salary in accordance with law.
The writ petition is disposed of."
7.
The petitioner further asserts that despite the stand taken by the respondents before the Apex Court in Annexure P10, they are not releasing pension to him and are taking the plea that he is not entitled to the same because he had tendered his resignation and consequently on account of Rule 26 would not be entitled to the relief claimed for.
8.
The stand of the respondents in short is that under Rule 26, the petitioner is not entitled to pension as a matter of right in case of voluntary retirement.
The respondents relied upon Rule 20(1) of CCS (P) Rules, 1972 to say that once a person resigns he is not entitled to any benefits of service that may have accrued to him and therefore, pensionary benefits have been rightly withheld.
9.
The petitioner had filed replication, in which the original stand has been reiterated.
10.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record of the case.
11.
In this case, the petitioner seeks to rely upon two judgments of the Apex Court passed in the prior litigation between him and his employer for submitting that the respondents were obliged to decide his application for retirement and thereafter grant him pensionary benefits that would accrue to him.
The petitioner had joined the service on 24121956 and had moved the application for retirement on 6111979.
Prior to this, the petitioner had submitted his resignation on 191974 which admittedly till today has not been decided.
The short question which would arise in this petition is as to for how long can an employer keep in abeyance the decision on the resignation and in case after the submission thereof, the petitioner again starts working with the same organisation would it be open for it to assert at a stage when the resignation has been replaced by a request for premature retirement to fall back on the resignation for denying the employee the retiral benefits, which would be due to him.
When examined from this angle, I have no doubt in my mind that if prior to the acceptance of the resignation an employee rejoins the service without any demur on behalf of the employer, it would not be open to him to claim at a later stage when the relations again become strained that it would accept the resignation and not the request seeking voluntary retirement.
As a matter of fact, no documentary evidence of the acceptance of voluntary retirement has been brought on the record nor have the respondents placed on the record the letter of resignation so as to enable the Court to decipher terms thereof.
12.
In this view of the matter, as evidently, the respondents had chosen not to treat the case of the petitioner as one for resignation and allowed him to join the service again, I fail to see how they can after allowing him to rejoin fall back upon Rule 26.1 of the CCS Pension Rules, 1972 for denying him the retiral benefits on the ground that a person, who resigns would not be entitled to any family pension.
Since this is only reason why the respondents have rejected the claim of the petitioner for retiral benefits, this petition has to be allowed, the impugned order set aside and a direction issued to the respondents to calculate the retiral benefits due to the petitioner and pay the same to him within two months from the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The petitioner would also be entitled to receive interest at the rate of 9% per annum on the amounts so worked out from the date.
On which these amounts became due till the date, on which they are paid.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition allowed.