AK Goel, J - This writ petition challenges the order dated 381998, dismissing the petitioner's prayer for regularisation.
The petitioner had earlier filed Civil Writ Petition No. 16739 of 1997, seeking a direction for regularisation in service which came up for hearing on 451998 and this Court directed the respondents to consider the petitioner's claim.
Vide order dated 381998, Headmaster, Government High School, Kharak Bhura District Jind passed the impugned order stating that the services of the petitioner could not be regularised as there was "no provision to regularise the service of the part time employee and her case for regularisation will be considered as per policy/decision of the Government."
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the present writ petition has been filed.
2.
According to the petitioner, she was appointed as a part time sweeper in the Government Middle School, (sic) on temporary basis through employment exchange after interview by the Selection Committee on 2351994.
She joined on 6.7.1994 and after completion of three years in service, her case was forwarded to the District Education Officer, Jind for regularisation in terms of the Policy of the Haryana Government dated 19121980, Annexure P-2, which provided for regularisation of services after three years of part time service.
It is stated that the respondents discontinued the payment of salary to the petitioner though the petitioner continued to work and the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 16739 of 1997, wherein apart from directing the consideration of the petitioner's claim for regularisation, this Court recorded the statement of the counsel for the respondents that salary due to the petitioner from September, 1995 to April 30, 1998 had been paid on 151998 and that the case of regularisation of the petitioner would be considered in accordance with law.
The full text of the order dated 451998 is reproduced below :  "Mr. Bishnoi, learned counsel for the respondents, states that an amount of Rs. 11,170/- due to the petitioner on account of arrears of salary from September 1995 to April 30, 1998 along with interest @ 12% has been paid on May 1, 1998.
An affidavit of the Head Master, Government High School, Kharak Bhura, has been filed.
He further states that the petitioner's case for regularisation shall be considered in accordance with law.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not put in appearance in spite of the fact that the case has been called for the second time.
The primary prayers of the petitioner were for the payment of arrears of salary and for the consideration of her case for regularisation.
The first relief has already been granted.
In respect of the second relief, it has been stated that the claim shall be examined.
Let the petitioner's claim for the regularisation of her services be considered within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the order.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.
Sd/- Jawahar Lal Gupta, Judge  Sd/- N.C. Khichi, Judge"  3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Learned counsel for the respondents pointed out from the written statement filed by respondent No. 6 that the petitioner's services could not be regularised as there was no provision to regularise the part time employees as stated in letter dated 551995 issued by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana.
This stand has been taken by the respondents in spite of the Policy of the Haryana State issued vide order dated 19121980, annexure P-2 to the writ petition and letter dated 30121998 issued by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Annexure R-6.
The learned counsel for the respondents also submitted that the services of the petitioner stood terminated on 691997 before her completing three years of service.
This contention is untenable as the petitioner had already completed three years of service on 691997 and as per the statement of the counsel for the respondents recorded by this Court on 451998, quoted herein above, the petitioner was in service upto April 30, 1998.
The question is what order has to be passed.
Instead of straightaway passing any final order on merits, we think if fit to direct the director of Education Department, Haryana, to personally consider the matter and pass an appropriate order having regard to the fact that the petitioner has completed more than three years of the service and her case has not so far been examined in the light of the Policy of the Haryana Government even though an undertaking was given to this Court on May 4, 1998, by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Haryana through the Secretary to Government of Haryana, Education Department as well as other respondents.
The Director, Education Department, Haryana, would dispose of the matter within three months from today.
4.
Though the above order disposes of the subject matter of this writ petition, we take up for consideration what has occurred to us while hearing a number of writ petitions which have been filed in this Court.
We have come across the Policy of regularisation issued by the Haryana Government and a number of writ petitions are being filed seeking a direction for consideration of the claims of various employees in terms of the said Policy.
This Court has been passing orders directing the State Government too dispose of the representations of the employees.
However, we have observed that in most of the cases, disposal of the representations is not satisfactory.
The employees have to file writ petitions only to seek a direction that the representation be decided.
Decision of the representations is done by various concerned officers, but either they are not fully acquainted with the Policy or they are not acquainted with the various orders passed by this Court from time to time.
5.
Besides, there are a number of matters where a grievance is made that the pay scale of employees was reduced retrospectively and recovery was sought to be effected.
6.
There are also cases where increments for higher qualifications are sought.
These matters have been dealt with at length in various decisions of this Court which are ignored by the State.
This is giving rise to avoidable litigation which is neither in the interest of employees nor in the interest of the State.
We, therefore, propose to give following directions :-  (a) The State of Haryana should compile and publish its policies so that the same are available to all concerned.
The State Government may also consider revising their existing policies in the light of various binding decisions on the question of regularisation, pay scales, revision, grant of increments, compassionate appointment and allied matters; and (b) Provide a forum for redressal of grievances of the employees who claim the benefit of the policies, headed by an officer of the Government not below the rank of Secretary, which shall examine the claims and decide them within a specified time by a speaking order.
Before we issue the final directions in that regard, we direct the State of Haryana to indicate their response in the matter in the form of an affidavit of the Chief Secretary, Haryana, to be filed within six weeks.
The case be listed on 15-10-2001.
We request the Advocate General, Haryana, to assist the Court in this matter.
Copy of order Dasti on payment.
Order accordingly.