SS Sudhalkar, J - By this writ petition, the employer is challenging the award of the Labour Court dated 3041999, Annexure P/3, vide which the Labour Court had ordered reinstatement of respondent No. 2 with continuity of service and 25% back wages.
2.
The case of respondent No. 2 is that he joined service with the petitioner on 25.5.1988 as Auction Recorder and his services were abruptly terminated on 27.1.1989 without any rhyme or reason.
He has further contended that he had completed the continuous service of more than 240 days in the calendar year but his services had been terminated without compliance of the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
He has further contended that after the termination of his services, fresh appointments were made by the petitioner and seven posts were kept vacant because of the writ petition filed by the respondent No. 2 and others.
It is also contended that the petitioner has engaged persons from Minor Irrigation Tubewell Corporation and also contended that the principle of 'last come first go' was not adopted.
3.
The Labour Court had held that the respondent has not completed continuous service of more than 240 days in the calendar year.
However, it held that the principle of 'last come first go' was not followed and the duration of the service of the respondent was not for a fixed period.
The contention taken was that the claim of respondent No. 2 was barred by the principle of res judicata.
This contention was also not accepted by the Labour Court and the reference of respondent No. 2 was allowed.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the respondent had filed a writ petition along with other workmen and that writ petition was dismissed and therefore, this writ petition is barred by the principle of res judicata.
Copy of the writ petition and order are on record of this case, as Ex. W/A and W/B respectively.
However, it is clear that the question of termination of service was not gone into because the said writ petition was dismissed in limine in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana vs. Piara Singh.
The order of the Division Bench dismissing the earlier writ petition in limine is as under :  "Dismissed in view of the judgment of Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992 (5) S.P.L.
1.
In the case of State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, reported as 1992(3) R.S.J.
235 the Supreme Court dealt with regularisation of services, equal pay for equal work, regularisation qua ad hoc/temporary employees, absorption, creation and abolition of posts etc. As the petitioner in the writ petition had prayed for reinstatement as also regularisation, the order in the said writ petition can be said to be a non-speaking order qua the prayer of regularisation.
The Labour Court has inter alia observed as under :- ".....It has not been disputed at bar that in Piara Singh's case the question for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court was only regarding the regularisation of services of certain categories of employees/workmen.
The question of retrenchment and the applicabilities of the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act to such type of termination was never a question for consideration before the Hon'ble apex Court in Piara Singh's case.
Hence the decision of the Hon'ble apex Court in Piara Singh's case had only examined on merits the question regarding the regularisation of services of the employees/workmen of various categories.
On the basis of that decision, that Hon'ble High Court had dismissed the writ petition filed by the workman.
In that writ petition, the petitioner had also claimed the relief for regularisation.
So the question of regularisation of the workman stands finally decided on merits by the Hon'ble High Court.
However, the question regarding the legality or illegality of the termination of the services of the workman was never adjudicated on merits and the writ petition filed by the workman has been dismissed on the basis of the decision of the Hon'ble apex Court in Piara Singh's case which is a ground analogous to the ground of laches and the availability of an alternative remedy.
So the remedy under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act will not be barred by the principle of res judicata due to the dismissal of his writ petition."
5.
I do not find any infirmity in the finding of the Labour Court in view of the reasons given by it.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner is not an "Industry".
He has cited the case of Management of Horticulture Department of Delhi Administration v. Trilok Chand and another, reported as 2000(2) R.S.J.
63.
It has been held therein that Horticulture Department of Delhi Administration is not an Industry and therefore, would be excluded from the purview of the Act.
This judgment will not help the petitioner.
As mentioned in the writ petition, the respondent had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1144 of 1990.
The writ petition was dismissed by this Court on 31.5.1990 and it was held that the respondent and other petitioners may seek remedy under the 1947 Act.
This being the position, the respondent-workman was relegated to his remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Therefore, it cannot now lie in the mouth of the petitioner to say that the petitioner is not an "Industry".
The workman cannot be shunted from pillar to post and this Court having directed the respondent-workman to avail his remedy under the 1947 Act, doors of justice cannot be closed to the respondent on this ground, argued the learned counsel.
7.
Regarding last come first go, the Labour Court has observed that the respondent has contended that Suresh Kumar, Dharambir, Karnail Singh and Ram Kumar were junior to him but were retained in service at the time of termination of his services, The documents were got produced from petitioner and Labour Court considered the documents and found that the stand of the Management that Suresh Kumar was regular employee was factually incorrect.
The Labour Court has also held that the respondent was appointed on 25.5.1998 and the others were appointed after him and that it was not disputed that all these persons were in service at the time of termination of services of respondent-workman.
This finding is not shown to be wrong.
On the contrary, it is based on the documents, which were got produced in the case.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the respondent was appointed for a specified period and therefore, could not get the benefit of the Act.
He has cited the case of Escorts Limited v. Presiding Officer and another, reported as 1997(11) S.C.C.
521.
It was held by the Supreme Court in that case, that when a temporary appointment for specified period (two months in that case) with the terms of appointment enabling the employer to terminate the service at any stage without assigning any reason, the termination of services under the said terms even though effected before the expiry of the specified period, would not amount to retrenchment.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on the case of State of Rajasthan and others v. Rameshwar Lal Gahlot, reported as 1996(2) SCT 600 (SC) : 1996(1) S.C.C.
595.
It has been held by the Supreme Court therein that when there was appointment for a specified period, the termination on the expiry of such period, unless found to be mala fide or colourable exercise of power, was valid.
In was also held therein that Section 25-F of the Act was not attracted in such a case and, therefore, relief of fresh appointment or of reinstatement could not be granted.
10.
Learned counsel has further cited the case of Allahabad Bank v. Prem Singh, reported as 1996(4) SCT 213 (SC) : 1996(10) S.C.C.
597.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in that case that temporary appointment under different letters for one day or two, making a total of four continuous days with a stipulation in the appointment letter that the appointment is purely temporary, for a period specified therein, the termination automatically after that period, would not amount to retrenchment.
It was held that the employer was under no obligation to employ the person.
The termination had effected automatically on the expiry of period of contract of service.
11.
The principles in these three judgments will not come to the rescue of the petitioner in this case.
The Labour Court has found that the appointment for fixed period was given to the respondent for three times with notional breaks and there was no evidence to establish that the work of Auction Recorder was for fixed duration.
The work was of a regular nature.
It is also not the case of the petitioner that a regular incumbent had come and hence the respondent was to go.
12.
In the case of Allahabad Bank (supra), the service was for a very limited period and the period itself shows that the respondent had no intention to continue it and to fill up the post beyond four days.
It appears from the judgment that the bank had requisitioned through the District Soldiers, Sailors and Army Board, Delhi and then the respondent was appointed for a period of four days, as a temporary cashier.
The facts of the case are, therefore, different.
13.
In the case of Rameshwar Lal Gahlot (supra) it is mentioned that the termination should not mala fide or in colourable exercise of power.
Here, in the present case, the post is not being filled up by regular person.
The persons appointed after the respondent are continuing in service and therefore, the present case smacks of mala fides and is the illustration of colourable exercise of power.
Moreover, the Supreme Court in that case had given direction that the employee be continued till the assumption of office by a regular incumbent.
14.
In view of the above reasons and in view of the fact that the petitioner has resorted to unlawful labour practice, and has kept the juniors in service by retrenching the respondent, the judgment in the case of Escorts Limited (supra) shall not apply to the present case.
15.
Therefore, all the above Supreme Court cases have facts which are not similar to the present case.
The learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has relied on the case of Trishla Devi v. The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-labour Court, UT, Chandigarh and others, reported as 1999(3) SCT 398 (P&H)(DB) : 1999(1) R.S.J.
58.
A Division Bench of this Court, in that case, has held that when there was ad hoc appointment for 89 days for a fixed tenure on regular pay scale and it was extended from time to time with an intermittent gap of two days and the posts were available at the time of termination and it was not the case of the employer that the services of the employee were terminated due to abolition of posts or due to availability of candidates recommended by the Board, the appointment for a period of fixed tenure of 89 days amounted to unfair labour practice.
The Division Bench had followed the earlier judgment in the case of Bhikhu Ram v. The Presiding Officer, Industrial-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, reported as 1998(1) RSJ 703.
Amongst other Supreme Court judgments, the Division Bench had also followed the judgment in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, reported as AIR 1986 SC 1571.
The Supreme Court has observed as under :  "....This principle is that the courts will not enforce and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are not equal in bargaining power.
It is difficult to give an exhaustive list of all bargains of this type.
No court can visualise the different situations which can arise in the affairs of men.
One can only attempt to give some illustrations.
For instance, the above principle will apply where the inequality of bargaining power is the result of the great disparity in the economic strength of the contracting parties.
It will apply where the inequality is the result of circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or not.
It will apply to situations in which the weaker party is in a position in which he can obtain goods or services or means of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the stronger party or go without them.
It will also apply where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of rules as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or rules may be.
This principle, however, will not apply where the bargaining power of the contracting parties is equal or utmost equal."
The Supreme Court has further observed in the said case as under :-  "The types of contracts to which the principles formulated by us above applies are not contracts which are tainted with illegality but are contracts which contain terms which are so unfair and unreasonable that they shock the conscience of the court.
They are opposed to public policy and require to be adjudged void."
The Supreme Court after discussing various decisions and principles, held that an unconscionable term in a contract of employment is void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 as being opposed to public policy and when such a term is contained in the contract of employment, entered into with a Government company, it is also void as infringing Article 14 of the Constitution.
16.
In view of this judgment, and the facts in the present case, the principle laid down by the Supreme Court in the Supreme Court judgments cited by learned counsel for the petitioner, in the case of Allahabad Bank, Rameshwar Lal Gahlot and Escorts Limited (supra) are distinguished.
17.
Learned counsel for the respondent has relied on the case of Engineer-in- Chief, Haryana PWD Public Health Branch, Chandigarh v. Gopal Singh and another, reported as 1999(1) Judicial Reports (Labour and Services) 425.
It has been held by a Division Bench of this Court that for the purpose of Section 25G of the Act, it is not necessary that the workman should have worked for 240 days.
18.
In view of the above position, I do not find any worth in the writ petition.
The award of the Labour Court does not deserve any interference.
This writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.