Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction, particularly in the nature of certiorari, for quashing of the order dated 291999, Annexure P/5 to the writ petition, vide which the petitioners have been denied the benefit of grant of one increment under Rule 44(a)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-I, Part-I, upon their appointment to the promotional post of Head Teacher.
2.
The necessary facts are that the petitioners were appointed as J.B.T.
teachers in Haryana Education Department during the period 1965 to 1968.
They were promoted to the post of Head teacher during the period 2241997 to 11.11.1999.
The petitioners were promoted and granted the revised pay scale of Rs. 5500 - 9000/-.
Copy of the promotion order dated 14.11.1999 has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/2.
The Government of Haryana revised the pay scales of its employees vide notification dated 711998 with effect from 111996.
The pay of all the petitioners was fixed in the revised pay scale applicable to them.
The petitioners claim that they were entitled to one increment after they had been promoted to the post of Head Teacher in terms of Rule 44(a)(i).
As their grievance was not settled by the respondents, they served a legal notice upon the respondents on 5.8.1999 claiming the same relief for the reasons stated therein.
According to the petitioners they were performing the duties of higher responsibility as they were discharging the functions of teacher as well as of administrative nature while appointed as Head Teacher.
This request of the petitioners was declined by the respondents vide order dated 291999 in response to the legal notice.
Thus, the petitioners filed this writ petition.
3.
The respondents, upon notice, filed a detailed reply.
The facts are not in dispute.
The respondents place reliance upon Rule 15, which reads as under:-  "The respondents, upon notice, filed a detailed reply.
The facts are not in dispute.
The respondents place reliance upon Rule 15, which reads as under:- "That the functional pay scale of the promotional post and the ACP Scale, which the Govt. servant during his pay prior to the promotion are identical then his pay will not again be fixed in the functional pay scale of the promotional post which is identical to ACP Scale, which he was already drawing his pay before promotion.
Then he will continue to draw his salary at the same stage and even his date of increment will also continue to be same as before the promotion."
4.
In view of the above provisions, it is stated that the petitioners were already getting the higher scale equal to the promotional grade even prior to their promotion, then the pay cannot be refixed in the same scale.
As they were already getting promotional grade, so the question of extra increments does not arise in the pay scale even after promotion.
On this interpretation, the respondents pray for dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
At the very outset we may notice that when the respondents were promoted vide order dated 14.11.1999 to the post of Head Teacher, they were promoted in the grade of Rs. 5500/- - 9000/- non-gazetted scale cadre with immediate effect.
There were definite conditions stipulated in the promotion order itelf.
The seven conditions stipulated in the promotion order did not carry any such condition that their promotion would not give them benefit of the provisions of Rule 44.
In this order it was also noticed that the petitioners could decline the promotion within 15 days of the issuance of the order.
In other words, the option was with the petitioners to accept the promotion or not.
They have accepted the promotion on the terms and conditions stated in the order of promotion.
The language of Rule 44 of the Rules has to be interpreted in favour of the petitioners as the rule intends to give one increment to an employee who is discharging duties and functions of higher responsibilities of promotion.
The order of promotion read with Rule 44 does not envisage denial of this increment for the reasons that pay scales had been revised.
6.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Swaran Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 313 (P&H) CWP No. 17301 of 2000, decided on 21.2.2002, had the occasion to consider this very question.
After detailed discussion, the Court held as under:-  "The controversy in the present case is a very narrow compass in as much as the promotion of the petitioners is not disputed to the post of Head Teachers.
Nothing has been placed by the respondents on the record to show that the post of Head Teacher in comparison to J.B.T.
Teacher does not carry higher responsibilities.
The petitioners were actually working as Head Teachers for all this period is also not disputed and in fact it is conceded that they were given the benefit of Rule 44 in the pay scales as on 111996.
The pay scale of Head Teacher is 1400-2600.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Sunder Lal Jain and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(1) S.L.R.
215, held that the persons who were working as Junior Lab.
Attendant were required to be promoted to the post of Senior Lab.
Attendant, were entitled to the higher pay scales than the one which they were getting on a post from which they had been promoted.
Rule 44 (supra) has been subject matter of scrutiny on earlier occasions as well.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Lal Singh Versus State of Punjab had granted relief to the persons similarly situated alike the petitioners.
The judgment in Lal Singh case was appealed by the State before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court modified the order of the HIgh Court passed in the case State of Punjab versus Lal Singh, after taking into consideration the ambit and scope of Rule 413 and held as under:- "A reading thereof would clearly indicate that initial substantive pay of a Government employee who is appointed substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay, is regulated, if he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post and when appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance, then he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post.
Thus, it could be seen that when JBT Teacher was appointed temporarily as a Head Teacher, he is entitled to draw, since he is holding responsibilities of greater importance as a Head Teacher, one advance increment in his old post in the time scale next above the substantive pay on the date of his temporary promotion as a Head Teacher.
The appeal is accordingly allowed.
The order of the High Court stands modified.
They are entitled to one advance increment in the scale of JBT Teacher at the time of promotion while discharging the duties as Head Teacher.
No costs".
It would be useful to mention here that following the principle enunciated by the Apex Court in Lal Singh's case (supra) the Division Bench of this Court granted the relief to the petitioners who were similarly situated.
Reference can be made to Shiv Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and another; Civil Writ Petition No. 11495 of 2000. decided on August 30, 2000, Veena Kumari and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(4) SCT 1038 (P&H)(DB) : 2000(4) RSJ 341 and Sudarshan v. State Haryana, 2001(2) SCT 243.
The consistent view of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as various judgments of this Court is that once the increment was given to the employee on assumption of higher responsibilities of teacher and administration, then Govt. is liable to take into consideration the said increment for fixation of pay in the higher scale."
7.
We adopt the reasoning given in the case of Swaran Singh and others (supra) and are of the considered view that the respondents are not justified in declining the relief to the petitioners on this score.
The petitioners were already receiving the revised pay scales and thereafter were promoted as Head Teachers, a post carrying higher duties, responsibilities and functions.
Once they satisfy the ingredients of Rule 44(a)(i) then they cannot be denied the relief on the ground of revised pay scales.
Revision of pay scales makes an inevitable result of giving higher pay to the members of a particular cadre.
This cannot frustrate the incentive and right envisaged within the ambit and scope of Rule 44.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow this writ petition and quash the impugned order Annexure P/5 dated 291999.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.