RL Anand, J - By this judgment, we dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions i.e. C.W.P.
No. 11712 of 1999, Musheer Ahmad etc. v. The Punjab Wakf Board and others and C.W.P.
No. 15787 of 1999, Mohd.
Owais and another v. Union of India and others and one CW No. 21456 of 2000 under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC filed by Mohd.
Jamil and four others, as in our opinion, both the writ petitions and civil miscellaneous can be disposed of by common judgment.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 11712 of 1999 there are as many as 10 petitioners who were given appointments on various posts in the Punjab Wakf Board.
They have made a prayer that a writ of certiorari be issued and the orders dated 1181999 vide which the services of the petitioners were terminated by paying the month's salary, be set aside and directions be given to the respondent authorities to admit the petitioners into service with all consequential benefits.
3.
Similarly, in the second writ petition No. 15787 of 1999 there are two petitioners who have challenged the orders dated 1181999 vide which their services too were terminated and they have made a prayer for setting aside the said orders, which in the opinion of the petitioners, have been passed in illegal and arbitrary manner and without adhering to the principles of natural justice.
4.
For the sake of facts, I am taking from C.W.P.
No. 11712 of 1999 and the case set up by the petitioners of both the writ petitions is that Wakf Board advertised posts of Estate Officers, Section Officers, Rent Collectors.
Clerks, Vigilance Officers.
Financial Controllers etc. vide advertisements issued from time to time and copy of one of the advertisements is dated 761999 (Annexure P-1).
The petitioners were eligible for different posts and they were appointed Vigilance Officers, Financial Controllers, Estate Officers/Section Officers and Rent Collectors/Clerks.
In pursuance of their applications, a written test was conducted for the post of Estate Officer/Section Officer/Rent Controllers/Clerks while for the post of Vigilance Officer/Financial Controller no written test was conducted.
Interviews were conducted by the Board and the selection was made and on the basis thereof, the petitioners were appointed on different posts.
The appointments were on regular basis in the regular pay scale on probation for a period of one year in the first instance.
Moreover, the service conditions of the petitioners were to be governed in terms of the Wakf Act, 1995 and Punjab Wakf Board Regulations, 1966 and such other rules and regulations that may be formulated.
In pursuance of their selections and appointments the petitioners were medically examined, police verifications were done and on completion of the formalities all the petitioners submitted their joining reports on 961999, 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th July, 1999.
They were working on their respective posts when all of them received the identical orders terminating their services.
In the impugned orders, it has been stated that the appointment of the petitioners were in contravention of the regulations.
The termination orders were received by the petitioners under protest on 1281999.
The termination order reveals that it was passed in compliance of order No. 4/15/1998-Wakf dated 1181999 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
Though the petitioners tried to know the contents of the order dated 1181999 but they were not provided with that order.
The petitioners have alleged that the principles of natural justice have not been complied with.
No opportunity whatsoever were given to them before passing the impugned order.
No show cause notice was issued to them nor any charge-sheet was served.
The orders have been passed in a totally cloistered manner without any reasons stated that for one year, the service of the petitioner will be on probation and their services could be terminated on one month's notice but this is not the ground of termination orders.
Rather the order states that the termination is based on the contravention of the Regulations, procedure and conditions etc. and this could only be done by adopting a departmental procedure of inquiry and after adopting the principles of natural justice.
According to the petitioner, the termination orders have been issued in an arbitrary manner and, therefore, these are liable to be set aside and declaration be given in their favour that they are entitled to continue with the service.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2.
According to these respondents, the petitioners have no right to file the present writ petition as no fundamental rights have been infringed with the passing of the impugned order as the services of the petitioners had been terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions enumerated in their appointment letters which apparently show that during the period of probation the services of the petitioners could be terminated without assigning any reasons.
On merits, the stand of these respondents is that applications were invited for certain posts.
So far as the post of Vigilance Officer and Financial Controller are concerned, the advertisement clearly specified that for these two posts the persons from the State or the Central Government were to be appointed but petitioners No. 4 and 6 are direct recruited persons.
Since the stipulation in the advertisement was that these posts were to be filled on deputation, therefore, by taking the petitioners No. 4 and 6, the rights of many meritorious persons had been ignored who could not apply for the post.
Respondents No. 4 and 6 were not taken on deputation.
So far as written test was concerned the paper was the same for the Section Officers/Estate Officers as well as the Clerks/Rent Collectors though there was a lot of difference in the pay scales of these posts.
The procedure of selection was not only violated but was also amended to accommodate certain persons for favouritism and nepotism.
So far as the selection of Section Officers/Estate Officers and Clerks/Rent Collectors is concerned, their examination in Urdu was conducted and interview for the said post was also held but no specific marks nor marks obtained by the candidates were available on record of the proceedings of the selection.
Obviously, there were numerous complaints against the selection and the Central Government and Ministry under which the Punjab Wakf Board was working got an inquiry conducted by the Administrator in respect of these illegal appointments.
The Administrator held a detailed inquiry and perused the entire record pertaining to these selections and found that selections were made by following procedure which was alien to law.
Since the complaints were received, the Administrator and the Chief Executive Officers were replaced as the Ministry held an inquiry at its own level.
During the inquiry by the Administrator, it was found that certain persons who applied for the posts of Estate Office/Section Officers were appointed as Rent Collectors/Clerks and there was no criteria whatsoever for appointments to the post of Section Officers/Estate Officers and the Clerks/Rent Collectors though the said post was lower in cadre.
Even in the advertisement Annexure P-1, the number of posts available for Estate Officers/Section Officers and Rent Collectors/Clerks were not mentioned.
The present Administrator who was directed by the Government to hold the inquiry, found that there were number of irregularities in the selection and the same was not based on merit.
Since the selection was not found to be fair, therefore, the services of the petitioners were terminated during the period of probation in accordance with the terms and conditions of their appointments.
It was also submitted by respondents Nos. 1 and 2 that during the period of supersession of the Board or even otherwise directions can be issued to the Board by the Central Government as the Punjab Wakf Board is a composite Board for the States of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and U.T.
of Chandigarh.
The powers of the State Government were being exercised by the Central Government.
The Administrator before passing the orders of the termination in his wisdom has submitted the entire report to the Government and he was within his powers to seek the guidance and advise of the Ministry.
The order of termination issued qua the petitioners is valid, legal and constitutional.
The orders of termination were innocuous, therefore, the petitioners were not entitled to any show cause notice and charge sheet.
The orders of termination had been issued in accordance with the terms and conditions.
During the course of inquiry, it was noticed that proper procedure was not followed during the course of selection.
Even otherwise, the services of the petitioners were terminated in accordance with their appointment letters.
With this broad defence, the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
6.
A separate written statement was also filed on behalf of respondent No. 3- Union of India and their stand more or less is the same as that of respondents No. 1 and 2.
However it is also additional stand of respondent No. 3 that a large number of complaints started pouring in the Ministry about the alleged irregular activities being committed by the Administrator and Chief Executive Officer of the Wakf Board about making appointments to various posts in the Board.
Despite the fact that the Central Government had asked the Board on 31st March, 1998 not to make any appointment in the Board, complaints were received that the Board is making appointments in a large scale without informing the Central Government.
Considering the large number of complaints from numerous sources and the seriousness of the situation, the Central Government on 171999 vide Annexure R-3/1 once again issued directions to the Board not to make any appointment and if the result of any written test/interview is pending to be declared the same be withheld till further orders.
However, the spate of complaints did not come down and it was accordingly decided to send a team of officers of the Central Government headed by a Director of the Ministry to Ambala Cantt to conduct an inquiry into the various allegations levelled against the Administrator and Chief Executive Officer of the Board.
The inquiry (report) submitted by the team showed that the Administrator and the Chief Executive Officer had inter alia made a number of violations in the matter of appointments to the various posts.
In most of the cases, undue haste was done in completing the process of selection and when the Ministry issued fresh directions not to make any appointment on 171999 the Board allowed the candidates to join till 571999 on the basis of the offer of appointment issued to them on 30.6.1999 and 17 persons joined between 1st and 5th July, 1999.
It was not possible in normal course to join the duties on the dates aforesaid as the candidates belonged to various far of places of the country i.e. Bihar, UP, Rajasthan, Delhi etc. unless communication is sent to them on phone or fax with ulterior motives.
It was found that selection was not fair for the post of Financial Controller.
Applications as per the advertisement were called from the Central or State Government officials for appointment on deputation basis but the persons were selected on direct recruitment basis from open market only, which was a clear cut violation of the conditions of the advertisement.
The selection committee consisted of two members only which is again a clear violation of regulation 24 of Punjab Wakf Regulations, 1966 which stipulates that the Selection Committee should be constituted with a Chairman and two members.
7.
For the post of Vigilance Officer, it was noticed that neither any experience certificate was attached with bio-data nor any inquiry was made regarding his antecedents and working from any of his previous employers.
In this case also applications were invited from only Government officials on deputation basis.
But the selection committee consisted of only two persons i.e. Chief Executive Officer and Administrative Officer.
The Chairman was not involved in the selection committee.
Thus, it is again in violation of Section 24 of the Punjab Wakf Regulations, 1966.
In this case a person of lower rank was made a member of the selection committee for appointment of such important post.
8.
Continuing with the lot of irregularities it is stated by respondent No. 3 in the written statement that for the post of Estate Officer/Rent Collector no separate question paper of written test for the two posts in different categories and in different pay scales were prepared as the Estate Officer's post is in the officer grade while the Rent Collector's post is in the clerical grade.
It was not clear from the record when all the candidates were qualified on equal terms; how the Board selected the Estate Officers and Rent Controllers in different pay scales.
The result of written test was not displayed on the notice board and only an officer of the Board announced the list of the selected candidates.
It also came to the notice that some applicants had applied for both the posts and it was not clear as to how the Board had dealt with the situation.
As per the advertisement, the candidates were to be proficient in English and typing knowing.
However, neither any test in English proficiency nor any typing test was conducted while a test for Urdu was conducted.
No marks in the Urdu Test and in the interview were awarded.
In these circumstances, the appointment of the petitioners were wrong and were in violation of the directions of the Central Government.
The mode of recruitment was also bad, therefore, the Board was well within its right and powers to terminate the services of the petitioners as per the terms and conditions of the appointment letters.
Not only this, the Government of India ultimately decided to replace Administrator and Chief Executive Officer and directed the other Administrator of the Board to initiate suitable action against them after inquiring into the whole matter into depth.
The impugned orders have not been passed with the change of new Administrator but the action has been taken in terms of the conditions of appointment letters.
There was no malafide on the part of the successor Administrator.
No penalty has been imposed upon the petitioners while terminating their services during the period of probation.
It was a simple order of termination without any stigma as per the terms and conditions of the Board.
Therefore, the principles of natural justice were not required to be complied with before passing the impugned order.
With this broad defence respondent No. 3 has made a prayer for the dismissal of the writ petition.
9.
A rejoinder was filed on behalf of the petitioners in which they reiterated their allegations made in the petition by denying those of the written statement.
10.
Now, we will switch over to the application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC It is averred by the applicants that the petitioners had been appointed in June, 1999 by a process of selection conducted by the Board.
Since the process of selection was totally unfair, therefore, they made the complaints against the same to the Administrator of the Broad and also before the functionaries of the Central Government, it was on their complaints, that a detailed inquiry was conducted which led to the issuance of the termination orders of the petitioners, and, therefore, they are vitally interested in the fate of the writ petitions.
The petitioners are interested that fresh process of selection should be conducted so that the posts can be filled up in accordance with law.
In the event of allowing of the writ petitions, vital interest of the applicants are likely to be involved, therefore, they are the necessary and proper parties.
11.
We have S/Shri Rajiv Atma Ram and Denesh Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Shri AP Manchanda, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 3 and Shri SK Pipat, Senior counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and Shri PS Patwalia, appearing on behalf of the applicants and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case very carefully.
12.
First of all, we are inclined to take up the application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC and in our opinion the application deserves to be dismissed as we are of the considered view that the proposed applicants are neither necessary nor proper party.
Even in their absence, the controversy in the main writ petition can be properly adjudicated in the presence of respondents No. 1 to 3.
The stand of respondents No. 1 to 3, is the same as that of the applicants.
It is not the case of the applicants that respondents No. 1 and 2 are conniving with the petitioners.
We had given chance to Mr. Patwalia to argue in support of his application who did not add anything else but repeated what was contained in the written statements of respondents No. 1 to 3.
He simply highlighted by stating that all norms of law and regulations and procedure had been set at naught by the then Administrator and the Chief Executive Officer of the Board who went out of way in issuing the appointment letters.
Under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC the petitioner is the master of his cause of action.
The Court can only allow a person to become a party in the proceedings if his presence is necessary or proper for the adjudication of the controversy.
As we stated above that the interest of the applicants are fully watched by respondents No. 1 to 3 who is no way are conniving with the petitioners; rather they are opposing the writ petitions tooth and nail, therefore, we are of the considered opinion that application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC deserves to be dismissed.
We pass the order accordingly.
13.
Reverting to the merits the case, before we deal with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, it will be appropriate for us to refer and incorporate some documents in the judgment for arriving at a proper conclusion about the decision of these writ petitions.
14.
Annexure P-1 an advertisement dated 761999 vide which the posts of Estate Officers/Section Officer and Rent Collectors/Clerks in the pay scale of Rs. 5800-9200 and Rs. 3120-5160 respectively were advertised and the applicants were directed to apply within ten days.
This advertisement was issued in The Tribune on 761999.
Annexure P-2 is the appointment letter of petitioner No. 1 and as per condition No. 1 of the appointment letter the service was on probation for a period of one year in the first instance which could be extended in the case of unsatisfactory performance and during such probation period the candidate would be on the roll of the Board on purely temporary basis.
During the period of probation his service could be terminated by giving one month's salary in lieu of the notice without assigning any reason.
Annexure P-3 is the termination order dated 1181999 which is common to everybody and it runs as follows :  "In compliance with the order No. 4(15)/98-Wakf dated 1181999 of Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, the services of Shri Musheer Ahmad Son of Shri Qaddar Baksh whose appointment was made as Rent Collector/Clerk by the Board vide order No. 3(527)/Estab.
III/Aukas/99/4280 dated 30.6.1999 are found in contravention of the regulations, procedure and conditions etc. prescribed for the post, are hereby terminated with immediate effect.
Crossed cheque No. 454883 dated 1181999 for Rs. 6341/- on account of one month salary in lieu of one month notice and 11 days salary for duty period is enclosed herewith.
He stands relieved from the services of the Punjab Wakf Board forthwith.
This issues with the approval of the worthy Administrator."
15.
Annexure P-4 is the letter dated 1681999 written by the terminated employees vide which they made a request to supply them the copy of the order No. 4(15)/98-Wakf dated 1181999 issued by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment Government of India.
Annexure P-6 is another advertisement dated 28.1.1999.
Through this advertisement the applications for the posts of Financial Controller/Senior Accounts Officer, Civil Engineer, Accountant/Additional Accountant, Cashier, Estate Officer/Section Officer and Clerk-cum-Rent Collector were invited.
It was also notified that all the applicants must be bonafide residents of Punjab, Haryana, Union Territory of Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh and they must also submit their proof of domicile.
Annexure R-1 is the third advertisement dated 1431999 vide which the posts of Vigilance Officer and Financial Controllers were advertised and it was specifically stated in this advertisement that these posts will be filled up on deputation from amongst the employees of Central/State Governments.
Further it was mentioned in the advertisement that such eligible candidates i.e. who are working in the Central or State Government should apply within fifteen days of the issuance of the advertisement.
These two posts were never meant for direct recruits.
16.
Here is the case where we have formulated an opinion after hearing the learned counsel for the parties and on going through the record of this case including two inquiry reports and other relevant documents, that all principles of law, rule and procedure have been kept at bay by the Administrator and Chief Executive Officer for the reasons best known to them for which a departmental action is likely to take place.
These two officers had acted in such a great irresponsibility that it has shattered the judicial conscious of this Court.
We are sorry to comment and say that all rules or procedures of selection have been set a naught.
Even the basic ingredients of the posts have not been adhered.
The post meant for a type of category has been given to a different category altogether without caring its consequences.
The procedure which was adopted by the then Administrator and Chief Executive Officer was not expected to be followed by them.
They have been a great risk upon their shoulders in putting all norms of law into a dust bin.
17.
We have said in the earlier portion of the judgment that petitioners belong to the category of Vigilance Officers/Financial Controllers, Rent Collectors/Clerks, and Estate Officers/Section Officers.
During the course of submissions, our attention was invited to two inquiry reports; one conducted by Dr. FU Siddiqui dated 561999 and the other conducted by three officers namely Qazi Firasat Ali, Assistant Administrative Officer, Mohd.
Moniruzzaman, Section Officer (Wakf) and Shri Prahlad Kumar, Director.
On receipt of these two reports, Mrs. Maneka Gandhi, the Hon'ble Minister of State for Social Justice and Empowerment, passed the order dated 561999 in which she had commented that since Shri Siddiqui has uncovered extremely grave irregularities done by Mr. Khan, he should be removed immediately as of today and she would like to take action of legal kind instituted against him for misappropriation of funds.
Further we find the order dated 10/1181999 i.e. order No. 4(15)98 Wakf vide which directions were given by the Government of India through its Director Shri Prahlad Kumar to the Administrator of the Board that necessary action be taken to terminate the services of those officials who were appointed by the Board in contravention of the regulations/procedure and conditions etc. prescribed for the post as per rules and further directions were given to Administrator to conclude his inquiry on the other points under reference and to give a comprehensive charge statement of irregularities and improprieties so that the explanation of Chief Executive Officer/Administrator could be called for.
Shri Siddiqui, in his report dated 561999 examined every factor about the illegalities/irregularities in the appointment of various posts including Financial Controller, Vigilance Officers, Administrative Officer, Estate Officer/Rent Collector, vis-a-vis the post of Financial Controller, the observations of Shri Siddiqui were as follows ;-  "As per the Officer, the posts were advertised on 1431999 and the desirous applicants were directed to submits their applications within fifteen days from the date of the advertisement.
As per advertisement appointments were to be made on deputation basis from Central/State Government officials application was received from the Government officials.
41 applications were received which were scrutinised on 961999 by the screening committee consisting of the Administrative Officer (HRD), Administrative Officer (P) and Accounts Officer and only 4 candidates were short listed.
Interview was fixed on 2461999 and thereafter, two more applications of Mr. Shuab Raza Zaidi and other of Mr. Muzaffar Javed were also received on 11.6.1999 and 16.6.1999 respectively.
Chief Executive Officer passed the orders that these two applications would also be considered.
Only three candidates namely Shri Shiv Shankar Panjiara, Shri M Javed and Shri S.R.
Zaidi appeared before the interview committee consisting of Mr. MK Khan, CEO, and Mohd.
Kamil, FCA who was the proprietor of a Chartered Accountants firm.
Though Shri SS Panjiara who was one of the three candidates mentioned his qualification as Chartered Accountant yet at the time of the interview it was found that he did not complete his CA and he had also not having the requisite experience.
Mr. M Zaved the second candidate though he had completed CA in the year 1997 was not having the sufficient experience.
Mr. Zaidi the third candidate completed Chartered Accountant in 1990.
He was possessing 9 to 10 years experience and therefore, the committee selected him as Financial Controller.
The minutes of the selection committee were submitted to the Administrator on 2561999.
Selection was approved on 26.6.1999.
Appointment letter was issued on 26.6.1999 and Mr. Zaidi joined the Board on 271999.
18.
Thus, the above would show that the post of Financial Commissioner was to be filled on deputation.
Suddenly, the basic condition was changed.
In case the Board wanted to take the candidate from the open market it was obligatory that there should be fresh advertisement.
Thus, there is no difficulty in holding on our part that all norms were set at naught.
Otherwise also, as per the provisions of Section 68 of sub-clause (2) all appointments were supposed to be made by the Chairman on the recommendation of the Selection Committee which should be consisting of Chairman and two members but in the present case only two members were available.
Furthermore, our attention has been invited to one fax message dated 3131998.
It is a fax message issued by the Government of India to the Chief Administrator wherein the Government of India brought the matter to the notice of the Administrator that it has come to the notice of the Government that fresh appointments were being made in the Board and it is a informed to the Board with stress and emphasis not to make any appointment.
Directions were also given to the then Administrator to call on the Hon'ble Minister of State for Social Justice and Empowerment on her return from tour abroad.
19.
The things do not rest here.
As we stated above that Government of India had already started receiving number of complaints with regard to the mode of selection, therefore, Shri Prahlad Kumar Director send a fax message to Shri Syed Zafar, IRS Administrator not to effect any appointment.
The contents of the fax dated 171999 is very relevant four our purposes which is reproduced as follows :-  "By Fax No. 4100509,  CONFIDENTIAL MOST IMMEDIATE BY SPEED POST No. 4/29/96-Wakf Government of India Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Wakf Division) Room No. 439 "A" 4th Floor  Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-11001  Dated 1st July 1999 Shri Syed Zafar Mohamood, IRS, Administrator, Punjab Wakf Board, 50, Sardar Patel Marg, Ambala Cantt-133001 Sir, A number of complaints have been received by Hon'ble Minister of State for Social Justice and Empowerment regarding the irregularities being committed in the appointments for various posts in Punjab Wakf Board.
Minister of state for Social Justice and Empowerment has directed that with immediate effect, no appointment be made and if result of any written test/interview is pending to be declared, the same be withheld till further orders.
You are also requested to send a detailed report about the various appointment/recruitment made recently or under process.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/-  (Prahlad Kumar) Director (Wakf) Tele : 338 2774" 20.
The reading of the above would show that it had already come to the notice of the Central Government that lot of irregularities had been committed in the appointment of various posts and the Ministry of Social Justice Empowerment had desired with immediate effect that no appointment should be made in the Board and if result of any written test or interview was pending to be declared the same be withheld till further order.
The Government of India through this fax message called for detailed report about the various appointment/recruitments made recently or under process.
In spite of this, many of the petitioners were allowed to join after 171999.
The Officer Incharge of the Board ignored all norms of office and he showed utter disrespect and in-subordination when he dared to allow some of the petitioners to join the service in spite of the ban imposed earlier in the year 1998 and on 171999.
There was a total lack of application of mind which strengthens our view that everything was fishy and has been done for extraneous reasons by those officers who were the members of the Selection Committee or on whose behest the selection process was started/conducted.
These officers cannot escape from their responsibilities and we hope and expect that necessary action follow against the delinquent officials/officers at the departmental end.
21.
Our job is to make a judicial scrutiny and while exercising the powers of judicial review if public posts were going to be filled in such a defunct manner the faith of the people in our recruitment system shall touch the lowest ebb.
It is a country of rule of law.
People are vigilant about their rights.
Transparency is the desire of the day and nobody can say good bye to the well recognised principles of law.
22.
Reverting to the irregularities vis-a-vis the post of Vigilance Officer, Mr. Siddiqui in his report dated 561999 came to the conclusion that initially no application was received for that post.
After a lapse of two months all of a sudden one application from Shri Tanveer Alam was received in the office of the Board on 3151999.
In the advertisement the qualification was prescribed as Master's degree with five years experience in vigilance matter in Central/State Government/PSUS/Statutory Bodies or working in the rank of DSP.
Shri Alam was having only a Bachelor's degree with PG Diploma in Public Administration and Office Management and LL.B.
The candidate was interviewed and recommendation was made on 361999.
Those were approved on the same day.
Offer of appointment was issued on 961999 and Shri Alam joined on the same day in the forenoon.
Moreover, the Administration while approving his selection also granted five advance increments straightaway.
What else can be said against the mode of selection of the Vigilance Officer, it can be summed up as pure favouritism to accommodate and oblige a person who was not having the requisite qualifications.
His entry into service is a back door entry with less meritorious qualifications.
Five advance increments were given to him without examining his work and conduct.
Moreover, Mr. Alam did not attach any experience certificate.
No inquiry was made regarding his antecedents from his previous employer.
In this case also the applications were invited from only Government Officials on deputation.
Shri Alam was not serving in the Central Government or State Government.
The Corum of the Selection Committee was not in order.
Association of the Chairman as required under Section 68(2)(e) of the Act was not there.
There was no exceptional or outstanding bio-data justifying the grant of five advance increments.
Thus, it can be said that there is a relaxation in the academic qualifications.
A person of lower rank was interviewed and a post was given to a direct recruit instead of filling up from deputation from Central/State Governments employees.
There is a violation of Section 68 also.
23.
With regard to the post of Administrative Officer, it was again a deputation post.
Benefit of age relaxation was given to the selectee as he was a retired person.
No Selection Committee was constituted.
Only the Administrative interviewed him in his office.
The principles of equality were not adopted.
If the Board was desirous to fill this vacancy from a retired Government servant it was the duty of the Board to give a chance to equally situated persons.
24.
As regards Estate Officer/Rent Collector, a complete bungling was done.
No separate question papers for written test for these two posts which were in different cadress and in different pay scales were prepared.
Post of Estate Officer was a Officer Grade post while the post of Rent Collector was a clerical post.
All the candidates were qualified on equal terms but there is nothing to show how the Board selected the Estate Officer and Rent Collector in different pay scales.
Some of the candidates applied for both the posts.
As per the advertisement the candidates were to be proficient in English and type knowing.
Neither any test in English proficiency nor anything was conducted.
Only a Urdu test was conducted.
No marks were prescribed in Urdu test at the time of the interview, 3 years experience was essential but has been made as desirable.
Thus, the above discussion will give a glimpse as to what was going on at the time of the selection.
25.
A thorough inquiry was done about the other affairs of the Board including the misuse of the funds etc. That is not relevant for us.
Some points of the inquiry report dated 1671999 referred to above conducted by three officers under the supervision of Shri Prahlad Kumar Director can be quoted in order to show that the new appointments were based on regional consideration and bungling was done :-  "Alleged termination of Board's employees and appointing new employees on regional consideration and alleged bungling made in the recent appointments.
During the tenure of the present Administrator (since December, 1998), 5 employees were suspended.
Of which 3 are from Haryana and 1 each from Punjab and H.P.
4 employees were reverted of which 2 each are from Haryana and Punjab.
5 employees were discharged from service of which 3 are from Punjab and 1 each from Haryana and Chandigarh.
2 employees belonging to Punjab were terminated.
Regarding appointments made in the Board, it is seen that the Board all of a sudden started recruitment process for a number of posts during May and June, 1999 and filled up 19 posts.
From the detailed scrutiny of the Board's record, it is seen that in most of the cases undue haste has been shown in completing the selection process.
The Ministry issued a direction on 171999 not to make any appointment but still the Board allowed to join the candidates till 571999 on the basis of the offer of appointment issued to them on 30.6.1999.
Regarding the persons appointed for these 19 posts, the position with regard to their date of appointment and place of domicile is as under :-  Name No. of post Domicile Date of joining Sr. Law Officer (1) Muzaffar Nagar, UP 361999 Vigilance Officer (1) Lucknow.
UP 961999 Administrative Officer (1) Vikas Puri, Delhi 171999 Financial Controller (1) Chandni Chowk, Delhi 271999 Estate Officer (5) Ambala 171999 New Delhi 271999 Alwar (Raj) 271999 Jaipur (Raj) 271999 Rent Controller (10) Nahan (H.P.)
171999 Malerkotla (Pb) 371999 -do- -do- Fategarh (UP) 271999 JNU, New Delhi 371999 Zakir Nagar, Delhi 271999 Muzaffarnagar (UP) 271999 -do- 271999 Allahabad (UP) 271999 Aligarh (UP) 271999 Ranchi (Bihar) 571999 Regarding the appointment for the post of Financial Controller, it is seen that it is one of the newly sanctioned posts inthe scale of 7220-11660 (revised).
The post was advertised on 1431999 in a number of regional as well as national dailies, namely Quami Awaz, Indian Express, Chandigarh.
Times of India, Hindustan Times, Rozgar Samachar (Urdu) and Employment News.
No last date for receiving applications was specified in the advertisement.
As per the Advertisement, appointment was to be made on deputatin basis from amongst Central/State Governments officials.
But no application was received from Government Officials.
On perusal of the office file it is seen that in response to this advertisement, 41 applications were recieved.
These applications were scrutinised on 961999 by the Screening Committee consisting of the Adminitration Officer (HRD), Adminstration Officer (P), Accounts Officer and 4 candidates were short listed for interview.
Subsequently, two more applications one of Shri Shuab Raza Zaidi and the other of Shri Muzaffar Javed were recived on 11.6.1999 and 16.6.1999 respectively.
As per thenote of CEO on pages 5-6 in File No. 3(510) Estt.
III/Aukaf/99, these two applicants were also found fit and in all, 6 candidates were called for inteview on 2461999.
Only three candidates appeared in the interview, namely, Shri Shiv Shankar Panjiara, Shri M Javed and Shri S.R.
Zaidi.
The Interview Board consisted of Shri MK Khan, CEO and Shri Mohd.
Kamil, FCA, who is the proprietor of a Chartered Accountants firm (as expert) interviewed the candidates on 2461999.
Though Shri SS Panjiara mentioned his qualification as C A however, at the time of interview, it was found that he had not yet completed his CA and he was also not having the requisite experience.
Mr. Javed completed his CA in 1997 only and he was also not having sufficienit work experience.
The third candidate, Mr. Zaidi completed his CA in 1990 and was also possessing 9-10 years work experience.
He is also having additional qualification of ICWA He fulfils the requisite qualification and experience and the Committee, therefore, selected him for the post of Financial Controller.
The minutes were submitted to the Administrator on 2561999 and the selection was approved by him on 26.6.1999.
The offer of appointment was issued on 2961999 and Shri Zaidi joined the Board on 271999.
He belonged to Chandni Chowk, Delhi.
On seeing the record it is felt that since no application was received from the category of Government servants for deputation and the adverrtisement was for deputation only more efforts should have have been made by the Board to get person from this category only as this would have enabled the Board to get good and experienced officers.
Recruting persons from open market on Direct Recruitment basis will block the post for long time to come.
Regarding the case of Vigilance Officer Shri FC Chadha a retired Officer was working on this post of about 1-1/2 years on contract basis.
His term was not renewed after 31.3.1999.
The post was advertised along with the post of Financial Controller on 1431999 in a number of regional and national dailies.
No last date was prescribed.
On persual of the noting of CEO dated 261999 F.No.
3(508)/Estt./99) it is seen that initially no application was received for this post.
Subsequently, the application of one Shri Tanweer Alam was received in the office of Board on 3151999.
In the Advt.
the qualification was prescribed as Master's Degree with 5 years experience in Vigilance matters in Central/State Government/PSUs/Statutory Bodies or working in the rank of DSP.
Shri Alam is holding only Bachelor's Degree with PG Diploma in Public Administration and Officer Management and LL.B.
He is having total 16 years experience of which 8 years experience in the supervisory capacity in UP Cooperative Spinning Mills Federation Ltd., Kanpur.
The period of experience in disciplinary proceedings and domestic inquiries has not been mentioned clearly.
As per the note in the margin of AO (HRD) dated 361999 on page 1/notes the candidate was stated to be interviewed by him as well as by the CEO.
The CEO vide his note dated 261999 on the same page gave his recommendation for appointment of Shri Alam and submitted to Administrator who approved the same on 1361999.
The offer of appointment was issued on 961999 and Shri Alam joined the same day in the forenoon itself.
As per the mailing address given by him in his application he belongs to Lucknow.
The Administrator while approving his selection also granted 5 advance increments to him straightway.
In case of Sr. Law Official it is also a newly sanctioned post in the scale of 7220-11620.
The post was advertised in May, 1998 in Hind Samachar, Tribune, Hindustan Times and the Indian Express.
The method of appointment as mentioned in the advertisement was Deputation/Short term contract/Director Recruitment.
The essential qualification mentioned as Degree in Law with constitutional law holding analogous post or 7 years experience in Central/State Government/PSUs/Statutory Bodies-7 years experience in practising Advocate, well versed in Wakf matters/Laws.
In all 39 applications were received which were scrutinised by a Screening Committee consisting of CEO, Asst., Law Officer, AO (P) and AO (HRD) of the Board in its meeting held on 3041999.
In this meeting Shri A Satter, AO (P) could not participate due to pre- occupation.
3 applicants fulfilled all the requirements and 12 others fulfilled all other requirements except knowledge of Wakf matters.
15 candidates were called for written test/interview on 23.5.1999.
Only 6 candidates appeared out of which one candidate left at the initial stage itself, the rest 5 candidates were interviewed by the Selection Committee consisting of Shri Irshad Ahmed, Advocate, Supreme Court, Shri SK Pipat, Senior Advocate, High Court of Punjab and Haryana and Shri MK Khan, CEO.
Shri Salim Akhtar, Dean of Faculty of Law, Aligarh Muslim University who was also on the Board as Expert did not turn up.
Out of these five, Shri Iqbal Ahmed secured in all 73 marks out of 15 (150 ?)
of which 48 in written test and 28 in the interview.
He was recommended by the Selection Committee which was approved by the Administrator on 28.5.1999.
The offer of appointment was issued on 31.5.1999 and he joined on 361999.
He belongs to Muzafar Nagar UP.
As regards the post of Administrative Officer the post was due to fall vacant on attaining the age of superannuation of Shri A Sattar.
The process of selection of a new AO has already been set on motion though the post was actually fallen vacant on 30.6.1999 after the expiry of one month's extension given to Shri Sattar.
The post was advertised in The Tribune, Employment News, Rozgar Samachar, Hindustan Times and Times of India in April/May, 1999.
As per the advertisement the post of AO was to be filled up on deputation basis from amongst the employees of Central/State Governments carrying the scale of Rs. 6400-10640.
As per the note of CEO dated 30.6.1999 (F. No. 3(528)/Estt.
III/1999, 14 applications were received out of which only 3 were through proper channel and the other 11 were received directly and were ignored straightaway.
On scrutiny of these applications received through proper channel it was observed that none of the candidates meet the requirements of requisite experience in the relevant field and therefore not considered for selection.
In the meanwhile, the application of TB Bagga retired under Secretary to the Rajya Sabha Sectt.
was received in the Board on 2261999.
He has stated in his application that he has wide experience in establishment/administrative jobs.
The Administrator stated to have interviewed him on 2461999 in Delhi and also ascertained his antecedents and performance from Rajaya Sabha Sectt.
on phone.
The Administrator was satisfied with the information supplied by the RS Sectt.
about his experience and knowledge and found him fit for the post of AO in PWB for two major reasons (i) he is more experienced than all other candidates, and (ii) his services will be economical for the Board as he is retired Government Officer.
On the basis of this, he was recommended for appointment as AO on a fixed monthly salary of Rs. 7,500 for a period of one year.
No deduction from his pension was also proposed.
This note of CEO was faxed to the Administrator at Delhi on 30.6.1999 on which Administrator conveyed his approval on telephone as per the marginal remarks given on page 2/N by the CEO.
The offer of appointment was issued to Shri Bagga on 30.6.1999 itself and he joined the Board on 171999 (FN).
He is from Vikas Puri, Delhi, as per the address given in his application.
From a close scrutiny of the file, it is noticed that in the noting of CEO dated 30.6.1999, there are a number of corrections carried out after applying white fluid, especially on the amount of salary, date of appointment etc. Photocopy of the note sheet which is stated to have been faxed to Administrator for approval also contained some discrepancies.
The approval of Administrator in writing has not been obtained on the file so far.
The marginal note only shows that the Administrator had given verbal instructions on phone to go ahead.
As regards the case of Estate Officers/Rent Collectors, it is stated that only 50% of the existing posts in this grade have been filled up by the Board now.
These post were advertised in The Tribune, Hind Samachar, Times of India with the stipulation that applications should reach within 10 days from the date of publication of the advertisement.
The advertisement was last published in the Times of India on 961999 and hence the last date was fixed by the Board was 1961999.
All the applications received till 1961999 were screened by a Screening Committee consisting of AO (P), AO (HRD) and Vigilance Officer of the Board over aged and under qualified applicants were rejected during the screening and a total of 309 applicants were called for written test on 2761999.
Call letters were issued on 1961999 and 20.6.1999 by telegram and also by ordinary post.
The expenses were not as high as mentioned in some of the complaints.
The total expenditure on this account as reported by the Board was 7577/- which includes Rs. 873/- as postal charge.
212 applicants appeared in the written test on 2761999.
Cut off percentage of marks for qualifying in the test was fixed as 70%.
Evaluation of all the tests was completed the same day and 65 candidates who secured 70% or more marks were called for Urdu Test next day i.e. 2861999.
42 candidates were found fit for interview which was also held the same day.
It is pertinent to mention here that the candidates were not awarded marks in Urdu test as well as in the interview.
However, the final merit list was prepared taking into account the marks of the written test and the views of the expert in Urdu test and interview.
The interview panel was consisted of the following :- Dr. Syed Zafar Mehmood, Administrator, Dr. Syed Mansoor Agha, Chief Editor, Quami Awaz - Expert - Shri MK Khan, CEO.
Eight candidates were found fit for the post of Estate Officer and 18 candidates for Rent Collector.
Out of the 18 candidates, the name of the Shri Mashkoor Ahmed with Roll No. 9183 was included in the list of selected candidates due to clerical mistake.
The offer of appointment issued to him was subsequently withdrawn.
The note on panel's recommendations for the selection to 26 posts of Estate Officer/Rent Collector were signed on 30.6.1999.
Following the criteria of merit, the offers of appointment of first 5 candidates for the post of Estate Officer and first 12 candidates for the post of Rent Collector were also issued on the same date i.e. 30.6.1999.
The details regarding the domicile and date of joining are given in the preceding paragraph".
25.
The above exercise we have made in order to highlight and demonstrate what actually has been done and what should have been done.
Punjab Wakf Bard is a joint Board and it looks after the Wakf property.
It is under the dual control of the Central Government and the State Government and both the Governments can give certain directions by exercising the powers under Sections 97 and 99 of the Wakf Act, 1995.
Section 97 lays down that subject to any directions issued by the Central Government under Section 96, the State Government may, from time to time, give to the Board such general or special directions as the State Government thinks fit and in the performance of its functions, the Board shall comply with such directions.
26.
In the present case, the instructions were issued by the Central Government firstly in the year 1998 not to fill up the post and there was a complete ban on 171999 yet everything was done in such a haste which could not be explained by the delinquent officials even before the two sets of inquiry teams.
A fax was received in the office of the Board at Ambala on 171999 and yet many of the petitioners were allowed to join the duties.
Section 99 of the Act lays down that if the State Government is of the opinion that the Board is unable to perform or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers or has willfully and without sufficient cause failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central Government under Section 96 or the State Government under Section 97, or if the State Government is satisfied on consideration on any report submitted after annual inspection, that the Board's continuance is likely to be injurious to the interests of the Wakfs in the State, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Board for a period not exceeding six months.
Thus, the actions of the Officers/Officials of the Board are subject to scrutiny.
Both Central and State Government can issue instructions in their respective spheres of powers.
The Government did exercise that power when the matter was first brought to the notice of the Board in the year 1998.
That very instruction was repeated in July 1999 but no attention was given to those orders and directions, by the then Administrator and the Chief Executive Officer.
27.
Faced with all above major difficulties which were pointed out by the learned counsel S/Shri Rajiv Atma Ram and Denesh Kumar, appearing on behalf of the petitioners, submitted that there is no circumstance on the record to suggest that any action is attributable to the petitioners so much so a Senior Law Officer who was selected in that very process of selection has been allowed to continue but the hammer has fallen upon the petitioners and, therefore, the order of termination of all the petitioners should be set aside specially when the principles of natural justice have not been complied with.
The counsel further submitted that the termination order would show that there was non-application of mind on the part of the appointing authority as the appointing authority was proceeding on the dotted line of the Government of India by complying its order No. 4/15/98 Wakf dated 1181999 and, therefore, all the termination orders should be set aside.
In support of his contention, the counsel for the petitioners relies upon a judgment of the Hon'ble D.B.
of this Courts dated 24.12.1999 passed in LPA No. 431 of 1997, The Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Chandigarh v. Sunil Dutt and others and submitted that if any irregularity/illegality has been committed in the selection and appointment of the petitioners then order of termination/appropriate orders could only be passed after affording an opportunity of hearing to the candidates specially when the petitioners have no role to play in their selection.
In other words, the counsel wanted to convey that the principles of natural justice have not been complied with in the present case.
There is no dispute that principle of natural justice is one of the vital organs of our judicial system.
Should this principle be applied universally in all cases, when it is proved on the record that the petitioners are the usurpers of a public office; when their appointments are illegal from every angle of vision as we have tried to highlight above.
In 1996(2) SCT 458 (P&H) : 1996(4) SLR 519, SK Jain v. State of Punjab, the Division Bench of this Court of which Justice Anand was the party, in para No. 19 to 23 of the judgment laid down as follows:-  "There is no strait-jacket or water tight compartment rules for the application of the principles of natural justice.
The concept and existence of such a rule would differ from case to case.
The principles of Audi Alteram Partem is a rule of fair play and cannot be permitted to stretch to cloak the illegalities committed by the individual propounding and praying its application.
It is very easy to proclaim the principles of natural justice but very difficult to define their precise extent.
The term "natural justice" means that the result or process should be just, the principle imply no more than that the substantial requirement of justice are necessarily followed., Justice Maugham in Maclean v. The Workers Union, 1929(1) CH.
602, 604 observed as follows :- "The phrase is, of course, used only in a popular sense and must not be taken to mean that there is any justice natural among men.
Among most savages there is no such thing as justice in the modern sense.
In ancient days a person wronged executed his own justice.
Amongst our own ancestors down to the thirteenth century, manifest felony such as that of manslayer taken with his weapon, or a thief with the stolen goods, might be punished by summary execution without any form of trial.
Again, every student has heard of compurgation and of ordeal; and it is hardly necessary to observe that (for example) a system of ordeal by water in which sinking was the sign of innocence and floating the sign of guilt, a system which lasted in this country for hundreds of years, has little to do with modern ideas of justice.
It is unnecessary to give further illustrations.
The truth is that justice is a very elaborate conception, the growth of many centuries of civilisation; and even now the conception differs widely in countries usually described as civilised.
20.
Lord Esher MR In Voinet v. Barett, 1885(55) L.J.Q.B.
39, 41, held :- Natural justice - that is... the natural sense of what is right and wrong".
The principle has its source in the concept of great antiquity, namely natural law by whatever name it has from time to time been called.
Just natural or natural law was originally the conception of a universal idea of good conduct upon which all laws are required to be founded.
The classical jurists were indistinct in their conceptions about matter but many of them frequently referred to just natural in the sense of law based on natural reason.
The concept of the principles of natural justice has developed in various countries according to socio, economic and political set up and applied differently in different cases to the extent and limits as were considered to be right and not wrong.
The origin of the principle of Audi Alteram Partem i.e. no person can be condemned unheard is traceable to the dawn in time and is to be applied keeping in view the passage of time and the changed legal and constitutional philosophy.
The requirement of natural justice varies with varying constitution of different quasi-judicial authorities and the statutory provisions in which they function.
The question whether or not any rule of natural justice has been violated in a case is required to be decided not in any pre-conceieved notions but in the light of the relevant statutory provisions applicable in the case.
The Court is required to keep in mind the circumstances of each case.
Whether the principle of natural justice would contemplate a personal hearing in every case or not will be end on the circumstances of the each case.
The principles of natural justice would not be applicable where the statutory provision itself lays down a procedure which is apparently shown to have been violated.
21.
The Supreme Court in Board of Mining v. Ramjee, AIR 1977 SC 965 dealing the case under the Coal Mines Regulation found on facts that where the statutory authority while applying Regulation 26 of the Coal Mines Regulations cancelled the Short firer's certificate agreeing with the recommendations of Inquiry Officer who had complied with the Regulations declined to quash that order on the ground that the alleged authority should have heard the short firer afresh before cancelling it.
The Supreme Court again in Swedesh Cotton Mills v. UOI, AIR 1981 SC 818 noticed some exceptions to the application of the principles of natural justice and held :  "Audi Alteram Partem rule may be disregarded in an emergent situation where immediate action brooks no delay to prevent some imminent danger or injury or hazard to paramount public interest".
22.
The Supreme Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416 held "the implication of natural justice being presumptive it may be excluded by express words of statute or by necessary intendment.
Where the conflict is between the public interest and the private interest, the presumption must necessarily be weak and may, therefore, be readily displaced".
It was further held :  "Not only, therefore, can the principles of natural justice be modified but in exceptional cases they can even be excluded.
There are well- defined exceptions to the nemo jundex in cause qua rule as also to the audi alteram partem rule.
The nemo jundex in cause sua rule is subject to the doctrine of necessity and yields to it as pointed out by this Court in J Mohapatra and Co v. State of Orissa, 1985 SCR 322, 334-5 AIR 1984 SC 1572, 1576-7.
So far as the audi alteram partem rule is concerned, both in England and in India, it is well established that where a right to a prior notice and an opportunity to be heard before an order is passed would obstruct the taking of prompt action, such a right can be excluded.
This right can also be excluded where the nature of the action to be taken, its object and purpose and the scheme of the relevant statutory provisions warrant its exclusion: not can the audi alteram partem rule be invoked if importing it would have the effect of paralysing the administrative process or where the need for promptitude or the urgency of taking action so demands, as pointed out in Maneka Gandhi's case at page 681 (of 1978) 2 SCR 621".
23.
In the instant case, if the observance of the rule of Audi alteram partem is accepted, the same may have the effect of paralysing the judicial process as contemplated under the Industrial Disputes Act inasmuch as all actions taken by the petitioner would be deemed to be void ab initio, he being usurper of the public office.
Otherwise also keeping in view the need for promptitude and the urgency of taking action, the observance of the aforesaid rule cannot be insisted upon a person who himself is proved to have usurped the power, violating the law and resorted in procuring undue benefits under suspicious circumstances cannot be held to be justified in urging the compliance of the principles of natural justice the basis of which is proved to have been broken, shattered and pierced.
Accepting the writ petition and permitting the petitioner to perform his duties would amount to licensing the continuance of illegalities and authorisation of passing orders which under the law would be deemed to be void ab initio.
Allowing the passing of such orders in cases relating to the workmen would definitely be against public interest and the interest of the society at large.
We are of the opinion that where it is prima facie proved that the person is usurper of the public office and has been removed by the Government action even in violation of the principles of natural justice, he cannot be rehabilitated or permitted to function and perform the duties of such office, which if permitted would not only defeat the ends of justice but would negate the rule of law prevalent and established in a democratic polity as in India.
The Supreme Court did not accept the universal application of the doctrine of principles of natural justice in "UT Chandigarh v. Dilbagh Singh and others, 1993(2) SCT 276 (SC) : 1993(1) S.L.R.
451".
27.
When the principle which has been enunciated by us above was approved by the various Courts from time to time, we quote the following judgments in order to repel the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
(i) 1997(1) Recent Service Judgments 272, Parmod Lahudas Meshram v. State of Maharasthra and others, wherein in para No. 3 of the judgment it was observed as follows :- "3.
Shri AK Sanghi, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that when the posts were advertised and the candidates were found eligible, it does not mandate that there should be an interview and selection.
Obviously, the Service Selection Board having found the petitioner to be eligible and qualified, recommended him and was accordingly appointed as Junior Engineer, when it was sought to be cancelled on a letter written by Member Secretary of the Service Selection Board, they are entitled to be heard.
No such opportunity has ever been given before cancellation of their appointments.
It is, therefore, violative of principles of natural justice.
We find no force in the contention.
It is seen that on their own admission they have merely applied for the post pursuant to an advertisement made for the selection.
It is the case of the Selection Board that a regular selection has to be made and selecting the eligible candidates, recommendation for appointment would be made.
Therefore, the letter said to be recommended conveying the eligible recommendations were not correct and according to the rules when such being the admission (admitted ?)
position, do not find any fault to cancel the appointments.
Under those circumstances, we do not find any illegality in the action taken by the respondents.
However, such things will not be permitted to be kept under the carpet.
The State Government is directed to refer the matter to the appropriate State CBI enquiry the concerned Inspector would make an independent investigation into the matter to find out as to who were responsible for such mal-practice committed and it will open to take appropriate criminal prosecution launched against the culprits.
(ii) In AIR 1964 Supreme Court 521, State of Punjab v. Jagdip Singh, it was observed as follows :- "Where a Government servant has no right to a post or to a particular status, though an authority under the Government acting beyond its competence had purported to give that person a status which it was not entitled to give he will not in law be deemed to have been validly appointed to the post or given the particular status".
(iii) In 1996(5) Supreme Court Cases 365, Biswa Ranjan Sahoo and others v. Sushanta Kumar Dinda and others, it was observed as follows :- "In a case of mass malpractice like the instant case, nothing would become fruitful by issuance of notice.
Fabrication would obviously either be not known or no one would come forward to bear the brunt.
Under these circumstances, the Tribunal was right in not issuing notice to the persons who are said to have been selected and given selection and appointment.
The procedures adopted are in flagrant breach of the rules offending Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
28.
In this cited case even the direction was given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court for holding an inquiry.
Since in our case, this aspect of the case is already being taken care of by the Government of India, therefore, we do not want to give any further directions in this regard.
1997(1) SCT 361 (SC) : JT 1996(9) SC 260, Parmod Lahudas Meshram v. State of Mahrasthra and others also supports our above view.
We have also examined this case from the acute angle and by giving all allowance to the petitioners that since they have no role to play in their appointment or they did not hatch or enter any conspiracy with the Selection Committee or with the Administrator, therefore, the principles of natural justice ought to have been complied with well before passing the termination order.
Even on those premises the petitioners have no case.
Their condition of service gives right to the management/employer to terminate their services by giving one month's salary.
They were on probation.
In such a situation the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution are not required to be followed as held in 1995(1) SCT 784 (SC)(DB) : 1995(1) Supreme Court Cases 638, Madhya Pradesh Hasta Shilpa Nigam Ltd v. Devendra Kumar Jain and others.
29.
Rejecting the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that Ex. R.1 has not superseded the earlier advertisement, we are convinced that the petitioners applied for the various posts not in pursuance of the earlier advertisement of 1997 or 1998 but they were interviewed in pursuance of the advertisement Ex. R.1.
Even otherwise, how there can be any possible appointment when the Board was directed by the Central Government not to make any appointment and when there was a specific ban on 171999 and both the orders were to the knowledge of the Board.
30.
There is one more argument which is yet to be made by the counsel for the petitioners that there was non-application of mind on the part of the appointing authority.
It is not so.
A lot of dust gathered both in the local office and in the Government of India office at Delhi with regard to the various selections.
That was the reason that Inquiry Officers were deputed by the Government of India to examine the different selections.
A detailed report as submitted.
We have already stated above that Government of India can issue the instructions.
They were satisfied with the inquiry.
They gave directions to the local office to proceed according to the rules.
The appointing authority was satisfied that there was a lot of bungling, illegalities and irregularities in the process of selection.
Acting on the conditions of appointment the services of the petitioners were terminated.
In fact the action has been taken at the level of appointing authority itself though on the guidance provided by the centre which approved the report of the Inquiry Officer.
Otherwise also the Government of India under the statutory powers could issue the directions.
31.
Summing up our above discussion, we have come to this conclusion that principles of natural justice is a salutary principle of law but is not supposed to be followed in each and every case.
It will apply certainly where the facts so justify and demand but when there is a mass bungling, in the process of selection; when conditions of advertisement had been flouted with impunity; when rules and regulations had not been adhered to; when insubordination has been shown to the statutory directions of the Government of India and the State Governments; when selections are based on regional basis, when principles of equality under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution have been flouted; when the selectees are the usurpers of the public posts, when the constitution of the selection committee itself is bad, in such like cases, we need not to adopt the principles of natural justice.
32.
Resultantly, we are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid two writ petitions too deserve to be dismissed like the application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC We order accordingly.
No order as to costs  Petition dismissed.