Bakhshish Kaur, J - This is a petition under Section 12 read with Section 17 of the Contempt of Courts Act (in short the Act) for initiating contempt proceedings against the respondents for intentionally and wilfully disobeying the orders passed by this Court.
2.
Gurnam Singh-petitioner is an employee of Chandigarh Administration.
While he was working as Section Officer, Public Health, UT Chandigarh, he was given current duty charge of Sub divisional Engineer, Stores Sub Division by respondents.
He was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer (PH) in the scale of Rs. 2000-3500 on ad hoc basis vide office order No. 243 dated 2181989 with immediate effect by respondent No. 2.
He was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer on regular basis with effect from the same date i.e. 2181989.
3.
Vide Notification dated 1851996 issued by the Administration, UT Chandigarh, petitioner was transferred to the Municipal Corporation Chandigarh with immediate effect.
The employees, who are transferred, as per letter No. U-13025/9/97 CHD dated 7121998, are treated as on deputation retaining their lien with Chandigarh Administration till they are permanently absorbed in the Corporation.
4.
A case under Section 120-B IPC read with Section 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 was registered against various officers including the petitioner.
The petitioner was arrested on 3031993 and released on bail on 2941993.
The FIR was cancelled vide order dated 21.10.1998 passed by the Special Judge, Chandigarh.
The departmental proceedings were initiated against the petitioner.
He was served with the chargesheet.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report.
The reply submitted thereto by the petitioner was not considered.
Thus, the punishing authority vide order dated June 14, 2000 (Annexure P-1) imposed the penalty of reduction to the post of Junior Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 5800-9200.
The order Annexure P-1 was challenged by the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 9138 of 2000, which was disposed of by Division Bench of this Court on August 03, 2000 vide order Annexure P-4 by observing that the appellate powers are vested in the Finance Secretary, Local Government-cum-Secretary, Engineering Department, UT Administration, therefore, the petitioner was relegated to the remedy of appeal.
It was ordered that if an appeal is filed by the petitioner in accordance with law and an application for staying the operation of the impugned order is also filed, then the appellate authority would take decision on the stay application within a fortnight of its filing.
The appeal was directed to be disposed of expeditiously but not later than six months of its filing.
5.
The petitioner's grievance is that the respondent has not passed any order within the period mentioned in the order as above.
The application for stay was rejected as not maintainable under the garb of Rule 18(2) of the Punishment and Appeal Rules by saying that the petitioner has not filed any appeal alongwith the stay application, which is factually incorrect.
In this way, the respondents have intentionally flouted the orders passed by this Court.
Hence, they are liable to be punished under the Contempt of Courts Act.
6.
The respondents in their reply in the form of affidavits, have admitted the facts i.e. registration of the case against the petitioner and the inquiry held against him as well as the orders passed by this Court in the writ petition filed by the petitioner and averred, inter alia, that they have not committed any contempt.
7.
The respondent No. 1 pleaded that when he had passed the order on the application for stay filed by the petitioner, the appeal was not presented before him.
Thus the application could not be taken into consideration at that point of time.
On enquiry, it transpired that memo of appeal was separately filed by the petitioner on 8th August, 2000.
The error committed in the office of the deponent is highly regretted as the appeal filed by the petitioner by inadvertent mistake, was marked to the office of Chief Engineer, UT Chandigarh though the petitioner was a transferred permanent employee of the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh.
8.
I have herd Shri Yogesh Putney, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Alok Jain, learned counsel for the respondents.
9.
Mr. Yogesh Putney, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that appeal was not disposed of within the stipulated period, as directed in order Annexure P-4 dated 382000 passed by this Court in CWP No. 9138 of 2000.
It amounts to a deliberate act on the part of the respondents simply to harass him.
The appeal along with the application was filed in the office and it was in the knowledge of the authorities concerned, that the appeal has also been filed along with the application for stay and the same is pending.
10.
Whether taking up the application for stay separately, not knowing that the appeal is also pending along with the application and dismissing the application as not maintainable in view of the provisions of Rule 18(2) of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, would in any way attract the provisions of Section 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act ?
11.
Section 2(b) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 defines "civil contempt" to mean wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of Court.
In Niaz Mohammed and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(6) SCC 332 : 1994(4) SCT 633 (SC), it has been observed by the Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court that while examining the grievance of the person who has invoked the jurisdiction of the Court to initiate the proceeding for contempt for disobedience of its order; before any such contemner is held guilty and punished, the court has to record a finding that such disobedience was wilful and intentional.
If from the circumstances of a particular case, brought to the notice of the Court, the court is satisfied that although there has been a disobedience but such disobedience is the result of some compelling circumstances under which it was not possible for the contemner to comply with the order, the Court may not punish the alleged contemner."
12.
The order of the punishment dated 1172000 passed by the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, addressed to the Financial Secretary-cum- Secretary, Engineering Department, Union Territory Chandigarh is Annexure P-5.
Copy of the appeal is Annexure P-6.
The order passed on the stay application is Annexure P-7.
The relevant portion of the order reads as under :-  "In rebuttal, Shri Gurnam Singh could not give a satisfactory explanation for not filing the appeal alongwith the stay application.
He stated that an appeal has also been filed separately and according to his information, it has been sent to the Engineering Department for comments.
I have heard both the parties in detail.
The contention of the applicant that an appeal has also been filed its merely a verbal assertion and is not borne on record on file.
It is obvious that no decision can be taken on a stay application unless the grounds of appeal are prima facie examined with reference to the impugned order.
The orders of Hon'ble High Court are also very clear that the appeal has to be filed and the appellant would also file a stay application.
Keeping in view the above position, I concluded that the present stay application is not maintainable in its present form and is, therefore, rejected.
The appellant Shri Gurnam Singh would, however, be at liberty to file a regular appeal alongwith an application for staying the operation of the impugned order, if he so desires, as per provision of the Punjab Government Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules."
13.
Now, adverting to the objection of Mr. Rakesh Singh-respondent No. 1, it is specifically mentioned therein that on enquiry, it has transpired that the memo of appeal filed separately by the petitioner was due to an inadvertent mistake, marked to the office of Chief Engineer, UT Chandigarh although the petitioner was a transferred permanent employee of the Corporation.
Thus, under these circumstances, when the appeal was not put up along with the said application and even the petitioner could not give a satisfactory explanation for not filing the appeal along with the stay application, then the order passed by the competent authority by observing that no decision can be taken on the stay application unless the grounds of appeal are prima facie examined with reference to the impugned order, in my opinion, the order having been passed in the aforesaid terms would not amount to contemptuous act on the part of the respondents.
Not only this, respondent No. 1 has further observed that Gurnam Singh would be at liberty to file regular appeal along with an application for staying the operation of the impugned order if so desires, as per the provisions of Punjab Government Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
Under these circumstances, where the papers were not properly handled by the staff or even the petitioner could not state as to when he had filed the appeal, then the respondents cannot be held guilty of the act complained of.
14.
The powers under the Contempt of Courts Act being extra-ordinary in nature, the Court should be reluctant to exercise the powers, particularly in a civil contempt, as observed in the case of Nivail Singh Dhillon v. Sohan Singh Bassi, 1971 Punjab Law Reporter 344 (P&H).
It has been further observed that where a clear case of contemptuous conduct not explainable otherwise arises, then only the contemnors must be punished.
15.
In Union of India v. Satish Chander Sharma, 1992 SCC 194, it has been observed that the contempt power should be shielded and the sword should be drawn sparingly if the Court has been convinced that there has been wilful disobedience.
16.
In Murray & Co v. Ashok Kr.
Newatia and Another, 2000(1) RCR(Crl.)
729 (SC) : JT 2000(1) 337 (SC), it has been held by the Apex Court in para 21, that "Unless the Court is satisfied that contempt is of such a nature that the act complained of substantially interferes with the due course of justice, question of any punishment would not arise.
It is not enough that there should be some technical contempt of court but it must be shown that the act of contempt would otherwise substantially interfere with the due course of justice which has been equated with "due administration of justice."
17.
In Mrityunjoy Das and another v. Sayed Hasibur Rahaman and others, 2001(2) RCR(Crl.)
260 (SC) : 2001 AIR SCW 1162, it has been held that the contempt procedure is to be sparingly exercised with due care and caution.
Under para 14 of the judgment, it is observed as under :-  "The other aspect of the matter ought also to be noticed at this juncture viz., the burden and standard proof.
The common English phrase "he who asserts must prove" has its due application in the matter of proof of the allegations said to be constituting the act of contempt.
As regard the standard of proof be it noted that a proceedings under the extraordinary jurisdiction of the Court in terms of the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act is quasi criminal, and as such, the standard of proof required is that of criminal proceeding and the breach shall have to be established beyond reasonable doubt.
The observations of Lord Denning in Re.
v Bramblevale, 1969(3) All ER 1062, lend support to the aforesaid.
Lord Denning in Re Bramblevale stated : "A contempt of Court is an offence of a criminal character.
A man may be sent to prison for it.
It must be satisfactorily proved.
To use the time-honoured phrase, it must be proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
It is not proved by showing that, when the man was asked about it, he told lies.
There must be some further evidence to incrimate him.
Once some evidence is given, then his lies can be thrown into the scale against him.
But there must be some other evidence...Where there are two equally inconsistent possibilities open to the Court, it is not right to hold that the offence is proved beyond reasonable doubt."
In view of the aforesaid, I am convinced that no wilful disobedience on the part of the respondents of the orders passed by this court has been made out.
This petition is, therefore, dismissed.
Rule against the respondents is discharged.
Petition dismissed.