Swatanter Kumar, J - As all the below noted 12 writ petitions bearing numbers 3285 of 2000; 2426, 3823, 5187, 5499, 5713, 7527, 7558, 7973, 8084 and 8124 of 2001, arises common question of law founded on similar facts, we propose to dispose of all these petitioners, thus, by a common judgment.
2.
The request of the petitioners for grant of promotional increment under Rule 44(a)(i) of Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume I Part I (here-in-after referred to as the Rules), on promotion as Head Teacher was rejected by the respondents vide order dated June 27, 2000.
This order has been impugned by the petitioners in these writ petitions.
3.
Reference to facts from one fact would suffice to deal with all the petitioners together as there are similar facts of all the cases except that the date of order of the rejection passed by the respondents is different.
We would refer to the facts of Civil Writ Petition No. 17301 of 2001, titled Swaran Singh and others v. Prem Singh and others.
The petitioners were appointed as J.B.T.
teachers.
They were promoted as Head Teachers on September 16, 1996.
The petitioners were granted the benefit of one increment under Rule 44(a)(i) of higher responsibility on promotion as Head Teachers.
The pay scales were revised with effect from 111996.
While revising the pay scales, the benefit of one increment already granted to the petitioners had been ignored.
On May 17, 1999, petitioner No. 1 filed representation to the respondents requesting therein that the said increment be not ignored.
Another representation was filed on September 19, 1999.
No response was received despite the fact that the petitioners served a Legal Demand Notice on September 21, 1999 compelling the petitioners to file writ petition in this Court.
Civil Writ Petition No. 1230 of 2000 filed by the petitioners was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court vide its order dated February 08, 2000, directing the respondents to consider the demand notice served by the petitioners and pass appropriate speaking order thereon, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of certified copy.
Pursuant thereto, the respondents passed order dated June 27, 2000, which is challenged in the present writ petitions as already noticed.
4.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
In the reply it has been disputed that the petitioners were promoted to the posts of Head Teachers and that they were granted the benefit earlier under the Rules.
however, on revision of pay scales they were not entitled to derive the benefit of Rule 44(a)(i) as under Rule 413(ii), they were given officiating promotion in the same pay scale of temporary Head Teachers.
It is also stated that the petitioners had given an undertaking to the department that if any excess payment is made to them as a result of incorrect fixation of pay or any excess payment detected in the light of discrepancies noticed subsequently will be refunded to the Government either by adjustment against future payments due or otherwise.
In fact the stand of the respondents is stated in reply to paragraph 4 of the reply, which is reproduced as under :-  "That the contents of para No. 2 are admitted being matter of record.
However, it is submitted that the benefit of higher responsibility was admissible prior to 111996 by fixing the pay at next stage in the same pay scale of Rs. 1600-2660 (Pre-revised) as per instructions dated 821994 and 29.12.1995 which deals with the grant of Higher Standard Pay Scale meaning thereby pay scale other than the pay scale prescribed for the post.
After the formation of revised pay-fixation rule, 1998 effective from 111996, the instructions issued on 821994 and 29.12.1995 have been repealed as per rule 24 of Haryana Civil Services (Assured Career Progression) Rules, 1998 which speaks as under :- "All orders/notifications/instructions/other instrument issued by Govt. through which the Govt.
Servants are entitled to draw the salary in a pay scale other than the functional pay scale prescribed for the post against which he is working shall become inoperative with effect from the date proceeding the date of publication of these rules with respect to Government Servants on whom these rules apply."
Hence, the benefit of fixation of pay at the next stage on or after 111996 at the time of officiating promotion in the same pay scale cannot be given in view of rule 4.13(2) of Punjab CSR Vol-I, Part-I read with rule 24 of Haryana Civil Services (Assured Progression) Rules, 1998."
5.
In the impugned order somewhat same reasoning is given and it is stated that all the petitioner cannot be stepped up at next stage of pay of lower post than the provision and Scope of Rule 413(2) even if assuming that they were discharging higher responsibilities on the post of Teacher.
6.
The controversy in the present case is a very narrow compass inasmuch as the promotion of the petitioners is not disputed to the post of Head Teachers.
Nothing has been placed by the respondents on the record to show that the post of Head Teacher in comparison to J.B.T.
Teacher does not carry higher responsibilities.
The petitioners were actually working as Head Teachers for all this period is also not disputed and in fact it is conceded that they were given the benefit of Rule 44. in the pay scales as on 111996.
The pay scale of Head Teacher is 1400-2660.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Sunder Lal Jain and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995 S.L.R.
215 : 1995(1) SCT 564 held that the persons who were working as Junior Lab.
Attendant were required to be promoted to the post of Senior Lab.
Attendant, were entitled to the higher pay scales than the one which they were getting on a post from which they had been promoted.
7.
Rule 44 (supra) has been subject matter of scrutiny by earlier occasions as well.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Lal Singh v. State of Punjab had granted relief to the persons similarly situated alike the petitioners.
The judgment in Lal Singh's case was appealed by the State before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court modified the order of the High Court passed in the case State of Punjab v. Lal Singh, after taking into consideration the ambit and scope of Rule 413 and held as under :-  "A reading thereof would clearly indicate that initial substantive pay of a Government employee who is appointed substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay, is regulated, if he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post and when appointed to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance, then he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post.
Thus, it could be seen that when JBT Teacher was appointed temporarily as a Head Teacher, he is entitled to draw, since he is holding responsibilities of greater importance as a Head Teacher, one advance increment in his old post in the time scale next above the substantive pay on the date of his temporarily promotion as a Head Teacher.
The appeal is accordingly allowed.
The order of the High Court stands modified.
They are entitled to one advance increment in the scale of JBT Teacher at the time of promotion while discharging the duties as Head Teachers.
No costs."
8.
It would be useful to mention here that following the principle enunciated by the Apex Court in Lal Singh's case (supra) the Division Bench of this Court granted the relief to the petitioners who were similarly situated.
Reference can be made to Shiv Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and another, Civil Writ Petition No. 11495 of 2000, decided on August 30, 2000; Veena Kumari and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(4) RSJ 341 : 2000(4) SCT 1038 (P&H)(DB) and Sudarshan v. State of Haryana, 2001(2) SCT 243.
9.
The consistent view of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as various judgments of this Court is that once the increment was given to the employee on assumption of higher responsibilities of teachers and administration, then Govt. is liable to take into consideration the said increment for fixation of pay in the higher scale.
10.
The facts in the present case as already noticed are hardly in dispute.
The petitioners were actually promoted and granted one increment as the Head Teachers post carry higher responsibilities.
The benefit granted to them could not be withdrawn to their dis-advantage because the pay scales were revised.
The increment was attached to the performance of the function of the higher post with higher responsibilities and could not be withdrawn just because there was revision of pay scales.
The impugned order passed by the respondents is based upon wrong assumption of law.
The concerned authority ought to have taken into consideration the relevant factors and decided the matter in the light of the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court and different Division Benches of this Court as referred to above.
11.
We find the view taken by the authorities is not in consonance with the principles of law enunciated by this Court in the above judgments.
12.
Resultantly, Annexure P-5 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners in the light of the above law and grant relief to the petitioners in accordance with Rules.
The Writ Petition is accordingly allowed.
The parties, however, are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.