Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner, after his matriculation, did his diploma in Art and Craft Teacher Training Course, conducted by the Department of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, in First Division, in the year 1991.
The petitioner started serving in private schools.
The Government of Haryana advertised 40 posts of Art and Craft Teachers in BC Category.
On 1431996 the petitioner was given adhoc appointment by the District Education Officer.
Hisar in Government High School, Kirdhan.
Subsequently, this village was transfered to District Fatehabad.
On 341996, the posting of the petitioner was changed to Government High School, Thuian.
He continued to work in that school till August, 1998.
The petitioner had submitted an application for the advertised vacancies and in furtherance thereto, was interviewed by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, under Roll No. 294.
The result was declared on 1041998.
The petitioner was selected and his case was sent by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, to District Education Officer, Fatehabad, for issuing appointment letter to the petitioner on 1151998.
Same practice is adopted in relation to other candidates of general category as well as BC category.
The appointment letters to rest of the candidates issued but despite the fact that the petitioner completed all his formalities, the petitioner was not given any letter and was compelled to file civil writ petition No. 11648 of 1998, which was dismissed by the Court with liberty to the petitioner to make representation to the respondents enumerated in the advertisement.
Copy of the said order is annexed with this writ petition as Annexure P/6.
The petitioner submitted his representation to the respondents while even referring to the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Smt. Viran Wali v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 16540 of 1994, decided on 121995 : 1995(2) SCT 362 (P&H)(DB), wherein it was held that the qualification which the petitioner had obtained is to be recognised by the State of Haryana and appointment letter should be issued to the petitioner who was similarly situated alike the petitioner.
However, the respondents still rejected the request of the petitioner compelling him to approach this Court again through the present writ petition under Articles 26/227 of the Constitution of India.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply wherein it is stated that essential qualifications have been enumerated in the advertisement and are as under:-  "(i) Matric pass (full subjects).
(ii) Pass in 2 years Art and Craft Diploma examination conducted by the Haryana Industries/Industrial Training Department.
OR Special certificate of teaching in Drawing in the Secondary Department issued by the Haryana Education Department.
NOTE : Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard is essential."
The petitioner having passed two years Art and Craft Diploma from Punjab is not eligible because Education Department of Haryana Government do not recognise the two years Art and Craft Diploma equivalent to two years Art and Craft Diploma from Haryana.
The appointing authority is competent to grant or not to grant recognition to a particular qualification, as such the action of the State in declining appointment letter to the petitioner is fully justified and is in accordance with law.
The respondents have also relied upon another judgment of Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 2662 of 1997, titled as Gurmit Kaur v. State of Haryana and others.
There is no dispute to the fact that petitioner has not done his two years diploma in Art and Craft from the State of Haryana.
He has cleared his Diploma Course in Art and Craft from the Institute run by the Department of Education and Industrial Training, Punjab that too in the year 991.
The respondents have raised to other dispute except to the extent that petitioner has not done his two years diploma course from Haryana Government.
Diploma certificate of Punjab Government is not recognised as equivalent to the diploma issued by the Haryana Government.
As such, the petitioner does not satisfy the essential qualifications for appointment to the post.
We have referred to the essential qualifications above as enumerated in the advertisement.
The petitioner has passed his matric as well as two years Art and Craft Diploma examination conducted by the Haryana Government.
The petitioner otherwise is eligible, but it is lack of recognition by the State of Haryana which has obstructed the Government from issuing letter of appointment to the petitioner.
The advertisement did not indicate that the candidates who have passed two years diploma from Punjab are not eligible.
It is pertinent to notice at this stage, which is not otherwise disputed that the petitioner was granted adhoc appointment by the Government of Haryana in its different schools since 1996.
At that time, the two years diploma course conducted by the State of Punjab was accepted as recognised by the State of Haryana and all candidates who had done such course were given employment.
The State of Haryana has issued instructions only in January, 1998 derecognising and withdrawing recognition of the two years diploma certificate issued by the State of Punjab.
The advertisement was issued and even interviews were conducted by the candidates prior to the said derecognition of the diploma course by the State of Haryana.
It is settled principle of law that eligibility of a candidate has to be determined as on the last date of submission of applications.
Certainly, the petitioner was eligible on 7111996 itself.
Settled precepts of administrative law certainly indicate that the matters relating to equivalence of diploma/degree course and its recognition or de- recognition essentially must fall in the domain of the expert bodies.
It is not for the Courts to venture upon such adjudication as no expertise are available with the Court to fairly and squarely pronounce upon niceties of such matters relating to technical education, but the decision of the administrative or executive authority in this regard is subject to three conditions (i) that the decision should be taken by competent authority upon proper application of mind in consonance with rules and (ii) such decision can be made effective prospectively alone and (iii) the persons who have already acquired such qualification when it was recognised by the other University or State should normally not be made the ground for denial of further education or employment prospects.
These are principles which are pervasively applicable to this field.
At this stage we may refer to a recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ms. Sandhya Singh v. Punjabi University, Patiala and another, 2002(2) SCT 877 (P&H) CWP No. 17677 of 2000, decide don 20.12.2001, where dealing with somewhat controversy in regard to education matters, the Court held as under :-  "Thus, under to circumstances the de-recognition can be given effect to prior to the date of decision of the Academic Council.
The acts must be done in the manner and by the authority prescribed under the rules and statutes governing the business of the University.
No provision was brought to our notice under which even the Standing Committee of the Academic Council can attach finality to such a decision.
These all were the steps taken by the authorities for a final decision, which was ultimately taken by the Syndicate of the University on 24102000.
The obvious consequence thereof would be that all the students who got admission prior thereto are entitled to continue the course, as they were fully eligible on the date of entrance test, date of admission and their qualification of 10+2 was duly recognised by the University till that date.
We may refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027, where it was held as under :- "We are of the view that since at the time when the petitioners joined the course, it was recognised by the Government of Haryana and it was on the basis of this recognition that the petitioners joined the course, it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that though at the time or their joining the course it was recognised, yet they cannot be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course it was derecognised by the State Government on 9th January, 1985."
"...Of course, if any person has joined the certificate course after 9th January, 1985 he would not be entitled to the benefit of this order and any certificate obtained by him from the said Institutes would be or no avail.
There will be no order as to costs of the appeal."
In this regard, reference can also be made to the case of Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) Recent Services Judgements 327 : 1993(1) SCT 770 (P&H)(DB), where a Full Bench of this Court while following the above principles of law enunciated in the case of Suresh Pal (supra), held as under :-  "The name of this institution is also mentioned in the certificate issued by the Comptroller of Examination, Department of Industrial Training, Haryana.
In view of the instructions Annexure P/16, this Certificate of training taken in Haryana stood recognised by the State of Punjab.
When the petitioner completed this course and applied for job, such certificates were recognised by the State of Punjab decided to de-recognise such certificates, the same would be prospectively and will not apply retrospectively."
We may also notice the relief granted to the petitioners in the above petition by the Full Bench, as under :-  "Net result would be that the said training course diploma obtained by the petitioner from the Haryana State which was recognised by the State of Punjab in view of the instructions contained in Annexure P/16, would continue to be recognised as such and the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Arts and Crafts teacher on compassionate grounds under State Government instructions dated April 18, 1973, could not be denied."
In the case of Smt. Viran Wali (supra), a Division Bench of this Court had directed the State Government that the diploma obtained by the petitioners in those petitions from the institutions in State of Punjab be considered as recognised qualification for appointment as Arts and Crafts Teacher in the State of Haryana.
In face of this direction we hardly see any justification on the part of the State to decline relief to the petitioner.
Of course, in the case of Gurmeet Kaur (supra) the Division Bench has taken a different view but in view of the earlier judgment of the Division Bench in Viran Wali's case (supra) and the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court and Full Bench of this Court referred above, we would prefer to follow the view taken in Smt. Viran Wali's case (supra).
The petitioner made no misrepresentation at any stage.
He was granted adhoc appointment as Arts and Crafts Teacher in the school of the Government and in face of the fact that State of Haryana had recognised this qualification for a considerable period when even after the Punjab Re- Organisation Act, 1966 came into force and continued to recognise it till January, 1998.
We are not able to persuade ourselves to hold that the petitioner can be termed ineligible for appointment to the post of Arts and Crafts Teacher, for which he has already acquired sufficient experience of the same post.
For the reasons afore-stated, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondent to issue letter of appointment to the petitioner in accordance with law.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the parties left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.