GS Singhvi, J - Whether the Deputy District Education Officer (Primary), Ferozepur (respondent No. 3) could dismiss the appellant from service on the ground of his conviction by the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ferozepur for violating the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (for short, 'the 1940 Act') without considering the nature of offence, the findings recorded by the Court and his past service record is the question which arises for determination in this appeal filed by the appellant against order dated 2331987 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 607 of 1986.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the afore-mentioned question, we may briefly notice the facts.
While he was working as Assistant Master, Government Primary School, Wazidpur Kathian Walia, Block Abohar-II, District Ferozepur, the appellant submitted application dated 3031975 to the Block Education Officer, Abohar for permission to do medical practice as a hobby after school hours.
The concerned officer is said to have granted the permission subject to the condition that the study of students should not suffer, after about 7-1/2 months, FIR No. 530 of 1976 was registered against the appellant for alleged violation of the provision of the 1940 Act.
Vide judgment dated 841977, the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ferozepur, convicted him, under Section 27(b) of the 1940 Act on the basis of his confessional statement, but awarded sentence only till the rising of the Court and payment of fine of Rs. 250/- or in default suffer further imprisonment for 3 months.
The operative part of that judgment reads as under :-  "I have heard the accused in the matter of sentence.
The facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of the offence and the antecedents of the accused do not justify the release of the accused on probation of good conduct.
1, therefore, sentence the accused to undergo imprisonment till the rising of the Court and to pay fine in the sum of Rs. 250/-, or in default of payment of fine to undergo further RI for three months.
The drugs taken into possession shall be disposed of according to rules, after the expiry of period of appeal or revision, if any, and subject to its result.
The file be consigned to the record too (room ?)."
3.
After about two years of his conviction, respondent No. 3 passed order dated 2631979 vide which he dismissed the appellant from service by involving Rule 13(i) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short, 'the 1970 Rules').
4.
The appellant challenged his dismissal in Civil Writ Petition No. 1261 of 1979 which was dismissed as withdrawn on 28.4.1979 with liberty to file departmental appeal.
The appeal filed by him was dismissed by the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Education.
He then filed C.W.P.
No. 607 of 1986 for quashing the orders passed by the punishing and appellate authorities.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by making the following observations :  "It is clear from a perusal of the statutory provisions, reproduced above, that the petitioner had not been convicted for his inability to produce bills of the medicines found in his shop.
He had been convicted because he has been selling/stocking for sale of drugs in contravention of the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
The petitioner had himself admitted the prosecution allegations against him.
He was held guilty of violating the provisions of Section 27(b) ibid.
This is a serious offence and is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years.
The seriousness lies in the falling of very potent and other drugs which are abused by some people as intoxicants.
Some of these drugs are habit-forming and have a very deleterious effect on the physical and mental health of the user.
The injurious effects of the menace of consumption of intoxicant drugs cannot be over-emphasised.
These drugs when abused ruin the health of the user and debilitate his mental faculties.
After sometime the user becomes a physical and mental wreck.
In other cases he develops tendencies towards violence and crime and becomes a menace to the orderly society.
The sale by unauthorised persons of all sorts of drugs without a proper prescription and to persons who do not need them for any treatment but abuse them for getting a kick, is not an ordinary crime.
It is not against a particular individual it is a crime against the society at large.
A teacher, in the Indian milieu, is an ideal for the young impressionable minds.
If teachers start indulging in illegal activities, it is likely to have pernicious influence on their students.
Such an action cannot be countenanced.
From the mention in the dismissal order of the provisions of sections of the statute for the violation of which the petitioner has been convicted, the date of the order and description of the court, it becomes clear that the punishing authority had gone through the judgment of the criminal court, and, thus, was fully aware of the facts which led to the conviction of the petitioner.
Even otherwise, it is clear from the pleadings of the parties that after the conviction of the petitioner, the petitioner was first suspended.
He had made a representation against the suspension in which he had taken all possible defences.
The same had been considered and rejected.
These facts indicate that the punishing authority was aware of the factual and legal aspects of the case and had passed the orders after full application of the mind.
The order passed on the file is also indicative of this.
Shri G.S.
Grewal, learned Advocate General, Punjab had produced before me the file of the case.
The translation of the order reads as under :-  "In accordance with the above-mentioned proposals (the notings on the file), Sh. Hans Raj, petitioner is being dismissed.
Orders may be issued.
It looks that the teacher in conspiracy with the Block Education Officer was practicing medicine.
The Block Education Officer could not authorise the petitioner to engage in practice of medicine.
The teacher had opened a shop of medicines and he had employed a salesman to work thereon......" In the notings referred to in the order, all the aspects of the case have been examined.
So, the plea of Shri Chatrath that the punishing authority had not applied its mind to the question as to what punishment should be inflicted on the delinquent teacher cannot be accepted.
The authorities cited have thus no application."
5.
Shri GK Chatrath, Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant argued that the order under challenge should be set aside because the learned Single Judge has failed to consider the appellant's plea that the order of punishment passed by respondent No. 3 was ultra vires to Rule 13(i) of the 1970 Rules.
He further argued that the learned Single judge has seriously erred in upholding the orders impugned in the writ petition ignoring that the order of punishment was passed by respondent No. 3 without considering the appellant's conduct which led to his conviction by the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate.
Learned counsel submitted that the appellant's conviction under Section 27(b) of the 1940 Act by itself was not sufficient for imposition of penalty of removal from service and respondent No. 3 was duty-bound to consider the nature of offence, the order passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ferozepur and other relevant factors like length of appellant's service and his service record which the concerned respondent failed to do.
Shri Chatrath submitted that if all these factors had been considered by respondent No. 3, he could not have imposed the penalty of removal ignoring the fact that even the Chief Judicial Magistrate had taken a very lenient view and awarded sentence only upto the rise of Court.
Learned counsel lamented that the learned Single Judge considered the file produced by the Advocate General after conclusion of arguments without giving opportunity to the counsel of the writ petitioner to make his submissions in the context of notings recorded on the file.
He also assailed the note relied upon by the learned Single Judge by pointing out that no evidence is available on the file to show that the appellant was practising medicine in conspiracy with the Block Education Officer.
6.
The learned Deputy Advocate General adopted the reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge for dismissing the writ petition and argued that even though order dated 2631979 did not contain reasons which constituted the foundation of the decision taken by the punishing authority, that deficiency will be deemed to have been made good by the reasons recorded on the file.
7.
Before proceeding further, we may mention that during the course of arguments, we had asked the learned Deputy Advocate General to produce the file which was shown to the learned Single Judge by the then Advocate General and also show whether any evidence was available on the file to prove that there was conspiracy between the appellant and the Block Education Officer so as to enable the former to practice in medicine.
In reply, the learned Deputy Advocate General, stated that the file is not available with the department.
She also stated that no evidence is available on the record which may give an idea of conspiracy between the appellant and the Block Education Officer.
8, We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
Article 311 (1) and (2) and Rule 13 of the 1970 Rules, which have bearing on the decision of this appeal, read as under :  "Article 311(1) and (2) of the Constitution - 311.
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a State - (1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges : Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry to impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed.
Provided further that his clause shall not apply -  (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or xx, xx, xx, xx, xx Rule 13 of the 1970 Rules 13.
Special procedure in certain cases.
- Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 - (i) Where any penalty is imposed on a Government employee on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or (ii) where the punishing authority is satisfied the reasons to be recorded by it in writing that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in these rules; or (iii) where the Governer is satisfied that in the interest of the State, it is not expedient to hold any inquiry in the manner provided in these rules, the punishing authority may consider the circumstances of the case and make such orders thereon as it deems fit : Provided that the Commission shall be consulted, where such consultation is necessary, before any orders are made in any case under this rule."
An analysis of the above reproduced constitutional provisions shows that a holder of civil post can be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank except after holding an inquiry in which he is required to be informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges [Article 311(2)].
This requirement can be dispensed with in three contingencies specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2).
Clause of this proviso envisages dismissal or removal or reduction in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to the conviction of the employee on a criminal charge.
In other words, an employee, who is convicted on a criminal charge, can be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank without holding a regular departmental enquiry envisaged by Article 311(2).
Rule 13(i) of the 1970 Rules, which is pari materia to clause (a) of Second proviso to Article 311(2), declares that nothing contained in Rules 8 to 12 shall apply where any penalty is imposed on a government employee on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
9.
The question as to whether an employee who is dismissed of removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge can seek relief from the Court was considered by a Constitution Bench in Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, 1985(3) SCC 398.
By a majority judgment, the Constitution Bench held as under :  "Where a disciplinary authority comes to know that a government servant has been convicted on a criminal charge, it must consider whether his conduct which has led to his conviction was such as warrants the imposition of a penalty and, if so, what that penalty should be.
For that purpose, it will have to peruse the judgment of the criminal court and consider all the facts and circumstances of the case.
Once the disciplinary authority reaches the conclusion that the government servant's conduct was such as to require his dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank, he must decide which of these three penalties should be imposed on him.
This too it has to do by itself and without hearing the government servant concerned by reason of the exclusionary effect of the second proviso.
However, a conviction on a criminal charge does not automatically entail dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of the government servant concerned and, therefore, it is not mandatory to impose any of these major penalties.
Having decided which of these three penalties is required to be imposed, he has to pass the requisite order ..... A government servant who is aggrieved by the penalty imposed by the disciplinary authority acting under Cl(a) of the second proviso to Art. 311(2) can agitate in appeal, revision or review, as the case may be, that the penalty was too severe or excessive and not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
If it is his case that he is not the government servant who has been in fact convicted, he can also agitate this question in appeal, revision or review.
If he fails in all the departmental remedies and still wants to pursue the matter, he can invoke the Court's power of judicial review subject to the court permitting it.
If the Court finds that he was not in fact the person convicted, it will strike down the impugned order and order him to be reinstated in service.
Where the court finds that the penalty imposed by the impugned order is arbitrary or grossly excessive or out of all proportion to the offence committed or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case or the requirements of that particular government service, the Court will also strike down the impugned order.
It is, however, not necessary that the Court should always order reinstatement.
The court can instead substitute a penalty which in its opinion would be just and proper in the circumstances of the case."
10.
Shankar Dass v. Union of India and another, AIR 1985 SC 772 is a classic example of the Court's interdiction in a matter similar to the case in hand.
The facts of that case were that while he was employed as a Cash Clerk in Delhi Milk Supply Scheme Department, Government of India, the appellant was prosecuted for breach of trust in respect of a sum of Rs. 500/-.
The learned Magistrate 1st Class, Delhi convicted his under Section 409 of the Indian Penal Code, but in view of the peculiar circumstances relating to the crime and the criminal, he released him on probation under Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
However, he was summarily dismissed from service.
The suit filed by him in 1966 was dismissed by the trial Court.
The decree of the trial Court was confirmed by the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Delhi.
The second appeal filed by him was allowed by a learned Single Judge of Delhi High Court on the ground that he could not be dismissed from service without affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard as required by Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the Government of India was allowed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court extracted a portion of the order passed by the Judicial Magistrate in which the appellant had withheld the amount and proceeded to observe as under :  "It is to be lamented that despite these observations of the learned Magistrate, the Government chose to dismiss the appellant in a huff without applying its mind to the penalty which could appropriately be imposed upon him in so far as his service career was concerned.
Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution confers on the Government the power to dismiss a person from service "on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge."
But that power like every other power has to be exercised fairly, justly and reasonably.
Surely the constitution does not contemplate that a Government servant who is convicted for parking his scooter in a non-parking area should be dismissed from service.
He may perhaps not be entitled to be heard on the question of penalty since Cl. (a) of the second proviso to Art. 311(2) makes the provisions of that Article inapplicable when a penalty is to be imposed on a Government servant on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
But the right to impose a penalty carries with it the duty to act justily.
Considering the facts of this case, there can be no two opinions that the penalty of dismissal from service imposed upon the appellant is whimsical."
11.
The proposition of law which emerges from these decisions is that conviction on a criminal charge does not automatically entails the penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank and before imposing any of these or other penalty, the competent authority is duty-bound to consider whether the conduct of the employee which has led to his conviction was such as to warrant imposition of penalty, if any.
For this purpose, the concerned authority is required to peruse the judgment of the criminal Court to find out the nature of offence and the views expressed by the Court and also consider the other relevant factors like length of service and past record of the employee.
The factor like conviction for an offence, which has no bearing on the employee's conduct as a government servant, would also be relevant for determining the quantum of punishment.
If the employee is convicted for a trivial offence, the competent authority may not punish him or may impose a minor penalty.
The authority concerned may also take a lenient view if the Court convicting the employee felt that the offence did not award of service sentence.
However, no strait-jacket formula can be laid down for exercise of power under Clause (a) of second proviso to Article 311 of the Constitution of India or Rule 13(i) of the 1970 Rules and each case will have to be decided on its own facts.
12.
If the impugned judgment and orders passed by the punishing and appellate authorities are examined in the light of the above discussion, we do not find any difficulty in holding that the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by upholding the order of punishment ignoring the fact that respondent No. 3 had not applied mind to the requirement of Rule 13(i) and passed order of punishment without considering the nature of offence committed by the appellant, his past record and the length of service.
In our considered view, the order passed by respondent No. 3 should have been declared ultra vires to the provisions of Rule 13(i) of the 1970 Rules and clause (a) of second proviso to Article 311 of the Constitution of India because he did not advert to the relevant factors like the nature of offence for which the appellant had been convicted, the findings recorded by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ferozepur and his service record etc.  13.
The notings recorded on the file, to which reference has been made in the order of the learned Single Judge, have not been made available to us for perusal, but even if the same were to be taken into consideration, it is not possible to sustain the impugned order because no evidence whatsoever is available on the record to show that the appellant had entered into a conspiracy with Block Education Officer for practising medicine.
That apart, the facts brought on the record show that he had started medical practice as a hobby with a view to help the rural population and not for making profits.
His action may not have been in conformity with the provisions of the 1-940 Act, but the fact that the Chief Judicial Magistrate had taken a lenient view and sentenced him only to the rising of the Court ought to have been considered by the punishing authority before imposing extreme penalty of dismissal and its failure to do so must be treated as sufficient to vitiate the order of punishment and the appellate order.
14.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
Order dated 2331987 passed by the learned Single Judge is set aside.
The writ petition filed by the appellant is allowed.
Orders dated 2631979 and 8.6.1982 passed by respondent No. 3 and Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Education are declared illegal and quashed.
15.
The issue which remains to be considered is as to what relief should be given to the appellant.
According to Shri Chatrath, his client has crossed the age of 58 years and, therefore, he would feel satisfied if the respondents are directed to pay the retiral pay benefits.
In view of this, we direct that the appellant shall not be entitled to back wages, but the respondents shall pay all retiral benefits by treating him to have continued in service till the date of superannuation.
Appeal allowed.