R Gururajan, J - The petitioner V.S.S.
Sangha, a Co-operative Society, Simikeri, Bagalkot, is before this Court challenging the award passed by the Labour Court in K.I.D.
No. 566/95, Annexure `A' in this petition.
2.
The petitioner-Sangha is a Co-operative Society and the respondent-workman was a worker in the said Sangha.
The Society charged R-1 for the allegation of:  (1) Increased the RR without sanction of the Department; (2) For having taken the enhanced pay without authorisation; (3) For taking a loan of Rs. 11,350/- against his agricultural land and his failure to repay the loan in spite of receipt of a compensation of Rs. 50,000/- from the Government; (4) For misutilising the cash balance of the Society of a sum of Rs. 3,590/- and a sum of Rs. 12,922/- and also Rs. 325/-.
He was further charged for having misutilised an amount of Rs. 3,415/- on 3111990 and for written assurance to repay a sum of Rs. 2,48125 in addition to his failure to show the existence of stock of goods worth Rs. 4,34350.
3.
These allegations were subsequently enquired into by the Society by way of Departmental enquiry.
The enquiry was conducted in accordance with law.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his findings in terms of Annexure `B'.
The petitioner imposed the major penalty of dismissal in terms of an order dated 24.7.1994.
The respondent took up the matter of dismissal in terms of Section 10(4-A) of the ID Act before the Labour Court, Hubli.
The case was numbered as K.I.D.
No. 75/94, which was subsequently renumbered as K.I.D.
No. 566/95.
The respondent-workman filed this Claim Statement and the Claim Statement was contested by way of objections.
Parties filed documents bearing Exs.
M-1 to M-17.
The Labour Court heard the parties and thereafter passed an order ordering 50% of the backwages to the claimant from the date of order of dismissal till the date of award, subject to adjustments, if any.
4.
Sri Prabhuling K. Navadgi, learned Counsel appearing for the management attacks the award by contending that the Labour Court has factually given a premium for a grave misconduct of misappropriation.
He says that the relief in the case on hand is wholly unwarranted and unsustainable in law.
5.
Per contra, the Counsel for the workman supports the award.
6.
Heard the Counsel on either side.
Perused the impugned award.
7.
The admitted materials reveal that the petitioner is the Sangha and the respondent No. 1 is a worker in the said Sangha.
While so working, from the pleadings and from the material on record, it appears that the workman has committed several omissions including misappropriation/misutilisation of the fund belonging to the Sangha on several occasions.
The departmental proceedings were initiated factually ending in its dismissal.
The Labour Court has framed an issue with regard to a departmental enquiry.
The said issue has been answered in favour of the management in terms of an order dated 611997.
Therefore, the learned Judge considered the materials placed before the Court.
The Labour Court notices in the award that the workman had not repaid the loan and the land mortgaged was acquired by the Government.
Even after obtaining full compensation, he has not cleared the loan amount.
The Labour Court notices that in the Audit Report, a sum of Rs. 3,450/- is shown as different and the said amount is not paid by the respondent-workman.
The Labour Court notices the document Ex.M-17, in which the signature of the workman is found.
After noticing various aspects of the matter, the Labour Court in the impugned award holds that the workman is guilty of temporary misappropriation of the money belonging to the Sangha.
The Labour Court again in the subsequent paragraphs holds that the charge Nos. 2, 5 and 6 are proved.
After noticing the proved charges, the Labour Court also holds that the relief of reinstatement cannot be imposed in the light of the gravity of the misconduct proved and in the light of the management losing confidence in the respondent-workman.
But, however, the Labour Court holds that the relief of compensation, in view of reinstatement would be proper to be granted.
Once the Court comes to a conclusion that a serious act of misconduct is proved, the Labour Court is not justified in granting compensation.
Any grant of compensation would be a premium of serious misconduct committed by the workman.
The Labour Court failed to see that the petitioner is a small Sangha and the respondent has virtually misutilised his position by way of misappropriation.
In these circumstances, the Labour Court ought to have rejected the entire reference and ought not to have granted the compensation.
The said grant of compensation in the light of the proved misconduct, in my view, is wholly unsustainable in law.
8.
It is also seen from the material on record that the respondent, as a matter of fact was in employment in Totageri Beleger Maratha Sahakari Sangha, Bagalkot.
In these circumstances, Sri Navadgi, learned Counsel is perfectly justified in complaining about the grant of 50% backwages.
The Supreme Court in somewhat identical circumstances, has ruled in the judgment reported in 2000(7) SCC 517 : AIR 2000 SC 3129 in paras 6, 7 and 8 that in the case of the proved misappropriation, the Labour Court cannot substitute penalty imposed by the employer in such cases.
The findings of the Supreme Court in the said judgment read as under at page 3131; of AIR :  "6.
As stated above, the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench in writ appeals confirmed the findings given by the Labour Court that charges against the workmen for breach of trust and misappropriation of funds entrusted to them for the value mentioned in the charge-sheet had been established.
After giving the said findings, in our view, the Labour Court materially erred in setting aside the order passed by the management removing the workmen from service and reinstating them with 25% backwages.
Once an act of misappropriation is proved, may be for a small or large amount, there is no question of showing uncalled for sympathy and reinstating the employees in service.
Law on this point is well settled.
In UPSRTC v. Badudeo Chaudhary, 1997(11) SCC 370 this Court set aside the judgment passed by the High Court in a case where a conductor serving with UP State Road Transport Corporation was removed from service on the ground that the alleged misconduct of the conductor was an attempt to cause loss of Rs. 65 to the Corporation by issuing tickets to 23 passengers for a sum of Rs. 235 but recovering @ Rs. 535 per head and also by making entry in the way bill as having received the amount of Rs. 235, which figure was subsequently altered to Rs. 285.
The Court held that it was not possible to say that the Corporation removing the conductor from service has imposed a punishment which is disproportionate to his misconduct.
Similarly in Punjab Dairy Development Corpn.
Ltd. v. Kala Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2661 : 1997(3) SCT 580 (SC) this Court considered the case of a workman who was working as a Dairy Helper-cum-Cleaner for collecting milk fro various centers and was charged for the misconduct that he inflated the quantum of milk supplies in the milk centres and also inflated the quality of fat contents where there were less fat contents.
The Court held (at SCC pp, 161-62, para 4) that in view of the proof of misconduct a necessary consequence will be that the management had lost confidence that the workman would truthfully and faithfully carry on his duties and consequently the Labour Court rightly declined to exercise the power under Section 11-A of the ID Act to grant relief with minor penalty.
7.
In view of the aforesaid settled legal position, the High Court materially erred in confirming the directions given by the Labour Court in reinstating the respondent workmen with 25% backwages.
For giving the aforesaid direction, the Labour Court considered that there is no evidence regarding past misconduct by the employees and, therefore, it can be observed that they have rendered several years of service without any blemish and to some extent, there was lapse on the part of the management.
8.
In case of proved misappropriation, in our view, there is no question of considering past record.
It is the discretion of the employer to consider the same is appropriate cases, but the Labour Court cannot substitute the penalty imposed by the employer in such cases.
9.
In the light of the clear pronouncement of law by the Supreme Court and in the light of the proved misconduct, the impugned award cannot stand the scrutiny of law.
10.
In these circumstances, this petition stands allowed.
The impugned award is set aside.
The order of dismissal is confirmed.
11.
However, it is clarified that the award with regard to subsistence allowance is not disturbed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.