Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for quashing of the order dated 15.10.1993, Annexure P/2 to the writ petition, vide which the deceased Mangal Singh-Constable was dismissed from service under Rule 161(2) read with proviso (b) (2) to Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the order dated 16101998, Annexure P/5, vide which the appeal filed against the order of dismissal was rejected.
2.
Challenge by the petitioners to the impugned order is three-fold :-  (a) There is proper application of mind by the competent authority inasmuch as no reasons have been stated as to why it was not reasonably practicable to hold a regular departmental inquiry against the deceased Mangal Singh; (b) the nature of the charges were such that the respondents were under obligation to hold a regular departmental inquiry before terminating/dismissing the services of the Mangal Singh; and  (c) under Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution of India, such power is vested in the Governor of the State alone while the impugned order has been passed by the Superintendent of Police, thus, is liable to be quashed.
3.
It may be necessary to make reference to the relevant facts giving rise to the present petition.
Mangal Singh, husband of petitioner No. 1 and father of petitioners No. 2 and 3, joined the Punjab Police Wireless Department on 271987.
According to the petitioners, he was falsely implicated in F.I.R. No. 58 dated 12101993 registered at Police Station Machhiwarha under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code.
Deceased Mangal Singh was acquitted after trial, vide judgment of the trial court dated 7111996.
However, said Mangal Singh was dismissed from service, vide order dated 15.10.1993 under Punjab Police Rule 161(2) read with proviso (b) (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
An appeal was preferred by Mangal Singh on 4121996 before the Inspector General of Police, which was dismissed, vide order dated 521997.
Mangal Singh then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1080 of 1998.
Reply was filed in that writ petition stating that a detailed order dismissing the appeal of the appellant had been passed by the competent authority on 16101998.
Resultantly, the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to challenge the said order.
4.
Vide order dated 16101998, detailed reasons were communicated to the petitioners.
5.
Unfortunately on 19101998, Mangal Singh is stated to have been killed.
The present petition against the order of dismissal as well as that of the appellate authority have been challenged by the wife of deceased Mangal Singh and his two children.
6.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply, wherein it has been stated that the services of the Mangal Singh had been dismissed in accordance with law and the relevant rules.
It was not reasonably practicable to hold a regular departmental inquiry, as the said Mangal Singh was threatening the witnesses and had won over the witnesses during the trial of the criminal case before the court of competent jurisdiction.
It is averred that the conduct of Mangal Singh was such that he could not have become a disciplined police officer and keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, the impugned order was passed.
The appeal of the deceased Mangal Singh was dismissed by a reasoned order and, as such, this court should not interfere in the impugned orders.
7.
As far as the first two points viz. challenge to the punishment order and consequent order passed by the competent authority on appeal filed by Mangal Singh, raised by the petitioners, are concerned, it will be appropriate to discuss them collectively.
8.
Vide order dated 16101998, reasons recorded by the authority were communicated to deceased Mangal Singh.
The appellate authority, while sustaining the order of dismissal gave various reasons.
Such as, Mangal Singh absented from duty or over stayed unauthorisedly.
He was directed to be careful in future.
In addition to above, the following reasons were given by the appellate authority dismissing the appeal on merits :-  ".....4.
While posted as constable messenger at Police Radio Station Ferozepur, a criminal case FIR No. 68/89 dated 1481989 under Section 319, 320/171-F, IPC Police Station Cantt, Ferozepur was registered against him for giving his police uniform to two military jawans for getting their photographs in Police uniform and helped them in preparing/issuing bogus/fake identity cards of Punjab Police Department.
He was placed under suspension with effect from 1781989 afternoon vide order No. 22547/OASI dated 11989.
He was arrested in this case on 1781989.
This was sent as untraced on 2841990 as intimated by DSP/Communication, Ferozepur.
As such he was reinstated vide order No. 15289-96/OSI dated 2371990.
5.
While posted at Police Radio Station Ropar, on 781992 someone stole the PP badges and Uniform Stars from the uniform of SI Surjit Singh which was kept in the store-room.
When Supervisor District Communication, Ropar enquired from him about it he used threatening language against the Supervisor District Communication Ropar and threatened that if he (Constable Mangal Singh) is transferred from Ropar "you and your family will be eliminated".
On the receipt of report of the Supervisor District Communication Ropar by DIG Police Telecommunications, this constable/messenger was called in the office of D.I.G.
and he admitted having used threatening language as noted above against the Supervisor District Communication Ropar and tendered written apology for the same.
He was reprimanded.
6.
Furthermore this constable messenger was (sic) security of the State and maintenance of the Public order.
He was also not taking proper interest in the performance of his duties.
He has exhibited gross indiscipline in unbecoming of a police officer who is entrusted with the duties of maintaining security of the State.
7.
Again case FIR No. 58 dated 12101993 Police Station Machhiwara under Section 377 IPC was registered against this constable messenger but this was not the sole ground of his dismissal under rule 16.1(2) read with the provision (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India w.e.f 15.10.1993.
As such his acquittal in this case as per the judgment of Judicial Magistrate Ist Class Ludhiana dated 7111996 does not entitle him to reinstatement.
8.
It is also pertinent to mention that the bare perusal of the judgment produced by the representationist, Para-6 shows the complainant and the prosecution witnesses were declared hostile and were allowed to cross- examine by the PP but they have not uttered a single word against the accused.
This was very popularly there in the days of badly disturbed law and order problem in the Punjab State and this is a clear indication towards the activities of this constable messenger which were prejudicial towards the security of the State.
His appeal was considered by the then Additional Director General of Police, Computer and Wireless Punjab and filed being devoid of merit."
9.
It has been specifically averred in the reply filed by the State that Mangal Singh had thrown threats to the higher officers and Supervisor District Communication Officer through various sources of communications.
Mangal Singh was indulging in activities prejudicial to the security of the State and maintenance of public order.
10.
We must notice, at this stage, that no replication/rejoinder was filed by the petitioners denying the averments made in the written statement filed by the State.
If Mangal Singh was threatening the superior officers/Inquiry Officer and the witnesses, who were to appear in the departmental inquiry, the decision of the competent authority that it was reasonably not practicable to hold a regular departmental inquiry can hardly be said to be erroneous or unjustified.
In fact, it has been specifically pleaded that the witnesses, who were to appear on behalf of the prosecution, in the case under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, against deceased Mangal Singh, were won over by him and as such they had to be declared hostile in the court.
Threats to the supervisor officers to the effect that they would be eliminated are extra- ordinary circumstances, under which it can hardly be said to be feasible to hold a regular departmental inquiry and to establish the charges rendered by the competent authority.
11.
The order of competent authority is based on sufficient material and has been passed on appropriate grounds.
Such exercise of discretion by the disciplinary authority is, of course, open to judicial review but within a very narrow compass and jurisdiction.
The contention of the petitioners that nature of charges is such that a regular departmental inquiry could have been held in due course, is without any merit.
The reasons stated by the appellate authority is not to be viewed from nature of the gravity of the offence or the charges alone but must be examined in the back drop of the attendant circumstances such as threats to the supervisors officers, witnesses, and most indiscipline behaviour of the deceased in the department.
The concerned authority has taken a view and the High Court, in exercise of its extra- ordinary writ jurisdiction, would not interfere with such view only for the reason that it was possible to take another view in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The circumstances disclosed on record certainly constitute sufficient ground for the competent authority to come to such conclusion.
We do not see any error in exercise of the power vested in the authority.
Thus, we reject the first two contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioners in support of his third contention has mainly relied upon the judgment of this court in case of Swaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(3) S.C.C.
113.
Not only the facts of that case are different but even the question of law decided by the Hon'ble Division Bench is not one raised in the present petition.
It cannot be disputed that under the prescribed table under Rule 161(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, the power to impose the punishment of dismissal of a constable is with the Superintendent of Police.
Under proviso 2 of Rule 16.24(ix), it is specifically provided that such order can be passed without granting a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed penalty against a constable where the authority, empowered to dismiss such constable, is of the considered view that it was not reasonably practicable to give to that officer an opportunity of showing cause.
Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India, which makes an exception to the protection available to a person, under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, read as under :-  "(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonable practicable to hold such inquiry; or" Article 311(3) of the Constitution of India further grants a finality to the order of the competent authority passed in exercise of above powers.
Articles 311(3) of the Constitution of India reads as under :- "(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final."
13.
The cumulative effect of the bare reading of the above statutory provisions seen in the light of the specific provisions of the Punjab Police Rules make it clear that a competent authority is empowered to exercise such power and come to the conclusion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold a regular departmental inquiry before dismissing a member of police force.
Such decision would be open to judicial review but within a limited scope.
The pre-requisites of exercises of such discretion are formation of an opinion based on reasonable ground and recording of satisfaction thereupon by the competent authority.
These ingredients are satisfied in the present case and the authority concerned has exercised its power under the relevant provisions of Punjab Police Rules read with Article 311 (ii) (b) of the Constitution of India, as mentioned supra.
It will be very difficult for the court to go into the merits or demerits of such orders unless they were patently illogical or unsustainable on any cannons of law, as was the circumstances in Swaran Singh's case (supra).
The impugned orders were passed by the appropriate authority not only keeping in view the security of the State as only ground for dispensing with the services of Mangal Singh but there were other reasons like indiscipline, behaviour of terror, threatening senior officers and witnesses, unauthorised absence and to maintain public order required by his supervisors, which were considered by the appropriate authority within the purview of Article 311(b) of the Constitution of India as reasonable ground for dispensing with regular departmental inquiry, which ultimately dismissed the services of Mangal Singh and, as such, the present case of the petitioners cannot be placed at parity with the case cited by the petitioner.
In that case, no reasons whatsoever had been stated by the authority concerned except mentioning that the "petitioner was dangerous and desperate persons" The plea of the State that the power was exercised under Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution of India was held to be not sustainable.
The court had found, as a matter of fact, that there was no application of mind by the authorities concerned.
The petitioners have placed no document on record which would directly or indirectly indicate that the respondents have not justifiably exercised the discretion in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
On the contrary, the respondents have placed sufficient material on record to support the action taken in dismissing Mangal Singh from service.
In the present case, we are unable to see any valid reason which would justify interference by the court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
14.
For the reasons afore-stated, we are of the view that the impugned orders dismissing deceased Mangal Singh from service and the order of the appellate authority do not suffer from any error of law and are not in excess of jurisdiction or authority vested in the respondents.
15.
Finding no merit, we dismiss this writ petition, however, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.