RL Anand, J - This is a management's writ filed by M/s Elofic Industries (India) and challenge has been given to the award dated 23121982 given by the Labour Court, Faridabad vide which the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Faridabad gave a declaration that the services of Smt. Balvati were wrongly terminated by the management and, therefore, she was entitled to her reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
2.
An industrial dispute was referred to the Labour Court as to whether the termination of the services of Smt. Balvati was justified.
The case set up by the workman is that she worked in the factory of the management for 1-1/2 years and drew salary at the rate of Rs. 275/- per month at the time of termination of her services.
On 21121980 her services were terminated in an illegal manner and this amounts to retrenchment.
The management did not complied with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and the Standing Orders.
3.
The notice of the claim of the workman was given to the management and the stand taken up by the management is that since the workman had collected her dues in full and final, therefore, she is stopped from raising any dispute.
Moreover, she was appointed for six months on probation which was extended twice for three months.
Her work was not satisfactory and the period of probation ended on 20121980.
So, she was removed from services and on that day she collected her full and final wages, and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25 of the Act are not attracted.
4.
The pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues :-  "1.
Whether the claimant is estopped for raising industrial disputes after taking her full and final ?
If so to what effect ?
2.
Whether the termination of service of Smt. Balvati is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief is she entitled ?"
5.
Both the issues were decided against the management and finally the Labour Court gave the above declaration.
6.
Before I deal with the submissions raised by Mr. PS Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the management, it will be appropriate for me to reproduce the findings of the Labour Court on issue Nos. 1 and 2 as under :-  "Issue No. 1 The representative of the respondent argued on this issue that the claimant submitted one application for appointment as helper which is Exhibit M-1.
On this application the appointment letter Exhibit M-2 was given to her which bears her signatures as stated by Shri SN Dabar, Personnel Officer which also bears the signatures of Works Manager.
Exhibit M-3, 4 and 5 are the progress reports of the claimant.
Exhibit M-6 and M-7 are the letters for extension of probation period.
Exhibit M-8 is a letter to remove the claimant which was given to her.
She took her full and final through Exhibit M-9 and M-10 is a report from the Government to rejecting the reference.
He further argued that according to the statement MW-1 the amount of Exhibit M-9 as full and final was given to the claimant and after receiving this full and final she cannot raise this dispute.
He further argued that the witness has stated in his cross-examination that Exhibit M-9 was prepared in his presence and he signed the same at Mark "A" and full and final of all the workmen is always done in his presence.
The representative of the respondent further argued that after the full and final she has no claim and cannot raise this dispute.
The representative of the workman argued on this issue that as stated by the workman as MW-1 in her cross-examination that the respondent got signed on some papers at the time of her appointment and also at the time of her removal.
Exhibit M-1, M-2, M-6, M-7, M-8 and M-9 beard her signatures and received no amount Exhibit M-9.
She joined and she does not know about the appointment letter.
The terms and conditions of the appointment letter were not explained to her.
She is illiterate and simple lady and only knows to sign in Hindi which she signed on the documents.
On the other hand the respondent produced Exhibit M-1 to M-10 but not proved them as required by law.
The respondent witness MW-1 has stated in his cross-examination that he does not know about the progress reports Exhibit M-3 and M-5 because it is job of the department head.
The respondent did not produce any person to prove these documents which are the progress reports and which were denied by the respondent witness MW-1.
The progress reports were not communicated to the claimant so she does not know about the progress report and these are the documents which are prepared by the respondent of their own without giving the notice to the claimant.
The question of extension which is shown by the respondent - vide Exhibit M-6 and M-7 does not arise as the claimant has stated in her statement that no extension was given to her.
She had signed on some blank papers on the asking of the respondent at the time of taking the job and also at the time of removal and Exhibit M-6 and M-7 are the same papers which the respondent got singed and Exhibit M-7 clears this fact that these papers were got signed by the respondent before writing these documents.
The signs are taken at the very bottom of the paper which is very visible from the naked eye.
The papers were got signed before it were written.
Moreover, when the work of the respondent was not satisfactory what was the need to extend the time twice.
He further argued that Exhibit M-9 which the respondent states as the full and final is only for Rs. 256/- which is pay of the claimant, and nothing more and it cannot be said full and final of the claimant, who has worked for 1-1/2 years.
It is practice of these industries in Faridabad that they appoint the person without issuing any appointment letter and after a lapse of time they appoint on probation, so that they can remove the person at any time when they desire.
So it is unfair labour practice of the respondent and the question of full and final does not arise, after the completion of 1-1/2 years and they have not paid any bonus or the earned leaves with wages of the claimant which is statutory right of the claimant to claim from the respondent.
After hearing the arguments of both the parties and going through the file, I am of the view that the respondent has failed to prove this issue because they have simply filed the photostat copies of the documents and not proved the documents according to law.
Simply filing the documents does not prove the document.
The respondent witness has stated nothing about these documents.
He has simply stated that he is filing the documents from Exhibit M-1 to M-10.
The witness has denied about the progress reports of claimant which is the basic thing for the extension of period.
He has not stated anywhere, that she was appointed for six months and also not stated that her period of probation was extended for three months twice.
The issue of full and final was not proved by the respondent.
When she denies the receipt of any payment the respondent should have proved this fact by bringing some other evidence to prove the documents.
The respondent witness has simply stated that Exhibit M-9 was prepared in his presence but he was not made any statement that the amount was paid in his presence without which it cannot be believed that the amount was paid to her.
So the issue is decided against the respondent and in favour of the workman.
Issue No. 2 The representative of the respondent argued on this issue that she was appointed vide Exhibit M-2 for six months and after the progress reports her period of probation was extended twice and when final progress report was received then her services were terminated as her work was not satisfactory and the final report was Exhibit M-3 dated the 17th December, 1980.
The representative of the workman argued on this issue that she worked for 1- 1/2 years with the respondent and she was not appointed on probation as stated by MW-1 because no terms and conditions were explained to the claimant.
Who was a simple and illiterate lady.
No report was communicated to her and no extension period was communicated to her.
She was working as permanent employee and the respondent is not justified removing the service of the claimant in the way in which they have done.
She worked more than 240 days in the factory during the calendar year and if she was removed she was entitled for the retrenchment compensation as required under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 which was not complied by the respondent and so she is entitled for her reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
After hearing the arguments of both the parties, and going through the file, I am of the view that the respondent has taken his case very lightly and not tried to prove their case fully well.
They produced only one witness MW-1 who has simply produced the records and stated nothing about the record to prove the same in these circumstances, the record and statement of the respondent cannot be believed and the issue is decided in favour of the workman against the respondent and the workman Shrimati Balvati is entitled for her reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
This be read in answer to this reference."
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is a settled principle of law that the jurisdiction of the High Court in dealing such matters is not unlimited but restricted.
The award can only be set aside if there is an error of jurisdiction or there is a wrong exercise of jurisdiction.
But if the evidence has been properly evaluated and appreciated by the Labour Court, it will not be within the domain of the High Court to set aside that finding.
There were two issues before the Labour Court.
The first issue was whether the workman received the amount in full and final settlement.
On this aspect the parties led evidence.
The management simply produced documents Exs.M-1 to M-10.
But there is nothing on the record to show that these documents were proved according to law.
Mere placing of some documents on record or getting them exhibited does not dispense with the mode of proof.
The Labour Court has examined the documents very minutely and the so-called final receipts have been held to be not reliable in view of the fact that the workman is an illiterate lady and the finding is that her signatures were obtained on blank papers.
Therefore, I am inclined to affirm the findings of the Labour Court on issue No. 1.
8.
With regard to issue No. 2 also it is established on the record that the workman worked more than 240 days during the calendar year and, therefore, it was obligatory on the part of the management to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
No termination order has been produced on the record by the management nor the interim reports regarding the work of the workman have been produced.
9.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that when the reference was made by the appropriate government to the Labour Court second time, the petitioner was not heard.
This submission cannot be accepted.
The law has now changed.
The appropriate government has to act like a post office and the claim of the workman could not be rejected on the plea that her services were terminated by the management in accordance with her appointment letter.
Which was justified.
This type of finding could not be granted by the appropriate government.
Moment an industrial dispute had arisen, it was obligatory on the part of the appropriate government to refer the matter to the Labour Court which alone has the competency to decide whether the workman had received the payment in full or not.
Moment the matter has been referred to the Labour Court, it is the Labour Court who alone can adjudicate as to the valid termination of the services of the workman.
It was also the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the respondent-workman was on probation and till a regular order of confirmation is passed she remains on probation and if the services of a petitioner have been terminated, the provisions of Section 25 of the Act are not attracted.
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not applicable to the facts in hand in view of the reasons given by the Labour Court reproduced above in this judgment.
Resultantly, I hold that there is no error of jurisdiction or parent error on the face of the award.
Therefore, this writ petition is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.