CK Thakker, CJ.
- In both the petitions common questions of fact and law are involved.
It is, therefore, appropriate to decide both the petitions by a common judgment.
2.
The petitioners of these petitions have approached this Court for an appropriate writ, order or direction to the authorities - HP Krishi Vishvavidyalaya respondent No. 1, Hon'ble Vice Chancellor, HP Krishi Vishvavidyalaya-respondent No. 2 and the Screening Committee, HP Krishi Vishvavidyalaya -respondent No. 3 not to treat Dr. Atul respondent No. 4 herein eligible and qualified for appointment to the post of Associate Director in Directorate of Extension Education, HP Krishi Vishvavidyalaya, Palampur.
A relief is also sought restraining the authorities from treating respondent No. 4 as eligible candidate and in according approval of his name for the post of Associate Director.
A prayer is made to declare all actions taken in pursuance of selection of respondent No. 4 improper, illegal and unlawful.
The case of the petitioners is that the first respondent-University issued an Advertisement No. 2 of 2000 which appeared in the daily edition of "Tribune" dated July 16, 2000.
By the said advertisement, applications were invited for filling up various posts.
Post No. 1 was of Associate Director in the Directorate of Extension Education at Palampur.
It was in the pay scale of Rs. 16400-22400.
The last date of applications was August 21, 2000.
Essential Qualifications were laid down in the advertisement itself.
They were as under :  "For Post at Sr. No. 1 : (1) PhD degree or equivalent in the subject/discipline with consistently good academic record, with experience in modern techniques of extension (2) Ten Years teaching/research/extension education experience in the subject out of which five years should be as Assoc.
Prof/equivalent (3) Significant contribution as evidenced by publications in journals of repute (4) Ability to provide leadership to the Department/Unit/Station."
A Note was also appended to the advertisement, wherein, it was, inter alia, stated that a candidate must fulfil the prescribed, qualifications/experience on the last date of receipt of application.
3.
It is the case of the petitioners that they fulfilled necessary qualifications and thus were eligible to apply for the post of Associate Director.
They accordingly submitted their applications through proper channel.
The applications were considered by the Screening Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor of the University Both of them were called for interview by an interview call dated October 7, 2000 and they were asked to remain present on October 22, 2000.
The petitioners remained present at the time and place mentioned in the interview letter for the post of Associate Director.
The petitioners have stated in the petition that they were surprised to see respondent No. 4 present there, as according to the petitioners, he did not fulfil requisite qualifications laid down in the University Statutes as also the advertisement.
Since respondent No. 3 was not eligible to be appointed as Associate Director and yet he was called for interview, they submitted a detailed representation to the Chancellor on October 24, 2000 highlighting the irregularities committed by the University Authorities in the process of selection of Associate Director.
It is also alleged that the respondent No. 4 had been favoured by the Vice Chancellor (respondent No. 2 herein) A copy of said representation is also annexed to the petition.
Since respondent No. 4 was not possessing necessary qualifications, he could not have been called for interview and his case ought not to have been considered by the respondent authorities.
By considering the case of ineligible candidate (respondent No. 4 herein), an obvious illegality had been committed by the authorities.
The selection process was thus vitiated and was liable to be set aside.
Moreover, the respondent-authorities have not followed the provisions of the Himachal Pradesh Universities of Agriculture, Horticulture and Forestry Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') and Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya Statutes, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as `Statutes').
Further contention of the petitioners is that the Screening Committee and Selection Committee were not properly constituted and no selection could have been made by the said Committee.
The action of respondent No. 2 in approving the candidature of respondent No. 4 was not in conformity with law.
As there was no response from the Chancellor nor the grievance of the petitioners was redressed, they were constrained to approach this Court by filing the present petition.
4.
Notices were issued on November 1, 2000 and were made returnable after three weeks.
In CMPs, ad interim relief was granted by which the authorities were allowed to take further proceedings, but were restrained from making formal order of appointment to the post of Associate Director in the Directorate of Extension Education, Palampur, as per the advertisement till further orders.
The matter was, thereafter, adjourned from time to time.
Affidavits further affidavits have also been filed by the parties.
5.
We have heard Mr. Rajiv Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. NK Thakur, learned counsel for respondent-authorities and Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, instructed by Mr. Sanjiv Kathiala and Mr. Puneet Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No. 4.
6.
Mr. Sharma raised several contentions at the time of hearing of the petitions.
He submitted that entire selection process was vitiated inasmuch as respondent authorities have violated mandatory provisions of the Act, Statutes and advertisement issued by the University.
He also contended that respondent No. 4 did not possess requisite qualifications.
Since he was not eligible for the post of Associate Director, his case could not have been considered at all.
The action of the respondent-authorities of considering his application thus, goes to the root of the matter and the entire process deserves to be declared as de hors the Act and must be declared unlawful.
The counsel submitted that the constitution of both the Committees, namely, Screening Committee as well as the Selection Committee, was illegal and contrary to law.
Consequently, all actions taken by the said Committees including consideration of case of respondent No. 4 and his selection are null and void.
It was argued that when the action of the Committees was challenged, inter alia on the ground of partisan attitude, it was incumbent on the Committee to file a counter-affidavit.
As no reply is filed, the allegations levelled by the petitioners are deemed to have been admitted and the petitioners are entitled to the reliefs prayed.
The counsel also urged that there was mala fide and colourable exercise of power by the Vice Chancellor of the University, respondent No. 2 herein, but he has also not controverted the allegations by filing a counter.
When malice had been alleged, it was obligatory on the part of the respondent concerned to file an affidavit and to place on record his version.
Neither Vice-Chancellor nor any of the Committee members has thought it fit to do so.
Thus, the allegations have remained uncontroverted.
It was submitted that the respondents have committed an error in not interpreting properly and in applying provisions of the Act and Statutes and several decisions of the Apex Court.
A hybrid process for selection undertaken and adopted by the respondent-authorities is contrary to law and deserves to be set aside by this Court.
7.
On all these grounds, the petitions, according to Mr. Sharma, deserve acceptance and the action of the respondent-authorities is required to be set aside by issuing appropriate directions in accordance with law.
8.
On behalf of the respondent authorities, an affidavit-in-reply is filed by the Registrar of the University.
Similarly, contesting respondent No. 4 has filed a counter controverting the averments made, allegations levelled and contentions raised by the petitioners.
Three preliminary objections were also raised by the respondents.
Firstly, it was contended that an alternative and equally efficacious remedy is available to the petitioners to approach Himachal Pradesh Administrative Tribunal by invoking the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and the present petitions are not maintainable.
Secondly, no final decision had been taken by the authorities of appointing respondent No. 4 and the petitions are, thus, premature.
Thirdly, the petitioners themselves have appeared before the Committee and attempted to get themselves selected.
When they were not found fit and the same Committee has selected respondent No. 4, they have turned round and challenged the constitution of the Committee, which has considered cases of all.
This is impermissible and that the petitioners are estopped from raising contention against constitution of Committee.
9.
On merits, the respondents submitted that the entire process of selection starting from issuance of advertisement, constitution of Committees, consideration of educational and other qualifications, holding of interview and selection of respondent No. 4 was strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Act, Statutes and advertisement and no grievance can be made by any of the petitioners against the same.
It was also denied that constitution of Committee was illegal or unlawful, nor Screening Committee consisted of members, who could not have been appointed in the said Committee.
There was neither malice in fact nor malice in law on the part of respondent No. 2 - Vice Chancellor or respondent No. 3 Screening Committee.
So far as Selection Committee is concerned, it has been joined as party respondent in the petition.
Even respondent No. 2 Vice Chancellor and respondent No. 3 Screening Committee were joined in their official capacity.
If the petitioners allege mala fide against the Vice Chancellor or members of the Screening Committee (or members of Selection Committee), it was incumbent on the petitioners to join all of them so nomine so as to enable them to appear before the Court and to repudiate allegations by filing a counter-affidavit.
Since it was not done, the petitioners cannot be allowed to raise malice in fact or partisan attitude by them.
10.
Before considering the matters on merits, let us deal with the preliminary objections raised on behalf of the respondents.
11.
So far as the availability of alternative remedy is concerned, it was contended by the respondents that since the respondent-authorities can be said to be "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and remedy under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 is available to them, they have to approach the Administrative Tribunal and could not have come to this Court by invoking Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
12.
In this connection, our attention was invited over and above to a decision in L Chandera Kumar v. Union of India, 1995(2) SCT 674 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1125, a Full Bench decision of this Court in CWP No. 1327 of 1995, decided on September 18, 1997, titled Prof. SP Chandra v. Himachal Pradesh Krish Vishvavidyalaya.
13.
In our opinion, the contention has no force, in view of the notification issue by the Government of Himachal Pradesh on August 5, 2000.
It is true that the validity of the said Notification had been challenged before the Tribunal and the notification had been held ultra vires, but as stated at the Bar, a petition against the decision of the Tribunal is pending in this Court.
In any case, in the light of the above Notification, we are not inclined to dismiss the petitions on that ground.
14.
The second preliminary contention has also no force.
It was argued that this is a case of mere selection of respondent No. 4 and no appointment has so far been made.
Neither selection nor recommendation by a Committee or a Board would entitle respondent No. 4 to get appointment or deprive the petitioners of their legitimate and legal right in their favour.
At this stage, therefore, they cannot make grievance.
15.
From the affidavits and further affidavits, however, it is clear that after respondent No. 4 was selected, the Board of Management has approved such selection and recommendation to appoint him has also been made.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners, which appears to be well founded, that the appointment of respondent No. 4 could not be made in view of the interim order passed by this Court.
In this view of the matter, we do not think it proper to dismiss the petitions upholding the said preliminary contention.
16.
The third objection relates to applicability of doctrine of estoppel.
It was submitted that once the petitioners appeared before the Committee and attempted to get favourable response and having failed to get selected now cannot turn round and challenge constitution of Committee or selection made by it.
In our opinion, the objection is connected with merits as well.
Hence, we would be considering it at an appropriate stage.
17.
Let us now consider the matter on merits.
It is an undisputed fact that one of the posts, which was to be filled in as per advertisement Annexure PA to the petition was of an Associated Director in Directorate of Extension Education at Palampur in the pay scale of Rs. 16,400-21,400.
The post was to be filled in accordance with the provisions of the Act and Statutes.
As per the advertisement, the candidate must be having PhD degree or equivalent in the subject/discipline with consistently good academic record.
He must be having experience in modern techniques of extension and ten years teaching/research/extension education in the subject, out of which five years should be as Associate Professor or equivalent post.
He must have significant contribution as evidenced by publications in journals of repute and must have ability to provide leadership to the Department/Unit/Station.
18.
The principal contention of Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that respondent No. 4 did not possess requisite qualifications.
For that, he invited our attention to the relevant provisions of the Act.
The terms `agriculture', `Board', `Extension', `Forestry', and `Horticulture' have been defined in Section 2.
Section 7 enumerates powers and functions of the University.
Section 13 describes powers and functions of the Board, i.e. Board of Management constituted under Section 12 of the Act.
Section 25 relates to powers and duties of Vice Chancellor.
Section 29 makes provision relating to Director of Extension Education.
It states that the Director shall be responsible to Vice Chancellor of the University for extension programmes, specified in Section 38 of the Act, Section 39 provides for appointment of teachers, officers and staff.
Sections 53, 54 and 55 enable the University Authorities to make Statutes and Regulations for implementation of the provisions of the Act.
19.
In exercise of powers under the Act, the first respondent-University has framed the Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya Statutes, 1988.
Statue 14 defines certain terms.
Whereas statute 25 specifies powers and duties of Board of Management; statute 3 enumerates powers and duties of Vice Chancellor and Director of Research.
Statute 3.10 lays down procedure for selection.
It authorises the Vice Chancellor to constitute Screening Committee for screening the qualifications of the applicants and to call eligible candidates for interview by the Committee.
Statute 3.11 prescribed qualifications for various posts.
It deals with post of Director of Extension Education and lays down necessary qualifications.
It clarifies the composition of the selection committee would be the same as is for the post of Dean.
20.
The assertion of the petitioners is that respondent No. 4 is not qualified as per University Statutes.
His name, therefore, could not have been included in the list of eligible candidates to be interviewed.
According to the petitioners, respondent No. 4 is not possessing Ph.
D. in any discipline of agriculture science.
He is only Ph.
D. in the subject of Botany from Panjab University.
Moreover, under Section 311, a candidate must have ten years post doctoral teaching/research/extension education experience in the relevant field out of which atleast five years experience must be as Professor or equivalent rank.
Respondent No. 4 was merely an Associate Professor in 1993 and thus he lacks necessary experience.
21.
Now, respondent No. 1, University, in its counter-affidavit, has unequivocally stated that respondent No. 4 was eligible as he was holding necessary educational qualifications as well as experience.
According to the University, respondent No. 4 did Ph.
D in science from Panjab University, Chandigarh, and in his case the title of thesis was Studies on Population Biology of Chenopodium Album Biotypes, which is a crop in agriculture.
He had also obtained M Phil.
from Kurukshetra University and as such he was "fully qualified to man the post in question", and the Screening Committee has validly recommended his candidature.
22.
The contesting respondent No. 4, in his affidavit, asserted that he was eligible and the Screening Committee rightly considered him as qualified for the post of Associate Director.
It was stressed by him that the challenge of the petitioners to the eligibility of contesting respondent centered around the expression `Botany', which according to the petitioners, cannot be said to be agricultural science.
Expertise in Botany, thus, would not make a person eligible for appointment in Agricultural University.
It is, however, not so.
23.
Relying on New Lexicon Dictionary of English Language, it was submitted that Botany is one of the Sciences in Agriculture and it concerns with plant life and all its manifestations.
It was, therefore, wrong to contend, submitted the learned counsel for respondent No. 4, that the contesting respondent was not eligible.
The counsel also relied on definition of `agriculture' in clause (c) of Section 2 of the Act, as "the basic and applied sciences of soil and water management, crop production, etc."  24.
It was also submitted by the respondents that normally, a Court of law will not interfere in academic matters when an expert committee considered the qualifications of the petitioners and respondent No. 4 under the relevant statutory provisions and treated them eligible.
The Court, would not ordinarily substitute its opinion for the opinion of the expert body by interfering with the action of such body.
25.
Reference in this connection was made to a leading decision of the Supreme Court in University of Mysore v. P Govinda Rao, AIR 1965 SC 491, wherein the Supreme Court, inter alia, observed thus :  "It would normally be wise and safe for the courts to leave decisions of the academic matters to experts who are more familiar with the problems they face than the courts generally can be.
Boards of appointments to posts of teachers are nominated by Universities and when recommendations made by them and the appointments following on them are challenged before courts, normally the courts should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed by the experts."
The attention of the Court was also invited to several other decisions in which ratio laid down in P Govinda Rao was reiterated and followed.
26.
No doubt, Mr. Sharma, contended that if the provisions of the Act or the Statutes have not been complied with and a person is ineligible or does not have essential qualifications, the authority has no option but to declare him as ineligible.
If it is not done, the Court can interfere with such a decision.
For the said submission, our attention was invited to the following decisions of the Supreme Court :  1.
Dr. JP Kulshrestha and others v. Chancellor, Allahabad University and others, 1980(3) SCC 418; 2.
Dr. YP Gupta v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 SC 541; 3.
Dalpat Abasahab Solunke and others v. Dr. BS Mahajan and others, 1990(1) SCC 305; 4.
Neelima Misra v. Harinder Kaur Paintal and others, 1990(2) SCC 746; 5.
Dr. Prit Singh v. Mr. SK Mangal and others, 1992(3) SCT 738 (SC) : 1992(5) SLR 79 (SC); 6.
Dr. Ganga Prasad Verma and others v. State of Bihar and others, 1995 Supp (1) SCC 192; 7.
Director, AIIMS and others v. Dr. Nikhil Tandon and others, 1996(2) SCT 270 (SC) : 1996(7) SCC 741; 8.
State of Punjab and others v. Tara Singh Shahi, 1996(3) SCT 762 (SC) : 1996(8) SCC 448.
In our opinion, the law on the point is well settled and it is that the jurisdiction of the Court to decide eligibility of a candidate cannot be doubted.
It is also well settled that eligibility goes to the root of the matter and if a person is ineligible, his case cannot be considered.
Even if his case is considered and is selected, such selection will be illegal and unlawful and the Court would interfere.
But it is equally well settled that matters of educational qualifications should ordinarily be left to expert bodies and when they consider the question of qualifications or equivalence thereof, normally, the Court will not interfere and substitute its own knowledge.
27.
In the instant case, apart from the definition of "agriculture" on which reliance has been placed by the respondents, the Committee considered educational qualification of respondent No. 4 and treated him as eligible.
In our considered opinion, it cannot be said that by doing so, the Committee has committed an error of law or has acted illegally, arbitrarily or unreasonably.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that respondent No. 4 was ineligible, therefore, cannot be upheld and is hereby rejected.
28.
The second and equally forceful contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, was that the Committee did not consist of experts in the subject, and the constitution of the Committee, therefore, was contrary to law.
The counsel contended that Screening Committee consisted of five members, i.e., Dr. BL Chopra, Dr. AK Gupta, Dr. A Alam, Dr. VK Gupta and Dr. BS Hansara.
According to the petitioners, the first two, namely, Dr. BL Chopra and Dr. AK Gupta were from the discipline of Genetics, Dr. A Alam from the discipline of Agriculture Engineering, whereas Dr. VK Gupta though from the discipline of Agriculture but specialised in Plant Pathology.
Thus, only one member, namely Dr. BS Hansara was drawn from the discipline of Extension.
As the selection was to be made for the post of Associate Director in Extension Education, the concerned subject was Extension Education.
Hence, out of the five members only one member could be said to be expert.
Since other members were not experts on the subject, the constitution of Committee was not proper, legal and lawful.
29.
The first respondent-University, in this connection, relying on Section 38 of the Act as well as Statute 3.11, submitted that composition of Selection Committee was in accordance with law.
The Committee consisted of Vice Chancellor (Chairman), three Scientists or Educationalists with experience of work, having educational or administrative capacity from outside the University, out of which two members nominated by the Chancellor and one by the Vice Chancellor (Member) and one nominee of the ICAR (Member).
According to the University, all the outside experts were educationalists with background of agriculture besides being administrators.
Selection of Committee was, thus, legal and valid.
30.
Respondent No. 4 in his affidavit, stated that Dr. BL Chopra was former Director General of Indian Council of Agricultural Research and former Secretary of the Department of Agricultural Research and Education to the Government of India; Dr. AK Gupta was former Director and Professor Emitus of the National Laboratory of CSIR, which has the mandate for research and extension in all fields; Dr. A Alam was Deputy Director General, Agricultural Engineering, Indian Council of Agricultural Research whereas Dr. Hansara was Assistant Director General, Extension in Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
They all were thus, persons related to and connected with the field of Agriculture and Extension Education, contended the fourth respondent.
It was also submitted on his behalf that there was no requirement of law mandating that members must be from the field of agriculture.
It was stated that Dr. Alam was nominated by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research as member of the Selection Committee.
The Director of Extension Education was not associated as no regular Director was holding the post and hence, Dean, Postgraduate Studies, was on the Selection Committee.
According to respondent No. 4, therefore, it could not be contended that constitution of the Committee was illegal.
The grievance of the petitioners on this count also is ill conceived.
31.
It was also submitted in this connection, on behalf of respondent No. 4 that the petitioners are estopped from challenging the constitution of committee in view of the fact that the petitioners themselves appeared before the Committee and had taken a chance to get selected.
If they were of the view that the constitution of the Committee was not legal, or lawful, they ought not to have appeared before the Committeee and raised an objection against its constitution, which, according to him, "goes to the root of the matter."
A person, who appears before the Committee and takes a chance to get favourable treatment but fails in the attempt is estopped from challenging process of selection by the Committee.
32.
We are of the view that the submission has force.
The learned counsel for the respondents No. 4 has relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Dr. G Sarana v. University of Lucknow and others, AIR 1976 SC 2428.
In Dr. G Sarana, the Court held that where a candidate willingly and voluntarily appears before a Committee for selection knowing fully well that the constitution of the Committee was not legal and lawful and takes a chance to take a favourable report, but when he finds that it was unfavorable challenges the validity of the Committee, he can be estopped and be confronted against adopting the device of raising objection against constitution of Committee.
True it is that if there is inherent defect in the constitution of the Committee, such an objection can be raised by a candidate, but in the instant case as submitted by the learned counsel for the University as also by respondent No. 4, there was no such inherent illegality in constitution of the Committee nor it was contrary to the provisions of law.
In view of this, it is not open to the petitioners or any of them to raise a contention against constitution of Committee, when, they themselves appeared before the same Committee, tried to get favourable response of being selected but failed.
The contention, therefore, deserves to be negatived and accordingly, rejected.
33.
The contention of mala fide and colourable exercise of power by the authorities in extending undue benefit and advantage in selecting respondent No. 4 ignoring legal and legitimate claim of the petitioners also does not impress us.
It is, no doubt, true that mala fide exercise of power vitiates all actions.
Every power must be exercised bona fide, in good faith and not for collateral purposes.
Several cases have been cited before us to substantiate the above legal proposition, though the principle had not been disputed by the respondents.
Our attention, for the above proposition, was invited to the following cases :  1.
S Partap Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 72; 2.
CS Rowjee v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1964 SC 962; 3.
Bahrein Petroleum CoLtd v. PJ Pappu and another, AIR 1966 SC 634; 4.
Income Tax Officer, Special Investigation Circle B, Meerut v. M/s. Seth Brothers and others, AIR 1970 SC 292; 5.
State of Haryana and others v. Rajendra Sareen, AIR 1972 SC 1004; 6.
State of Punjab v. Ramji Lal and others, AIR 1971 SC 1228; 7.
Express Newspapers Pvt. Ltd. and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1986 SC 872.
As said earlier, the proposition laid down in the above cases, cannot be disputed and is not disputed.
The question, however, is of applicability to the principle in the case on hand.
Now, if legal mala fide or `malice in law' is imputed, the point can be argued by requesting the Court to set aside the action complained of.
But if the `malice in fact' is alleged and personal or individual allegations have been levelled, the person or individual concerned against whom such allegations are made, must be made party respondent.
In the instant case, in our view, the contention regarding constitution of Committee eligibility of respondent No. 4, educational qualifications of candidates called for interview, etc. can be argued on the basis of record which had been done.
But the petitioners have further alleged that Vice Chancellor (respondent No. 2), members of Screening Committee and members of Selection Committee wanted to favour respondent No. 4.
In our opinion, the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents is well placed that in such situation, the petitioners ought to have made the Vice Chancellor, Members of Screening Committee and Members of Selection Committee as parties by adding them eo nominee.
34.
So far as the constitution of Committee and requisite qualifications of respondent No. 4 is concerned, we have negatived the contentions raised by the petitioners.
The question of `malice in law', therefore, did not find favour with this Court and the argument is negatived.
If the allegation is of partisan attitude of any individual or personal favour, the petitioners ought to have joined such person(s) as party(ies) to the petitions.
35.
In the affidavit-in-rejoinder, the petitioners have, no doubt, stated that since the Hon'ble Vice Chancellor was holding high office and deserved respect from all citizens including the petitioners, he had not been arrayed as respondent.
It was further stated that it was the prerogative of the petitioners that they should include any high office either by name or by designation, and considering the status and position of respondent No. 2, he had not been included by name.
Non-impleadment of respondent No. 2, therefore, would not necessarily mean that there was no mala fide exercise of power by him.
36.
We are unable to uphold the contention.
It is true that as a dominus litus, it is for the petitioners to implead as respondents in their petitions any person as party.
It also cannot be gainsaid that a party, who is arrayed as respondent cannot compel the petitioner to join a particular person as respondent.
But it is equally true that if the petitioner makes allegations against a person and yet fails to join him as a party, the Court will consider as to what weight should be attached to such allegations.
In the instant case, the Vice Chancellor has not been arrayed as respondent by naming him.
May be as stated by the petitioners in the affidavit-in-rejoinder, they hold "the office of Hon'ble Vice Chancellor to highest esteem".
But then the petitioners cannot contend that as the Vice Chancellor has not filed a counter controverting the allegations, they must be deemed to have been admitted by him.
Similarly, the petitioners have not joined the members of the Screening Committee individually and only the Committee has been arrayed as respondent.
Hence, it cannot be said that it was default on the part of the members of the Screening Committee in not filing affidavits, denying the allegations levelled against them.
So far as the Selection Committee, is concerned, neither the Committee nor individual members of the Committee have been joined.
No notices have been issued to them nor they are before the Court.
As the individuals against whom allegations have been levelled are not before the Court, the submissions on behalf of the petitioners about malice in fact cannot be gone into.
Reference, in this connection, may be made to the following decisions;  1.
State of Bihar and another v. PP Sharma, IAS and another, 1991(2) SCT 397 (SC) : 1992 Supp.
1 SCC 222; 2.
The Chancellor and another v. Dr. Bijayananda Kar and others, 1994(1) SCT 524 (SC) : 1994(1) SCC 169.
The contention about mala fide and colourable exercise of power has thus no substance and cannot be upheld.
37.
The contention about the hybrid process has also no force.
Reading the relevant provisions of the Act and Statutes, the action undertaken by the authorities, it is clear that the same has been taken as per the provisions of law.
When the process was in accordance with law and the selection has been made for considering cases of the petitioners as well as respondent No. 4, no grievance can be made against such process.
38.
For the foregoing reasons, we see no ground to interfere with the action taken by the respondent-authorities (respondents 1 to 3).
We are unable to uphold the contention that respondent No. 4 was not qualified and hence, could not have been selected.
We also reject the contention of the petitioners that the constitution of the Committees was illegal or unlawful.
The allegation of mala fide exercise of power has also no foundation or basis and cannot be upheld.
Since none of the grounds put forward by the learned counsel for the petitioners has impressed us, the petitions deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly, dismissed.
Notices stand discharged.
In the facts and circumstances, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
CMP No. 1446 of 2000 in CWP No. 838 of 2000  CWP No. 1448 of 2000 in CWP No. 839 of 2000  39.
In view of the dismissal of the writ petitions, both the applications are also dismissed and the ad-interim relief is vacated.
CWP No. 1655 of 2000 in CWP No. 838 of 2000  CWP No. 1654 of 2000 in CWP No. 839 of 2000  In view of the orders passed in the main order, no order is required to be passed on these applications.
Petitions dismissed.