Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners, who had been granted admission in order of their merits and on the availability of vacancy and preference of institution to the Lateral Engineering Courses, in furtherance to the Lateral Engineering Test-2000 held on 1672000, have filed this writ petition praying that the respondents be directed to grant the petitioners free seats instead of paid seets.
2.
The basic contention raised is, that the persons lower in merits than the petitioners have been granted free seats in the 3rd counselling held by the respondents on 12th October, 2000, as such, they have been discriminated and their right of equal treatment has been infringed by respondents by their afore-stated arbitrary act.
3.
The relevant facts giving rise to the present petition are :- that the petitioners along with other applicants took Lateral Entry Engineering-2000 conducted by the Punjab Board Technical University, Jalandhar for grant of admission in various courses.
The result of this test was notified on 28th July, 2000.
The first counselling was held on 17/18th August, 2000.
The petitioners were granted admission to different courses, keeping in view the institutional preference of the petitioners on the basis of the rank that they had obtained in the Entrance Test.
The respondents issued an advertisement on 8th October, 2000 notifying that 3rd counselling will take place on 12th October, 2000 for filling the vacant seats in different courses.
In this advertisement, number of seats and name of the institutions, where such seats were vacant were not specified.
Third counselling was held on 12th October, 2000 and number of candidates are stated to have been granted free seats in different courses and institutes in order of merits.
4.
According to the petitioners, some of the persons/applicants, who have been granted seats, are lower in merits than the petitioners.
Thus, it is contended that the petitioners should have been granted free seats in preference to those candidates.
5.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a short reply and facts, as stated by the petitioners, are hardly disputed.
6.
According to the respondents, for all the vacant seats, 3rd counselling was held on 10122000 including the vacant seats CET-99.
The list of the vacant seats available was displayed on the notice Board on 12th October, 2000 before the counselling commenced.
As none of the applicants appeared for counselling, therefore, question of awarding them any seats does not arise.
Further, it is stated that none of the applicants satisfied the conditions stated in the advertisement.
Thus, they could not be considered in counselling even on that ground.
The respondents during the course of arguments also took up the plea that there are no free seats vacant which in any case could be awarded to the petitioners.
7.
From the above facts, it is clear that a very limited controversy arises for consideration of the court in the present case.
If the respondents had not adhered to the terms and conditions of the brochure, and had not given due notice for holding the 3rd counselling and if the petitioners had suffered any prejudice.
In that event, the action of the respondents can certainly be assailed in the present case.
It is not disputed before us and, in fact, the petitioners have themselves annexed as Annexure P/1 the advertisement issued by the university stating that 3rd counseling will be held on 12th October, 2000.
It will be appropriate to reproduce the third advertisement issued by the respondents :-  "PUNJAB TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY P.O.
REC CAMPUS, JALANDHAR-144011 LATERAL LATERAL ENTRY ENGINEERING TEST-2000 Admission to 2nd year/3rd semester B Tech/B.E.
Courses Advt.
No. 4/2000 Under the Lateral Entry Engineering Test Scheme, admission to vacant seats in second year/third semester of B Tech./B.E.
courses, session 2000- 2001, will be held for the Engineering Institutes affiliated to PTU, as under : Date Time Rank 12.10.2000 900 A.M. All Ranks Note : 1.
The admission will be made purely on the basis of the merit of LEET-2000 2.
The following candidates shall be eligible for the counselling :q I Candidates who did avail of LEET-2000 first and/or Second counselling.
II Candidates who could not get admission in LEET-2000 first and/or second counselling.
III Candidates who were admitted in the LEET-2000 first and/or second counselling.
and did not report to the College (His/Her initial deposit shall stand forfeited).
IV.
Candidates who deposited fee in the Institute to which they were admitted but opt to surrender their full fee.
The admitted candidates shall have to deposit tuition fee plus Rs. 10,000/- at the time of their admission.
Other charges will be deposited by them in the Institute after their admission.
Venue R.C.E.
Campus Jalandhar Sd/REGISTRAR."
8-9.
The above advertisement not only provided schedule of 3rd counselling but also specified the condition which a candidate is required to satisfy before he/she can be given admission or permitted to change his/her preference of collage or subject and convert seats from paid to free.
The conditions stipulated in the advertisement are obviously conditions precedent to the grant of admission in the 3rd counselling.
Under clause 53 of the brochure, the resultant vacancies after change of branch shall be filled in the 2nd counselling in accordance with schedule given in the brochure.
Clause 5.4deals with the second counselling on the basis of LEET-2000 and all the conditions stipulated in the advertisement are mere re-production of the terms and conditions contained in the 2nd clause.
If the seats still remain vacant, they were required to be filled up by the institute in accordance with the regulation 810 of the notification dated 2051994, as referred in the brochure.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, while relying upon the judgment in the case of Dr. Suresh Chandra Verma and others v. The Chancellor, Nagpur University and others, 1991(1) SCT 369 (SC) : AIR 1990 Supreme Court 203, contended that the respondents should have notified category of each seat and number of seats available in complete details in the advertisement.
The respondents having failed to do so the 3rd counselling held by the respondents is vitiated.
11.
It may be noticed that admittedly the respondents have given advertisement in the newspaper that 3rd counselling would be held on 12th October, 2000.
The reference was made to all the vacant seats in the advertisement issued in the newspaper.
Furthermore, details of all the seats and subjects were notified on the notice board, as stated in the counter- affidavit, which fact has not been disputed by filing any replication.
Even otherwise, we would have no reason to disbelieve the affidavit filed on behalf of the University.
Once, the advertisement had been made and the vacancies were put on notice board with complete details, we cannot trace any error in the action of the respondents holding 3rd counselling.
The purpose of holding 3rd counselling was obviously to fill up the vacant seats and to provide opportunity to the candidates, who were on the waiting list or otherwise eligible to apply for allocation of such seats.
The facts of the present case are in no way similar to the case of Dr. Suresh Chandra Verma (supra).
That case related to appointments of the teaching staff.
Their Lordships held that the notice of employment, as contemplated under section 57(4)(a), requires complete details of total number of reserved posts and the number of candidates.
That is not the situation here.
12.
As per the Full Bench judgment of this court in the case of Rahul Prabhakar v. Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar, 1997(3) SCT 526 (P&H)(FB) : 1997(3) P.L.R.
13, the terms and conditions of the brochure are binding on the candidates as well as all the authorities concerned.
Advertisement, Annexure P/1 had been issued in terms of the brochure and it in no way offended any of the clauses of the brochure.
Under the condition of the brochure, the candidates, who are admitted to the course and had deposited their fees were required to surrender the seats and forfeit their full fees before they could participate in the counselling.
The option in terms of the brochure was required to be exercised by the candidates in regard to surrender of their full fee.
It is not disputed before us that none of the petitioners had exercised that option before 3rd counselling held on 12th October, 2000.
The petitioners did not participate or even attempted to participate in the counselling held on 12th October, 2000 by intimating the selection/scrutiny committee at the relevant point of time.
The methodology adopted by the respondents for holding third counselling being counselling in terms of the brochure cannot be interfered by this court at this stage, more particularly, in view of the fact that the petitioners did not exercise the option, as contemplated under clause (iv) of the advertisement Annexure P/1.
The Full Bench of Delhi High Court in the case of Dr. Veena Gupta v. University of Delhi, 1994(1) SCT 856 (Delhi)(FB) : 1994(2) S.L.R.
68, while following the earlier decision of the Full Bench of the same Court in Sandhya Kabra and Ors. v. University of Delhi, A.I.R. 1993 Delhi, 40, held that every attempt should be made to fill up the resultant vacancies from the candidate mentioned in the waiting list.
The seats remaining vacant in All India quota thereafter would lapse and would be available to the local candidates.
The above decision of the Full Bench of Delhi High Court was approved by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Arvind Kumar Kankane v. State of UP and ors., 2001(3) SCT 1131 (SC) : JT 2001(6) SC 260 where the court held that no candidate be permitted to change seat or college, once he had exercised his option and taken seat/subject of his choice in order of merit.
In the present case, the prospectus specifically provides a chance to the admitted candidates to alter the subject of their choice in order of merit, however, subject to the condition that they comply with clause (iv) of the advertisement.
It is not even the case pleaded before us that the petitioners did exercise their option in accordance with the terms and conditions of the advertisement.
To say the least, the petitioners are not entitled to any relief on the basis of their own conduct.
Another factor which the court must take note of is that the petitioners had challenged the admission of respondents No. 3 to 5 in regard to free seats.
However, the learned counsel for the petitioners made statement before the Division Bench on 14.3.2001 that they were not necessary parties and their names be deleted from the array of parties.
At the request of the learned counsel for the petitioners, the court directed deletion of the said respondents.
Thus, the petitioners are even debarred from challenging the allotment of free seats to the said respondents.
13.
We also must notice that 3rd counseling was held on 12th October, 2000.
The present writ petition was filed in the month of January, 2001.
No reason has been stated in the petition why the petitioners chose to wait for this period and did not approach the court on the earlier occasion.
The present petition is a mere after-thought.
The distribution of seats between the free and paid seats is based on logical reasoning and once paid seats are accepted, the candidates cannot be permitted to change the seats except where it is so specifically provided under the brochure.
We have already held that the petitioners did not exercise their option in terms of the brochure/advertisement.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, delay of nearly four months would disentitle the petitioners from claiming the relief in writ jurisdiction.
The other students have been given admission and they have joined the course and have paid the fees.
All those candidates are not before this court.
14.
For the reasons afore-stated, we dismiss this writ petition, however, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.