RL Anand, J - Manphool Singh has filed the present writ petition against respondents No. 1 to 3 including Ranbir Singh Mandola, MLA of Haryana Lok Dal, under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed that at writ in the nature of certiorari be issued against the respondents and the inquiry pending against the petitioner be quashed, or, in the alternative, it may be stayed till final disposal of the criminal case pending in the criminal court at Bhiwani under Sections 199/420/467 and 471 IPC got registered by the State Vigilance Bureau, Hisar (Haryana) against the petitioner.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as Field Publicity Worker in Public Relations Department, Haryana on 711988.
As per the record of Registrar of Deaths and Births, Bhiwani, his date of birth is 641944.
In the year 1988, respondent No. 3 lodged a false complaint against the petitioner because the family of the petitioner did not support the political ambitions of respondent No. 3.
The complaint was found to be false and it was filed by the department.
On 2232000 a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner to the extent that the date of birth given in his bio-data was 161944.
In the election identity card the age of the petitioner has been shown as 66 years as on 111994.
In the certificate issued by the C.M.O., Bhiwani, which does not contain the name, the date of birth is 461944.
The petitioner filed the reply to the show cause notice but F.I.R. No. 16 was registered against him under Section 199/420/467/471 IPC.
Ultimately, he was dismissed from the service on the pressure of respondent No. 3 on 1262000.
The petitioner filed C.W.P.
8177 of 2000 in the High Court.
The writ was allowed on 23112000 and the petitioner was reinstated into service.
On 352000, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet on the same ground on which FIR No. 16 was registered.
He again filed the reply to the said charge-sheet and inquiry was ordered to be conducted.
He made representation on 192001 before respondent No. 2 to stay the inquiry till the criminal charge is finally decided by the criminal court, but respondent No. 3 is putting pressure upon respondent No. 2 in order to ensure that the petitioner should not remain in service.
The action on the part of the respondents in initiating the inquiry is illegal.
Hence this writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 filed the reply and according to them the petitioner concealed the fact regarding his actual date of birth in order to get appointment on the post of Block Publicity Worker in the Public Relations Department, Haryana.
He submitted different dates of birth i.e. 1041940, 461944 and about 66 years as on 111994 after joining duty and concealed his actual date of birth i.e. 221933 as recorded in his School Leaving Certificate.
The birth certificate showing the date of birth as 461944, issued by the Additional District Registrar, Deaths and Births, Bhiwani, does not contain the name of the child born and in fact it pertains to the younger brother of the petitioner.
The petitioner was not born in 1944.
He has committed a grave misconduct by concealing the facts regarding his actual date of birth.
He submitted different dates of his birth.
His actual date of birth is 221933 and in this manner the petitioner would have retired from Government service on 28.2.1993 before the date of regularisation of his services i.e. 3131993.
He has taken undue benefit of regularisation of his services by wrongly and knowingly misstating his date of birth.
A complaint was received against the petitioner in the office of respondent No. 2 in October, 1998 on which District Public Relations Officer, Bhiwani was asked to obtain the School Leaving Certificate in respect of date of birth of the petitioner.
A copy of the communication was also endorsed to the petitioner on 20111998 for information.
The District Public Relations Officer, Bhiwani obtained the School Leaving Certificate from the Principal.
Govt. Senior Secondary School, Jhojhu Kalan.
The documents supplied by the petitioner contained different dates of his birth.
Ram Kishan son of Sheo Chand resident of village Mandola (Bhiwani) made a complaint regarding declaration of false date of birth by the petitioner and an inquiry as conducted by State Vigilance Bureau.
It was categorically denied that respondent No. 3 put pressure upon respondent No. 2 for registration of criminal case against the petitioner.
The State Vigilance Bureau inquired into the matter and found the date of birth of the petitioner as 221933.
The services of the petitioner were terminated as per rules.
The order was set aside by the High Court with the observations that the respondents shall be at liberty to hold a fresh inquiry in accordance with law and pass an appropriate order.
Hence the fresh inquiry had been initiated against the petitioner.
A charge-sheet has already been issued to the petitioner vide memo dated 352001.
The reply to the charge-sheet has been found unsatisfactory and Shri Mahipal Singh, Joint director, Public Relations Department, Haryana has been appointed as Inquiry officer.
The departmental inquiry is an administrative matter and has no concern with the criminal case registered against the petitioner.
The petitioner is continuing in the Government service by falsely stating his date of birth as 461944 which is of his younger brother Shri Haquiqat, whereas the correct date of birth of the petitioner is 221993 as is evident from the School Leaving Certificate.
With this defence the respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the present writ petition.
4.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Vijay Dahiya, AAG, Haryana on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The short point for determination in this case is whether this court should (sic) the departmental inquiry against the petitioner pending the criminal charge.
This point has already been determined by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd and Anr., 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC) : JT 1999(2) SC 456 where it has been held as follows :-  "Proceedings in a criminal case and the departmental proceedings can proceed simultaneously with a little exception.
The basis for this proposition is that proceedings in a criminal case and the departmental proceedings operate in distinct and different jurisdictional areas.
In the departmental proceedings, where a charge relating to misconduct is being investigated, the factors operating in the mind of the Disciplinary Authority may be many such as enforcement of discipline or to investigate the level of integrity of the delinquent or the other staff, the standard of proof required in those proceedings is also different than that required in a criminal case.
The little exception may be where the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on the same set of facts and the evidence in both the proceedings is common without there being a variance."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held as under :-  "(i) Departmental proceedings and proceedings in a criminal case can proceed simultaneously as there is no bar in their being conducted simultaneously, though separately.
(ii) If the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and similar set of facts and the charge in the criminal case against the delinquent employee is of a grave nature which involved complicated questions of law and fact, it would be desirable to stay the departmental proceedings till the conclusion of the criminal case.
(iii) Whether the nature of a charge in a criminal case is grave and whether complicated questions of fact and law are involved in that case, will depend upon the nature of offence, the nature of the case launched against the employee on the basis of evidence and material collected against him during investigation or as reflected in the chargesheet.
(iv) The factors mentioned at (ii) above cannot be considered in isolation to stay the departmental proceedings but due regard has to be given to the fact that the departmental proceedings cannot be unduly delayed.
(v) If the criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the departmental proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded with so as to conclude them at an early date, so that if the employee is found not guilty his honour may be vindicated and in case he is found guilty, administration may get rid of him at the earliest."
6.
Thus, the reading of the above would show that the departmental proceedings and the criminal proceedings can go together as both of them operate in its own field.
The only exception is that if the chargesheet in the departmental proceedings and the charge framed in the criminal court are of identical nature then in that eventuality the court may stay the departmental proceedings but in the present case no ground for stay of departmental proceedings is made out.
The scope of the departmental proceedings is - firstly, that the petitioner has submitted a wrong certificate; secondly, the petitioner on the basis of wrong certificate obtained the benefit of regularisation and thirdly, the petitioner on the basis of that very date of birth might take other departmental benefits.
The aspect of the case could not be considered by the criminal court which can only give the finding as to whether the petitioner had fabricated the record or not.
Since the scope of both the proceedings is independent and not overlapping, therefore, I am not inclined to stay the departmental proceedings.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner then submitted that respondent No. 3 has not filed any written statement and, therefore, the allegations of the petitioner shall be deemed to have been admitted when respondent No. 3 has not categorically denied the case of the petitioner.
This submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is without any merit.
Everyone is not supposed to deny the allegations.
If one throws mud against anybody, he may react and he may not react.
It has come from the stand of respondent No. 2 that he was never pressurised by respondent No. 3.
The complaint was not made by respondent No. 3, rather it was at the behest of one Ram Kishan son of Sheo Chand.
Therefore, no adverse inference can be drawn against respondent No. 3 if he has not come in the Court to rebut the allegations of the petitioner.
In the departmental proceedings the conduct of the petitioner has to be investigated in relation to the charge sheet supplied to the petitioner, while in the criminal case it has to be seen whether the petitioner has forged the documents and has taken advantage of the same by knowing that these are forged.
Resultantly, this writ petition is totally devoid of any merit and is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.