Swatanter Kumar, J - Constable Jagdev Singh was dismissed from service by the order of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Barnala dated 14th September, 1993.
A departmental appeal preferred by the petitioner against the order dated 1491993 met the same fate, vide order dated 541994 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range, Patiala.
The petitioner challenges these two orders in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Precise facts giving rise to the present petition are that the petitioner was enrolled in the Punjab Police Service on 18th August, 1973.
During the course of service, the petitioner was given different commendation certificates from 1983 to 1986.
From 3rd October, 1991 to 7th November, 1991 the petitioner remained absent, again he remained absent from 8th November, 1991 to 28th February, 1992.
A departmental inquiry was conducted and thereafter the Senior Superintendent of Police, Barnala imposed the punishment of dismissal from service upon the petitioner, vide order dated 1491993.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the said order, which, was already noticed, was also dismissed.
Even the revision petition preferred before the Director General of Police, Punjab was dismissed on 551999.
3.
According to the petitioner, the impugned orders inflicting the punishment of dismissal from service are violative of the rules and are contrary to the settled cannons of law.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that unauthorised absence is not the mis-conduct of such gravest nature that should vest the petitioner with such severe punishment.
While passing the impugned orders, the Senior Superintendent of Police and even the appellate authority have not considered the length of service and whether the petitioner was incorrigible officer or not.
In these circumstances, the provision of Rule 16.2.
(1) of the Punjab Police Rules have been violated.
Thus, the order of dismissal is liable to be set aside.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in the alternative contended that at best the respondents should have imposed the penalty of compulsory retirement, rather than dismissal from service, in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In support of this contention the learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon the judgment of this Hon'ble Court in the case of Ex-Constable Ranbir Singh No. 323/SPT v. The State of Haryana and others, 1999(2) SCT 58 (P&H) : 1999(1) R.S.J.
527.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the State of Punjab vehemently contended that the orders have been passed in accordance with law and in conformity with the procedural law provided for conclusion of the departmental inquiry and imposition of a major penalty.
5.
It is contended on behalf of the respondents that the conduct of the petitioner during his service was deplorable.
Various orders of punishments for unauthorised absent and other acts of indiscipline has been passed against the petitioner, which were part of his service record.
This clearly shows that the petitioner was not only a habitual absentee but a person, who was incorrigible in terms of discipline and attendance.
The petitioner was unauthorizedly absent on various occasions and lastly for 147 days.
The departmental inquiry was conducted by Shri Ajaib Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police.
The petitioner had also submitted a written reply to the charge sheet.
Then a show cause notice dated 16.1.1986 was also served upon the petitioner, to which he filed reply.
Unauthorised absence was admitted.
It may be noticed that in that show cause notice every allegation against the petitioner was specifically stated.
The Superintendent of Police, Sangrur, vide his order dated 2511986 had earlier passed an order forfeiting his two years service with cumulative effect.
6.
As far as the present case is concerned, it was stated that the disciplinary authority agreed with the findings of the Inquiry Officer and after issuance of a show cause notice of dismissal, which was duly received by the petitioner under his own signatures, no reply was submitted by him and therefore, ultimately order of dismissal was passed.
As such, the impugned order do not suffer from any error of law or otherwise.
7.
In the light of the above circumstances, now we proceed to discuss the merits of the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner.
The unauthorised absence of the petitioner, in fact, is admitted case even before us.
It was not disputed that the petitioner was unauthorizedly absent for more than 147 days, as afore-noticed, but it is contended that unauthorised absence is not an act of gravest mis-conduct, which can entail the penalty of dismissal from service against the petitioner.
This contention need not detain us any further as the law in this regard is fully settled.
A Division Bench of this court in the case of Ex-Constable Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(4) SCT 130 (P&H) : 1997(3) R.S.J.
353 held that unauthorised absence from duty by a police official is an act of gravest mis- conduct.
8.
Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of UP and others v. Ashok Kumar Singh and another, (sic) 1996(2) SCT 139 (SC) : 1996 SC 736 held as under :-  ".....The High Court failed to bear in mind that the first respondent was a police constable and was serving in a disciplined force demanding strict adherence to the rules and procedures more than any other department.
Having noticed the fact that the first respondent has absented himself from duty without leave on several occasions, we are unable to appreciate the High Court's observation that his absence from duty would not amount to such a grave charge."
9.
Thus, we have no hesitation in rejecting the first contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
10.
It is true that the competent authority is required to apply its mind to the facts and circumstances of the case before passing the order of the punishment.
Such application of mind should necessarily be directed to the length of service, incorrigibility of the officer/official concerned and the service record of the delinquent officer.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the competent authority has failed to apply its mind in regard to ingredients afore-noticed.
There can hardly be any dispute to the proposition of law that the competent authority is required to apply its mind effectively on the aspects afore-referred.
What is pertinent is the application of these principles to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
11.
At the outset, we would refer to paragraph 3 of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, where the respondents have referred to the previous conduct and service record of the petitioner.
Paragraph 3 of the written statement reads as under :-  "3.
That the contents of this para are denied being incorrect.
The petitioner was enlisted as constable w.e.f.
18872 and not w.e.f.
18873.
The petitioner was awarded two major punishments of forfeiture of service i.e. 5 years approved service was forfeited vide order No. 3401-5/B dated 28492 for absenting himself from 7.11.89 to 141289, 161289 to 1.2.91 and two years approved service vide order dated 25186 for drinking liquor on duty and quarrelling with constable Balbir Singh annexed as R-I and R-II respectively.
Besides this on account of his wilful absence from duty on various occasion according to character roll mentioned in this office file, the petitioner was marked absent vide order book mentioned below :- 3.8.76 to 4876 two days with order book No. 3877/76.
20.7.77 to 21.7.77 two days with OB No. 4388/77, 6.7.77 to 11.7.77 six days with OB No. 1223/78, 6.10.84 to 7.10.84 one day with OB No. 8171/84, 10485 to 11485 one day with OB No. 4074/85, 4785 to 5.7.85 1 day with order Book No. 4813/85, 6985 to 14.9.85 eight days with OB No. 5338/85 and 22386 to 1.4.86 ten days with OB No. 2857/86 and as such it cannot be said that the service of the petitioner has remained unblemished."
12.
The above undisputed facts clearly show that the petitioner repeatedly absented himself from duty unauthorisedly.
He also committed various acts of indiscipline.
Various orders of punishment were inflicted upon the petitioner, which were duly recorded in his service record.
Incorrigibility of the petitioner is apparent on the face of the record on the file.
The orders of punishments have been passed on regular interval and which, in fact, were not assailed by the petitioner before any competent authority.
In other words, the petitioner accepted the correctness of the orders passed against him.
To entertain the plea of non-application of mind, the court necessarily need not to go by the language of the orders passed but can well considered the matter in its larger perspective by taking into consideration the record of the case and official records produced before the court during the course of hearing, the writ petition being that of Certiorari/Mandamus.
It is cumulative effect of the entire service record of the petitioner and various acts of mis-conduct which ultimately be taken into consideration by the authorities concerned.
In the present case, earlier orders of punishments have already attained finality and the petitioner out of his own accord did not file any reply to the show cause notice nor did he bother to appear before the competent authority.
The disciplinary authority not only came to the conclusion that it was not proper to retain the petitioner in service but also of the definite opinion that "therefore, it is not desirable to retain such an employee in service because his action are likely to have an adverse effect on other employees".
13.
The appellate authority also applied its mind and found that the punishment awarded to the petitioner was commensurate with the gravity of the mis-conduct.
14.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that the court should substitute the punishment of dismissal from service to that of compulsorily retiring the petitioner is liable to be rejected.
This question is no more res-integra and stands answered by various judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as this court.
In the case of Satnam (supra), again this court, while relying upon the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, held as under :-  "The jurisdiction of the Court of enter upon into such controversy is a very limited one.
For the services to which the petitioner belongs, discipline and obedience is one of the basic ingredients which defines the nature of duties of the petitioner.
The conduct of the petitioner is certainly not worthy of any concession.
The authorities in their wisdom and in the interest of the service have passed the impugned order which to our mind does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Once the enquiry is properly held and satisfied the afore-stated principles of imposition of punishment would primarily fall in the domain of the disciplinary authority.
Except in rare of rarest cases the Courts may not be inclined to interfere on the quantum of punishment simplicitor.
In this regard reference can be made to the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of N Rajarathinam v. State of Tamil Nadu and another, 1996(4) SCT 599 (SC) : JT 1996(8) SC 477 wherein it was held as under :- "If all the relevant facts and circumstances and the evidence on record are taken into consideration and it is found that the evidence establishes misconduct against a public servant, the disciplinary authority is perfectly empowered to take appropriate decision as to the nature of the findings on the proof of guilt.
Once there is a finding as regards the proof of misconduct, what should be the nature of the punishment to be imposed is for the disciplinary authority to consider."
Another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court may also referred to i.e. State of Tamil Nadu and another v. S Subramaniam, 1996(2) SCT 191 (SC) : JT 1996(2) Supreme Court 114.
Thus, in view of the settled position of law the reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on Chanan Singh's case (supra) is not well founded."
15.
Reference can also be made to another Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ex-Constable Rakesh Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) R.S.J.
333.
16.
In view of the above enunciated principle of law, the present case is certainly not the one where court would interfere in the quantum of punishment awarded to the petitioner.
The conduct of the petitioner no way calls for any equitable relief.
Once the concerned authority has come to a definite conclusion that it is not in the interest of the police force to retain such persons, the obvious implication is that the authorities concerned had applied its mind both to the gravest nature of mis-conduct as well as incorrigibility.
Keeping in view the service record of the petitioner.
There is substantial compliance to the ingredients of rule 16.2(1) of the Punjab Police Rules.
17.
Another factor which the court has to consider, while exercising its equitable jurisdiction, is in regard to delay and laches on the part of the petitioner.
The order of dismissal was passed against the petitioner on 14th September, 1993.
The appellate authority dismissed the appeal on 541994.
What prevented the petitioner from approaching the court till 14th July, 1999 when the present petition was filed remains unexplained on record.
In the writ petition, no averment has been made as to what steps were taken by the petitioner from 1994 till 1999.
It is unreasonable delay in approaching the court under its writ jurisdiction.
18.
For the reasons afore-stated, we find no merits in this petition.
We are of the considered view that the impugned orders do not suffer from any infirmity, which would justify interference by this court in exercise of its power under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is dismissed.
however, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.