Swatanter Kumar, J - Education Department of Government of Punjab issued an advertisement on 242000 for filling 7230 JBT Teachers posts of district cadre in the said department carrying a grade of Rs. 4550-7220/-.
The petitioners in this writ petition have raised a three-fold challenge to this advertisement and the action of respondent No. 4 is filling of the said vacancies in furtherance thereto :-  a) Post of JBT teacher is a class-III post and the selection thereto can only be made through the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board, more particularly, when the Government has not issued any notification taking out the post of JBT teachers from the purview of said Board ; b) The Government, having framed Punjab Education Class-III, (Primary School Cadre) Service Rules, 1997, is bound to make appointments only in accordance with the provisions regulating such appointment and upon recommendation of the Board.
c) The advertisement is an arbitrary act on the part of the Government and is intended to achieve no public interest or purpose.
2.
Before discussing the merit of this three-fold challenge, reference to basic facts would be necessary.
The petitioners are graduates and have also passed B.Ed.
examination.
They fulfil the eligibility conditions and have a right to apply for the post of JBT teacher in accordance with the Punjab Education Class-III (Primary School Cadre) Service Rules, 1997, hereinafter referred to as the Rules.
Government of Punjab constituted Punjab Subordinate Service Selection Board 1651997.
In accordance with the notification the purpose for constitution of such Board is to provide appointments to Class-III posts under the State Government.
The Chairman and Members of the said Board were appointed in July and November, 1997 and a circular was issued by the Government of Punjab on 12121997 to fill up Class-III posts through the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board hereinafter referred to as the Board.
On 2962000 new Chairman of the Board was appointed.
Whenever and wherever the Government decides to take the posts/appointments of a particular cadre outside the purview of the Board, the Government can and has the power to issue such notification that too well within time.
Special reference is been made by the petitioners to the posts of veterinary pharmacists which were taken out from the very purview of the Board vide notification dated 991999.
However, on 242000 the Department of Education of State of Punjab issued an advertisement for making appointment of 7230 JBT teachers.
According to the petitioners those posts have not been yet taken out from the purview of the Board and they challenge the action of the Education Department in issuing the said advertisement intending to directly appoint the JBT teachers without making a reference to the Board and more particularly through Selection Committees which have been constituted in every District under the chairmanship of respondent No. 4.
The very constitution of Departmental Selection Committees at District level is motivated, discriminatory and unfair.
It would vitiate the entire process of selection and deny fair competition.
The petitioners further made a specific reference to the functions of the Board under the notification issued by the State Government.
The relevant part of Rule 2 reads as under :-  "2.
(1) xx xx xx  2.
(2) It shall not be necessary to consult the Board for suitability of candidates for appointment to :- i) a temporary post, the necessity for which is declared at the time of its creating to be unlikely to continue for more than six months; ii) appointment to permanent post of a person temporarily for a period not exceeding six months, owing to emergent circumstances having arisen, it is necessary in public interest, to fill the vacancy immediately and there is likely to be undue delay in making appointment in consultation with the Board; and iii) a post to be filled in by promotion or transfer."
3.
Further reference has also been made to the rules and under Appendix `A' to Rule 1 ibid the post of JBT teacher falls at Item No. 4.
The petitioners contended that on the bare reading of the above provisions, the advertisement is contrary to law and the selection to the post can only be made through and upon the recommendation of the Board by the Government.
Elucidating the plea of arbitrariness, the petitioners have contended in the writ petition as under :-  "6.
That it is relevant to mention here that respondent No. 2 is the authority who is exercising his power ever respondents No. 3 and 4 with a purpose to fill the posts different Sub-committees under the Chairmanship of respondent No. 4 has been constituted.
The respondent No. 4 Chairman to act as a coordinater.
This is being done with an intention that the Sub- Committees which are constituted under District Education Officer/Officers are of not higher level.
They are under the direct influence respondent No. 2 as such the political interference is not ruled out.
So the chances of fair selection are also remote.
7.
That the respondent No. 5 Punjab Subordinate Service Selection Board is an expert body constituted by the State of Punjab for making appointments to Class-III posts under the State of Punjab.
The expert body is mere (more ?)
appropriate and is not under the influence of any minister or secretary etc.
Independence of the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board is more than Sub-Committees constituted at the lower level under District Education Officer."
Upon notice, the respondent filed short reply and thereafter written submissions were also filed on behalf of the State.
The facts are hardly in dispute.
In short, the stand of the Government is that the Council of Ministers in its meeting held on 19102000 decided to take the posts of JBT teachers outside the purview of the Board.
Annexure R.1/T dated 25102000 has been annexed to the reply in support thereof.
It is also pleaded that under Clause (2)(iii) of the notification (p. 10) the Government has the power to exclude appointment to any posts from the purview of the Board.
It is also conceded in the reply that the process of the selection has yet not commenced.
The Government claims to have taken the said steps in public interest as there was emergent need to appoint the JBT teachers.
Annexure R.1/T was issued on 25102000.
Relevant part of the same reads as under :-  "The approval of proposals mentioned in para 6 of reminder letter dated 492000 of Education Department has been given.
Along with this decision, council of Ministers has also given approval of this point to the Administrative Department that due to the up-gradation of schools, the vacant posts may be filled up during the current and coming financial year.
The council of Ministers has also decided to take out those posts from the purview of Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board and the consent to fill these post has also been given by the Departmental Selection Committees.
The legislative affairs Branch may be intimated within 15 days regarding the action taken by the Administrative Department in regard to the decision taken by the Council of Ministers."
4.
According to the State the posts have already been taken outside the purview of the Subordinate Service Selection Board and the Government is competent to make appointments in the manner as it may deem fit and necessary.
The plea of arbitrariness and mala fides on the part of the State in making selection by constituting District Level Departmental Selection Committees has been specifically denied.
5.
During the course of hearing respondent-State was called upon to produce the relevant records, which were produced.
From the records it appears that the process for excluding the posts from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board was taken even prior to the issuance of the advertisement and the Council of Ministers in the meeting held on 19102000 had approved the proposal of the State Government for such exclusion and asked the department to take effective steps to make appointments.
The State in exercise of its executive powers had issued a letter on 30102000 on behalf of the Governor of Punjab [through Special Secretary, Education (P)] approving the above action.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioners as a corolary to his main argument, as noticed, argued that withdrawing the posts from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board is an act of subordinate or delegated legislation.
Further, it was argued that such act could only be completed when advice of the Council of Ministers is actually approved by the Governor and notification issued there-upon.
In other words, the act on the part of the State in excluding the posts from the purview of the Board is not complete even if the averments made in the affidavit of the State are taken to be correct.
For this purpose the learned counsel has relied upon the cases of Dattatraya Moreshwar Pangarkar v. The State of Bombay, 1952 SCR 612 (AIR 1952 SC 181); R Chitralekha v. State of Mysore, AIR 1964 SC 1823; M/s. Ghaio Mal and Sons v. State of Delhi, AIR 1959 SC 65 and State of Bihar v. Kripalu Shankar, 1987(3) SCC 34 (AIR 1987 SC 1554).
7.
It was also contended while relying upon the case of Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 395 that the advice of the Council of Ministers could be given effect to only upon the specific approval of the said action by the Governor of Punjab.
In this regard emphasis was laid on the following observations of the Hon'ble Apex Court :-  "Constitutionally speaking, the Minister is no more than an adviser and that the head of the State, the Governor is to act with the aid and advice of his Council of Ministers.
Therefore, until such advice is accepted by the Governor whatever the Minister or the Council of Ministers may say in regard to a particular matter does not become the action of the State until the advice of the Council of Ministers is accepted or deemed to be accepted by the Head of the State."
8.
On the other hand, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab contended that the act of exclusion of the posts from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board in terms of the notification dated 1651997, vide which the Board itself was constituted (sic) [reference Clause 2(iii)] does not require exercise of any legislative or delegate legislative power.
The action is simplicitor an executive act and the State Government has been given the power to act on its own.
The Government in exercise of its executive power through the authorised Secretary and in the name of the Governor, has issued the required order.
The Government is, therefore, competent to make appointments in accordance with the advertisement.
The advertisement does not offend any of the rules framed by the Government under the Punjab Education Class III Primary School Cadre Service Rules, 1997.
The Government was/is anxious in making expeditious appointments of teachers for various schools in the larger interests of the students and public.
The Government wishes to ensure that the students and the schools administration does not suffer on account of inadequate number of teachers is every school.
Even assuming that the action was an act of subordinate/delegated legislation, it stands specifically complied with in the meeting of Council of Ministers held on 19102000 and no personal satisfaction of the Governor of Punjab was called for.
The issuance of the letter on behalf of the Governer is sufficient compliance of the required law, as it was not an act which required exercise of discretion personally by the Governor within the purview and scope of the Article 154 of the Constitution of India.
In support of his submission learned counsel appearing for the State has placed reliance on the cases of Jai Singh Dalal v. State of Haryana, 1993(2) SCT 230 (SC) : 1993 Supp(2) SC Cases 600 (1993 Lab.IC 844; State of Bombay v. Harnam Singh Ram Singh Kochhar, AIR 1961 SC 1762; The Mysore State Road Transport Corporation v. Gopinath Gindachar Char, AIR 1968 SC 464; Jayantilal Amratlal Shodhan v. FN Rana, AIR 1964 SC 648 and Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, 1985(3) SCC 398 (1985 Lab.IC 1393).
9.
The first and the foremost question that arises for consideration of the Court is whether the issuance of advertisement dated 242000 by the State Government is arbitrary or is mala fide.
It was strongly contended by the counsel for the petitioners that the attempt of the State Government is to deprive fair selection., as well as the Board of its prescribed functions.
It was contended that the Board has no work of recommending selections pending with it and the members are sitting idle.
10.
During the course of hearing the Secretary from the Board as well as the Government strongly rebutted these allegations.
In fact it was brought on record that the Board has been able to recommend only about 500 candidates for various posts.
The Board has further advertised 6415 posts.
The Government has sent requisition to the Board for recommending different Selection Committees in relation to nearly 624 posts in different cadres and the same is pending with the Board.
These figures clearly show that there is lot of burden on the Board and it cannot be said under any circumstances that attempt of the Government is to frustrate fair selection through the Board by issuing the advertisement in question.
11.
It is a fact that appointment of teachers to the various schools are pending for a considerable period and on account of non-appointment of teachers the students are suffering.
The very fact that as on the date of issuance of the advertisement there were more than 7000 posts of teachers lying vacant, is sufficient indication of the grave situation that is prevailing in the State of Punjab in regard to providing primary education in the various parts of the State.
12.
In accordance with the relevant rules the seniority of the primary teachers is maintained at District Level and the cadre in question is district cadre.
Once there is district cadre, the constitution of District Level Departmental Selection Committee per se cannot be termed as improper or invalid.
The appointments are being made in accordance with Punjab State Education Class-III (Primary School Cadre) Service Rules, 1997.
The mode and manner of appointment will squarely fall in the jurisdiction of the Government and a candidate cannot command the State as to in what manner the Selection or appointment to the post in question should be made.
Even the jurisdiction of the Court in this regard would be very limited one.
Unless the method of or process of selection is patently unfair or offends Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India or is apparently arbitrary, the Court would not interfere in such matters.
The Council of Ministers in their wisdom took a decision on 19102000 to exclude these posts from the purview of the Board in the larger interests of the public and the education system in Punjab.
It is very difficult for this Court to trace element of arbitrariness, discrimination or mala fides in the decision of the Council of Ministers subject matter of the writ petition and more particularly on the basis of the record placed before the Court.
13.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, while arguing the matter on different dates contended that the State would be willing to appoint independent experts who are not under the control or influence of the State administration to make the appointments fair and beyond any suspicion.
To main the public faith and the fairness in this State action, two letters dated 442001 and 542001 were placed on record.
After these letters were placed on record, even the learned counsel for the petitioners fairly conceded that the petitioners would not have any objections to the selections being made by the Departmental Selection Committees at the District level provided the experts are taken from the Universities and certain fair criteria is adopted by the State Government for screening and short-listing of more than 60,000 applications, which have been received in response to the advertisement.
For this purpose the learned counsel relied upon the cases Union of India v. T Sunderaraman, 1997(2) SCT 810 (SC) : 1997(5) JT SC 48 (1997 Lab.IC 2342); Subhash Chandra Verma v. The State of Bihar, 1995(2) SCT 389 (SC) : 1995(2) RSJ 760; SB Mathur v. Hon'ble the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court, AIR 1983 SC 2073 (1989 Lab.IC 51) and Rajesh Sharma v. The Haryana Public Service Commission, 1991(1) RSJ 728.
14.
As is clear from the above discussion, the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties are at ad-idem and in fact they commonly conceded that the purpose of the petitioner as well as the State is to evolve public confidence and fairness in this process of selection to the posts of JBT teachers.
The concept of this dual criteria would certainly be satisfied if the independent experts from the University level are required to sit as Members of the District Level Selection Committees.
Further, the State adopts screening/short-listing of applicants in terms of its letter dated 542001.
The purpose of short-listing is not only bona fide, but is necessary in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
If 60,000 applicants are to be interviewed for 7230 posts, it would hardly be possible for the Selection Committees to give adequate and reasonable time for interviewing a candidate in order to judge the comparative merit between large number of candidates.
15.
The State has prescribed a criteria for scrutiny/screening of applications vide its letter dated 1682000, the validity or otherwise of which has not been questioned before this Court.
There appears to be no ground for sustainable challenge to this criteria.
Short-listing or screening of applications is a well accepted norm in the service jurisprudence.
The decision of the State of interview 5 applicants against one post on the basis of merits, though appears to be on a higher proportion, yet, I am of the considered view that this decision does not call for any interference by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
The State has to be given certain leverage in laying down the criteria, method and process for the selection.
The Court does not sit as a departmental Appellate Authority on the decision of the State to examine such criteria which is stated to be framed upon due consideration and expert advice.
The ground of arbitrariness and unfairness raised by the petitioner stands completely eliminated after issuance of aforestated letter by the State Government.
In all fairness the learned counsel for the petitioner has also conceded in that regard.
16.
Learned counsel appearing for the State of Punjab conceded that the Government should issue present advertisement only if the posts had been excluded from the purview of the Board in accordance with the Rules.
It may be noticed that the very posts are actually and lawfully excluded from the purview of the Board.
The Government is free to make appointments in the manner and on the basis of the criteria which has been decided by the concerned authorities.
No cause would further survive if the criteria in question meets the requirement of the fairness and its constitutionality.
17.
The limb of the main argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is based upon mis-conception of facts that the posts have not been taken outside the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
There is no dispute to the fact that the post of JBT teacher is Class-III post and the Punjab Education Class-III (Primary School Cadre) Rules 1997 are applicable to the post in question.
No provision of the said rule has been offended.
18.
Every action of the State more particularly appointments to different posts and process of selection thereof must be founded on the principle of fairness and equality.
The action of the State must be in larger interests of the public and appointments to these posts of teachers should be concluded as expeditiously as possible so that at least from the coming academic session, sufficient number of teachers are available to teach the students.
19.
In order to conclude this aspect of the matter, directions for compliance in furtherance to the stand of the State itself, as taken in the letters dated 1682000, 442001 and 542001, and as commonly conceded by the parties, are issued as under :-  i) The Selection to the posts of 7230 JBT teachers in furtherance to the advertisement dated 242000 shall be made by the District Level Selection Committees.
The composition of the said Committees shall be that of the Chairman, three Members and two Experts.
The Chairman and Government nominated Members shall be in terms of the Government letter dated 1682000. ii) The two Experts for each Selection Committee shall be nominated by the Vice Chancellor of the universities mentioned in the letter dated 442001 issued by the State, only from the Teaching Staff of the concerned University.
Such nomination shall be made by the Vice Chancellor on the request of Special Secretary, Education, Punjab.
iii) No Selection Committee shall interview any candidate where the two Experts from the University concerned are not present.
iv) The opinion of the two Experts of each Selection Committee, shall be given due respect and emphasis by the Members of the said Selection Committee in the process of selection keeping in view the Law laid down in the case of Ashok Yadav v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 454 (1986 Lab.
IC 1417).
v) Learned counsel for the State, upon instructions from the Special Secretary Education, Punjab, submitted that the State would only fill up 7230 posts to JBT teachers as advertised vide advertisement dated 242000.
For the subsequent vacancies, or the vacancies which are not included in the said advertisement, the State shall take necessary action separately for filling up such vacancies in accordance with the rules.
In other words, selection would be restricted to the 7230 posts only.
vi) The merit list of the applicants which the State has prepared in terms of its letter dated 1682000 to maintain ratio of 1:5 for the purpose of interview shall be made available and duly displayed on the notice board.
Such notice board shall be fixed at the place where the District Selection Committee is to hold the interview at least two days prior to the date of the interview.
The copy of the merit list along with the criteria adopted by the State shall be furnished to each member of the Committee.
20.
In view of the above directions and concessions given by the learned counsel for the parties, there is hardly any occasion for this Court to discuss the contentions in any further details and the legality and merits of the respective issues raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
However, it may be noticed that the State Government had constituted the Subordinate Services Selection Board vide notification dated 1651997.
The notification itself empowered the State Government to exclude the posts from the purview of the Board, has been specifically provided therein.
The learned counsel for the parties conceded that once the act of exclusion was completed, the advertisement in question could not be said to be invalid on that ground.
21.
Under Article 154 of the Constitution of India, the executive powers of the State are vested in the Governor and are to be exercised by him either directly or through officer(s) subordinate to him, in accordance with the Constitution.
Under Article 166 all executive action of the Governor of the State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor.
Under Rules of Business the Council of Ministers is to aid and advise the Governor of the State within the purview of the Article 163 of the Constitution.
The Council of Ministers actually took a decision in furtherance to the earlier proposal of the Government and required the Government to take expeditious action in filling up the posts in question through the District Level Departmental Selection Committees and also decided to treat the posts as having been taken out from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The Government issued a letter in the name of the Governor for exclusion of such posts.
In other words, the act of exclusion of the posts from the purview of the Board has been completed as per the records produced before this Court.
Such exclusion was an executive act and, thus, could be completed by an authorised officer issuing the circular.
Even if it is admitted to be an act of delegated legislation, still it did not require the personal approval or exercise of personal discretion on the part of the Governor.
22.
For the reasons afore-stated this writ petition is partially allowed and is disposed of with the directions afore-referred.
The State Government shall abide by the said directions as they are primarily based upon the circular issued by the State itself and the assurance given by its officers/authorities, to the Court during the course of hearing.
23.
There shall be no orders as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.