Rajesh Balia, J - Heard learned counsel for the appellant.
2.
The appellant challenges the order passed by learned Single Judge rejecting the petition filed against the order passed by Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court, Udaipur dated 1432000 on an application moved by respondent Harish Gonga, a Medical Representative of the petitioner company, under Section 33- C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The respondent has moved an application under Section 33-C(2) before the Labour Court on 31.2.1999 for quantification and recovery of a sum of Rs. 48,55330 alleged to be due from the petitioner appellant as remuneration for the period from July 1997 to August, 1998.
The respondent alleged the petitioner to be his employer.
The petitioner did not respond to the notice issued by the Labour Court of the application moved by the respondent workman and, therefore, the court directed the proceedings to continue ex-parte on 681999.
Prior to proceedings ex- parte the Labour Court has received a letter dated 761999 on 10.6.1999 from the petitioner appellant in which it was alleged that the respondent is not its workman within the meaning of Industrial Disputes Act inasmuch as a medical representative is not a workman within the definition of `workman' and in that light he has also placed reliance on a decision of HR Adyanthaya v. Sandoz (India) Ltd, 1995(1) SCT 278 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 2608, for taking the stand that the medical representatives are not workman within the meaning of the Act of 1947.
It was also stated in the said letter that the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) is a recovery court of non-disputed claims and has no jurisdiction even for workmen whose matters are under dispute.
It was also stated in that letter that substantively the applicant deserved his appointment when he was transferred to another territory as per the conditions of his employment contract and asked for dismissal of the application.
3.
The Labour Court by taking into consideration and after referring the aforesaid reply allowed the application of the respondent and quantified the amount payable by the appellant to the respondent workman as Rs. 27,900/- and directed the same to be paid to the workman by 1432000 failing which 10% interest was awarded.
This order was challenged by the appellant by way of writ petition No. 3486/2000 before this Court raising the same issues and relying on the decision of Supreme Court in HR Adyanthaya's case, AIR 1994 SC 2608 (supra) for contending that the medical representative is not a workman.
Learned Single Judge on considering the aforesaid decision as well as a Bench decision of this Court rendered in Rajasthan Medical & Sales Representatives Union v. M/s. Industrial Research Institute Private Ltd, DB Civil Special Appeal (Writ) No. 46498, decided on 2832000 reported in 2001(1) SCT 648 (Rajasthan) : 2000 Lab IC 1963, and another Bench decision of Punjab and Haryana High Court reported in Ripu Daman Bhanot v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana, 1996(4) SCT 628 (P&H) : 1996 Lab LR 1008, rejected the contention raised by the appellant and dismissed the petition.
4.
It is contended by Mr. Chauhan, learned counsel for the appellant in the first instance that it has been held in the aforesaid Supreme Court decision as well as the later decision of the Supreme Court reported in Rhone-Poulenc (India) Ltd v. State of UP, 2000(4) SCT 685 (SC) : 2000 Lab IC 3325, that a medical representative is not a workman.
5.
Having given our careful consideration we are unable to sustain the said contention.
6.
It is true that in the aforesaid two cases as a matter of fact Hon'ble Supreme Court has held the concerned claimants in the respective cases who were medical representatives as not the workman.
However, the difference that has been brought about as a matter of law on account of amendments made in Sales Promotion Employees (Condition of Service) Act, 1976 from time to time and the amendment made in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 by amending Act of 1982 under which the amendment in Section 2(s) and 2(rr) which has come into force w.e.f.
21.8.1994 the medical representatives without the limit of the salary which they draw has been held to be falling in the definition of workmen under the Industrial Disputes Act with effect from the respective amendments.
7.
It has been noticed by the Supreme Court that the definition of workman as it stood under Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act only an employee discharging the duties of skilled and technical nature and unskilled employees and duties of unskilled nature were included in the definition of workman.
A medical representative was held neither a skilled nor a technical employment and, therefore, on the anvil of the definition of workman given in Section 2(s) read with provisions of the SPE Act as it stood then held the same not falling within the definition of the workman.
Section 6 of the Sales Promotion Employees (Condition of Service) Act, 1976 made the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as in force for the time being applicable to the medical representatives by Act No. 48 of 1986 w.e.f.
651987.
Both the Supreme Court decisions referred to above and relied on by the appellant relate to dispute raised prior to amendment in 1987.
But with inclusion of category of workman employed to different operational work, in Section 2(s) and any commission payable on the promotion of the sales of business or both in definition of wages under Section 2(rr) made the medical representatives as workman depending on their wages as workmen within the meaning of Section 2(s) upto 651987 and without the limitation on their wages thereafter the ratio is not applicable to disputes relating to medical representative arising thereafter.
The court expressed its conclusion in this regard as under :-  "In other words, on and from 631976 the provisions of the ID Act became applicable to the medical representatives depending upon their wages upto 651987 and without the limitation on their wages thereafter and upon the capacity in which they were employed or engaged."
8.
It may be noticed that the dispute which was before Hon'ble the Supreme Court in HR Adyanthaya's case, AIR 1994 SC 2608 (supra) related to the period of termination that has been affected on 26.4.1976 and 9.12.1977 respectively and the employees case was not that they were drawing salary less than the fixed in the Act as prevailing then.
It is after explaining the law stood at the relevant time governing the matters relating to medical representatives under the Industrial Disputes Act that the Court found in those cases the appellants before them were not workmen as a medical representative not falling in that category.
In the like manner the decision in Rhone-Poulenc (India) Ltd (2000 Lab IC 3325) (supra) related to the period prior to 651987 wherein the medical representative was drawing the salary more than the ceiling stated in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 at the relevant time.
9.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that since the present case relates to the period of alleged denial of wages after 1987 inasmuch as it is related to claim for wages for 1997-98, a medical representative irrespective of limitation on the salary which he draws has to be considered as a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the I.D.
Act read with Section 6 of the PSE Act and that is the view taken by a Division Bench of this Court as well as a Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court referred to above on considering the decision of the Supreme Court in HR Adyanthaya's case (supra).
We are in respectful agreement with the same and find no error in the judgment of learned Single Judge in that regard.
10.
It was next contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that since he has raised the contention in his reply that the respondent was not a workman, it is not for this Court to decide and hold whether the medical representative is a workman or not and the matter ought to have been remanded back to the Labour Court for deciding this issue.
We are unable to accept this contention also.
11.
In the petition filed by the petitioner himself and the documents placed by him it is admitted case of the petitioner that the respondent was an employee of the petitioner as a medical representative and his services have been terminated vide order dated 491998, Annexure 9, Annexure 7 dated 381998 also goes to show that the respondent was directed to report at Bangalore on 1481998 at 10.30 A.M.
The claim of the workman respondent for non-payment of salary related to the period only upto August, 1998 prior to the alleged date of termination of his services.
Therefore, the validity of transfer orders or termination of service orders is of little consequence on the claim of the respondent for remuneration for the period during which he was undisputably, may, admittedly in the employment of the petitioner.
Therefore, the question whether the respondent voluntarily left the services, or whether the petitioner terminated his services validly, whether there was good ground for terminating the services on account of closure, are all irrelevant for the purpose of claim to the wages prior to the date of termination on the basis of the petitioner's own documents placed on record.
It is not the case of the petitioner even before this Court that any amount for the period for which it has been quantified and directed to be paid by the Labour Court has in fact been paid to the workman.
What has been contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the workman had no reason to go and knock at the doors of the Labour Court when he was directed to collect his dues vide Annexure 9 from the Divisional Sales Officers, Delhi.
We fail to understand if the appellants are so well disposed to pay the legitimate dues upto the date of termination of the workman with what intent and purpose this litigation is being perused.
On the contrary, when employment upto September, 1998 is apparent from the documents produced by the petitioner himself the entitlement to the wages till that date remains undisputed fact and all questions of quantification of the amounts due to the employee prior to the date would fall within the ambit of execution proceedings which is the nature of the proceedings before the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2).
No error otherwise has been pointed out that in the order made by the Labour Court.
12.
We, therefore, find no force in this appeal and the same is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.