RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of R.S.A.
No. 2443 of 1997 titled State of Haryana and others v. Dalbir Singh, 2002(1) SCT 81 (P&H).
and Civil Writ Petition No. 18153 of 1999 titled Dalbir Singh v. State of Haryana and others as in my opinion, both the matters can be disposed of by a common judgment.
2.
First of all, I take the pleadings of Civil Suit for mandatory injunction filed by Shri Dalbir Singh.
The case set up by the plaintiff Dalbir Singh in the trial Court was that he passed his Intermediate Examination from Bihar Intermediate Education Council under Roll Number 11087 in April, 1986.
The enlistment number was 8476.
The plaintiff was admitted to two years Diploma in Education Course in the Government Institute of Education and Training, Jind on 31.7.1993.
The basic qualification for the admission to Diploma in Education was intermediate examination.
The plaintiff submitted original marks sheet issued by Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna at the time of admission to Diploma in Education Course.
It was later on found that Roll Number mentioned in the mark sheet was 76958 and not the Roll Number 11087 under which the plaintiff passed his Intermediate Examination.
The admission of the plaintiff to Diploma in Education Course was cancelled.
The plaintiff got the clerical mistake (rectified) and submitted the copy of the duplicate mark sheet.
The defendants, however, refused to revoke the order/cancellation of admission to the course.
The plaintiff was also refused permission to take examination to Ist Year of Diploma in Education Course held in May, 1994.
The plaintiff was alllowed to appear provisionally in the Ist Year Examination of the Diploma in Course vide interim order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 6045 of 1994 but the result was withheld.
The writ petition was dismissed on 611995 holding that the petitioner involved disputed question of facts which cannot be gone into writ jurisdiction.
Resultantly, the plaintiff was relegated to adopt the remedy of the civil suit.
3.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendants who filed the reply and it was pleaded by the defendants that plaintiff was granted admission to the Diploma in Education Course on the basis of the certificate bearing Roll No. 76958, registration number 08478 issued by Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna.
The certificate was found false on verification vide letter of Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna No. 367/Spl/14 dated 331994.
The Director, Secondary Education Haryana, Chandigarh directed the cancellation of the admission of plaintiff and ordered for the registration of a criminal case.
The candidature of the plaintiff was cancelled with effect from 1541994.
FIR No. 125 was registered in Police Station, Jind on 1641994 under Sections 420, 467, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal Code.
The certificate was found false and bogus on verification and the candidature was cancelled and result of Diploma in Educaiton (I) was withheld.
The plaintiff failed to attend the requisite number of classes and four weeks teaching practice and, therefore, he was not entitled to appear in the IInd year examination of Diploma in Education Course.
By denying the other averments of the plaintiff, the defendants prayed for the dismissal of the suit.
4.
The plaintiff filed a rejoinder in which he reiterated the allegations made in the plaint by denying those of the written statement and from the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  1Whether the plaintiff is entitled to have his result declared on the grounds mentioned in the plaint ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 3.
Whether the suit is bad for want of notice u/s 80 CPC ?
OPD 4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action/locus standi to file this suit ?
OPD 5.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit by his own act and conduct ?
OPD 6.
Whether the suit merits dismissal with special costs u/s 35-A CPC ?
OPD 7.
Relief.
The parties led oral as well as documentary evidence in support of their case and on conclusion of the proceedings of the suit, the trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 2121997, decreed the suit of the plaintiff and the defendant's order of cancellation of the admission of the plaintiff to Diploma in Education Course 1993 was set aside and directions were further given to the defendants to declare the result of the plaintiff for first year and second year examination of Diploma in Education Course within one month from the date of passing of the judgment.
5.
The defendants filed the appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Jind who vide the impugned judgment and decree dated 2371997 dismissed the appeal of the State of Haryana and aggrieved by the judgments and decrees of the Courts below, the present appeal has been filed by the State of Haryana.
6.
Before I deal with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant, it will be appropriate for me to reproduce paras No. 11, 12 and 13 of the judgment of the first appellate Court, which are as under :-  "11.
It has been held by the trial Court on this issue and rightly so that there is only a mistake about the roll number of the candidate in the certificate produced by him.
At the time of result, the roll number should have been mentioned as 11087 but was by mistake mentioned as 76958, as is clear from the documentary evidence i.e. Ex. P-1 and its comparison with Ex.D.1.
There is clerical mistake in the roll number because registration number and also the marks obtained and subjects detailed are the same.
The name of the candidate is also the same.
The total marks obtained also tally.
The appellants had cancelled the admission of the respondent on the basis of Ex. D.2 but no opportunity of being heard was granted to him.
Their plea that he had noted down the order of the cancellation, would not mean that they had afforded him an effective opportunity to show cause and to explain that the roll number had been wrongly mentioned and that he had not produced a false certificate.
The view that he should have been granted an opportunity for such purpose finds support from the authorities reported as Rajiv Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) Recent Services Judgments 401, Ashwinder Kaur v. Panjab University Chandigarh and another, AIR 1989 (P&H) 190 and Moneet Goyal v. Punjabi University through its Registrar and others, 1994(4) SCT 174 (P&H) : 1994(4) Recent Services Judgments-194.
12.
It may also be mentioned as has also rightly been held by the trial Court that besides all the particulars in both the certificates being the same, except the roll number, there is also photograph of the candidate on the admit card, copy of which is Ex. P2.
The witness Arun Parshad (PW-1) who appeared from the office of the Council admitted that the admission form Ex.P-2 bore the photograph of the plaintiff who was at that time present in the Court and this witness also clarified about the mistake in the roll number and confirmed that the plaintiff-respondent had cleared the intermediate examination from the Council.
Rather a suggestion was put to him that the registration number in Ex. P1 and D.1 is the same which suggestion put by the defendant- appeallants went in favour of the plaintiff-respondent.
He has further stated that in the report Ex. D-2, it was mentioned that the certificate of the plaintiff was incorrect as mentioned as No. 40 but he himself stated that it was a clerical mistake.
There is evidence to show that when the plaintiff came to know about the cancellation of his admission, he again approached the authorities in the Council and got the clarification and the correct mark- sheet.
However, the genuineness of his case was not believed by the present appellants and his case was not reconsidered.
He could take the examination only as a result of the order of the Court.
He was allowed to take the examination for the first year by order of the Hor'ble High Court, while he was allowed to take final year examination by the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Jind.
13.
Thus, taken from any angle, it cannot be said that the admission of the plaintiff was rightly cancelled by the defendant-appellants.
Rather they did not give him any opportunity of being heard and also did not re- consider his case when he brought the clarification, which resulted in excessive hardship to him.
On account of clerical mistake in the roll number, he had to go from pillar to post for taking examination and his result has not yet been declared due to no fault of his.
Hence, the findings on this issue i.e. No. 1 recorded by the trial Court does not call for any interference and the same are upheld".
7.
Now, I take the pleadings of the parties made in Civil Writ Petition No. 18153 of 1999, filed by Shri Dalbir Singh.
8.
The petitioner Shri Dalbir Singh filed a Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents i.e. the State of Haryana, Director, Secondary Education Haryana and District Primary Education Officer, Sonepat directing them to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment on the post of JBT teacher.
9.
The case set up by the petitioner is that State of Haryana advertised various posts in Education Department including the posts of JBT teachers.
The petitioner was eligible for the said post.
He applied for the same.
He was interviewed on 20.11.1999 for the above mentioned post in the office of respondent No. 3 but nothing was conveyed to the petitioner.
Thereafter, on 14121999, a letter was received by the petitioner from the office of respondent No. 3 whereby the admission of the petitioner was cancelled on the ground that he was not having the requisite qualifications for the admission to D.Ed course.
As per the petitioner he filed a civil writ petition No. 6045 of 1994 in which he was relegated to file a civil suit vide order dated 611995.
Thereafter, he filed the civil Suit No. 244 of 1995 in the Court of Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Jind for the issuance of the mandatory injunction and for the declaration of the result.
The suit was decreed on 2121997.
10.
The State filed an appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Jind, who, vide order dated 2371997 upheld the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court and dismissed the appeal of the State of Haryana.
Hence, the State of Haryana filed the present R.S.A.
which is being disposed of through this judgment.
11.
According to Dalbir Singh petitioner, the High Court though admitted the Regular second Appeal but did not grant any stay to the State.
According to Dalbir Singh, he is having a valid certificate for diploma course and, therefore, he is entitled for consideration.
He was eligible to the post of JBT teacher but he is not being offered the job mainly on the ground that the certificate submitted by him from Bihar Intermediate Education Council is faked one.
12.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The stand of the respondents is very simple.
According to the respondents since the State of Haryana has filed the Regular Second Appeal against the decision of the Additional District Judge, Jind, therefore, it is not in a position to consider the petitioner to the post of JBT Teacher.
The certificate which was issued to the petitioner was subject to the decision of the R.S.A.
Since the validity of the D.Ed.
certificate given by the petitioner was in dispute, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the directions as prayed for in the writ petition.
13.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
Every thing will depend upon the fate of the R.S.A.
If R.S.A.
is dismissed the writ will succeed and if the RSA is allowed the writ petition would stand dismissed.
14.
The controversy in this case is very short.
The case set up by the plaintiff was that he passed intermediate examination from Bihar Intermediate Education Council and he appeared under Roll No. 11087 in April 1986.
He was given enlisted Roll No. which was 8476 of 1986.
He passed the intermediate examination.
Inadvertently, on the marks sheet roll number has been mentioned as 76958 instead of 11087.
15.
Now, it is to be seen whether the certificate which was submitted by the plaintiff-respondent was a faked one or there was honest clerical mistake on the part of Bihar Intermediate Education Council.
The record of the trial Court would show that the correct roll number which was allotted to the petitioner was 11087 and his enlistment number was 8478 of 1986 and he passed his intermediate examination in the year 1988 and the examination was held in April, 1988.
This is evident from the document Ex. P1, the photo copy of the marks sheet, issued by Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna.
According to this certificate, the plaintiff-petitioner secured 644 marks.
Ex.P2 is the admission form in which the enlistment number has been given as 8478 of 1986.
The name of plaintiff has been written as Dalbir Singh son of Shri Surat Singh.
This form also has the photograph of the plaintiff-petitioner and further the admission form would show that in the relevant columns which have been filled-in by the office, he was allotted Roll Number 11087.
If for the fault of the office, a wrong number has been shown, the plaintiff-petitioner cannot be blamed.
Though an effort was made to show that Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna, is a fake institution but this is not the case of the defendant-State in the trial Court nor there is any evidence to this effect.
Rather I will try to show that this institution is not a fake one.
It is a regularised institution.
Ex. P.3 is the photo copy of the certificate issued by the Bihar Intermediate Education Council Patna in which it has been certified that Shri Dalbir Singh son of Shri Surat Singh has passed the intermediate examination in the Ist Division and this certificate was issued under the signatures of Shri RP Poddar on 1251994.
P.4 is the photo copy of the letter dated 2791994 issued by Shri RP Poddar, to the Director, Secondary Education Haryana, with reference to the letter dated 2071941, in which it has been certified that the roll number of Shri Dalbir Singh was 11087 and his registration number was 8478 of 1986 and this information was supplied to the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana on the basis of the record available in that institution.
Further it has been certified that this information is being supplied on checking of the name of Shri Dalbir Singh which was traced in the tabulation register.
In the light of the letter Ex. P.4, there remains no doubt in the mind of this Court that Shri Dalbir Singh appeared under Roll No. 11087.
Ex.P.5 is yet another letter issued by Dr. RP Poddar, Secretary of the institution in which he has also certified after verifying from the record of the council that the plaintiff-petitioner secured 644 marks and passed intermediate examination in the Ist Division.
16.
In this view of the matter, if any mistake has happened in the marks sheet, by describing roll number of the petitioner as 76958, that is not binding.
When the plaintiff has produced the documentary evidence for the satisfaction of the authorities, they should have respected the certificates when independent inquiries have been made by the authorities certifying that plaintiff-petitioner appeared in the examination under roll No. 11087.
Reliance was placed on behalf of the appellant on Exs.
D.1, D.2 and D.3.
These documents cannot be given any importance in preference to the documents which have been proved by the plaintiff.
There is one more angle to show that mistake has happened and plaintiff never manipulated a false certificate from the Council.
Had he managed a false certificate the copy of which is Ex. D.1 the plaintiff never have approached the Council for the correction of the mistake.
A truthful person has the guts to approach to the authorities for the rectification of the mistake.
I may also make a mention that in the criminal case the plaintiff-petitioner was also acquitted and at no point of time the contention of the respondent-State was proved to be correct.
Thus, I affirm the judgments and decrees of the Courts below and dismiss the present Regular Second Appeal.
17.
As I stated above, the moment the appeal of the State is dismissed, it has a direct bearing on the Civil Writ Petition filed by Shri Dalbir Singh.
The plaintiff applied for the appointment to the post of JBT teacher.
The learned counsel for the writ petition submits that the petitioner had been selected but he was not offered the job mainly on the ground that his intermediate certificate which was submitted to the authorities was found to be fictitious.
I have already stated above that the said certificate is a genuine one and in these circumstances, the respondent-authorities had no business to reject the candidature of the petitioner.
18.
With the dismissal of the appeal filed by the State of Haryana, the present writ petition stands allowed and a writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of JBT teacher and if his name figures in the merit, further directions are given to the respondents to issue the appointment letter according to rules within 15 days from the receipt of the certified copy of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs in the appeal as well as in the writ petition.
Petition allowed.