Pratap Kr.
Ray, J - This writ application had been filed by the writ petitioner praying for cancellation of name of Kalachand Biswas who secured first position in the panel dated 27th July, 1995 for the Post of Assistant Teacher in English of Nimtala Vidyaniketan (hereinafter which to be referred to as concerned School) under jurisdiction of District Inspector of Schools (SE) Nadia hereinafter refer to as DI of Schools and thereby necessary direction of recasting of the panel by placement of his name from second position to first position.
The only ground of the writ application in support of his such prayer is that the first candidate of the panel, the respondent No. 8, herein since crossed the age of 35 years prior to reference of his name from the Employment Exchange, said candidate had no right to be empanelled in the said post in question.
2.
The respondent No. 8 had filed an Affidavit in Opposition controverting all the material allegations as well as on submitting different relevant facts which were not disclosed in the writ application.
From the Affidavit in Opposition of respondent No. 8, the following facts are revealed.
3.
A panel was prepared on 27th July, 1995 wherein present writ petitioner stood second and the respondent No. 8 stood first.
The respondent No. 8 is qualified with MA BEd.
The writ petitioner though is qualified with MA but at the time of sponsorship of his name, his such qualification was not recorded in the Local Employment Exchange and as per seniority position of the writ petitioner in respect of his registration in the employment Exchange under category of BA (Hons.)
candidate, his name was referred to.
Though the qualification of MA of the writ petitioner was not referred to by Employment Exchange while sending the name but Selection Committee added marks for such MA qualification and despite addition of such marks, writ petitioner stood second in the panel.
Though the panel was prepared by the validlty constituted Selection Committee but the School Authorities kept the matter pending by not forwarding the panel to the DI of Schools.
The respondent No. 8 moved a writ application CP 15384(W) of 1995 on the grievance that School Authority was keeping the entire matter pending and on that basis by the Order dated 19.9.95, said writ application was disposed of by GR Bhattacharya, J directing the School Authorities to forward the matter to the DI of Schools for consideration of the approval of the concerned panel and DI of Schools was directed to decide the question of approval after hearing the respective parties.
In pursuance of the Order dated 19.9.95 of G R Bhattacharya, J aforesaid, the School Authority forwarded the panel by approving the same by the Managing Committee of the School.
4.
On considering the factual matrix of the matter that while the respondent No. 8's name was sponsored by the Employment Exchange, respondent No. 8's age crossed 35 years and on considering the factor that the present petitioner was not entitled to have the qualification marks for MA qualification as same was not referred to by the Employment Exchange, DI of Schools by his decision dated 281295 directed that selection of respondent No. 8, Kalachand Biswas was right and proper as a first candidate of the panel and further directed that by deducting the marks on MA degree of the present writ petitioner that is Mayukh Chattapadhyay, the panel would be recasted and would be placed for approval to the DI of Schools.
Subsequent to that, two communications were received namely letter dated 19th February, 1996 and letter dated 18th April, 1996, both written by Employment Officer, which are as follows:-  "Please refer to this office Memo No. KRI/P/37/95/5858(I) dated 14695 under which a list of 20 (twenty) candidates was forwarded to you for the post of Asstt.
Teacher (English).
Sri Mayukh Chattopadhyay at serial No. 20 of the said list, submitted his Post Graduate qualification (MA in English) to this office on 12595.
He was submitted to your School for the above post on 14695 when his post Graduate qualification (MA in English) was not mentioned pending receipt of registration with P & E Section, Calcutta.
5.
As per Serial Instruction No. 4/95 of Director of Employment, his Post Graduate qualification (MA in English) is to be take into consideration for selection for the above post of Asstt.
Teacher (English)."
"Please refer to you letter No. 177/96 dated 14.3.96.
On examination of the particulars of Sri Kalachand Biswas (Reg.
No. PE/P/4811/93) at Sl.
No. 7, of the list of 20 (twenty) candidates sent to you under this office Memo No. KRI/P/37/95/5858(I) dated 14695, for the above post, it is found that he is not entitled to age relaxation as he is employed under Krishnanagar Municipality in clerical work.
Hence his candidature is hereby withdrawn.
Submission made erroneously is hereby regretted."
In view of such, by the communication that dated 26th April, 1996 DI of Schools wrote a letter to Director of School Education, West Bengal seeking his decision mentioning the decision of DI of Schools on such issue dated 28th December, 1995 whereby the direction was given for deduction of the marks of MA qualification as awarded in favour of Mayukh Chattapadhyay, the second candidate of the panel and confirmation of first position of Kalachand Biswas irrespective of crossing of 35 years of age while his name was sponsored.
By this communication DI of Schools wanted to know the followings from the Director of School Education:-  "In view of the facts abated above, he is requested to let this office know as to : (i) Whether the candidature of Sri Kalachand Biswas--who topped the list of empanelled candidate in the original panel--may be treated as cancelled on ground of his crossing 35 years on the date of notification of vacancy considering the fact that his name was duly sponsored by the Employment Exchange, and (ii) whether the marks awarded on MA qualification in favour of Sri Mayukh Chattapadhyay--the candidate of 2nd preference in the original panel and of first prof.
In the recasted panel may be taken into account on the basis of communication dt. 19296 from the District Employment Exchange, Krishnanagar, Nadia.
A decision on the fate of the panel may be arrived at on receipt of his reply on the aforesaid points."
On considering the entire matter namely candidature of present respondent No. 8, Kalachand Biswas whether would be cancelled and his name would be struck off from the first position of the panel as only on the ground of withdrawal of his name by the Employment Exchange as at the time of sponsoring of the name said Kalachand Biswas already crossed 35 years of age and the point as to whether the qualification marks for MA degree as was awarded by the Selection Committee in favour of second candidate of the panel, Mayukh Chattapadhyay would be deducted and/or excluded, Director of School Education, West Bengal by his decision dated 17th July, 1996 confirming the views of DI of Schools dated 19th September, 1995 decided that due to crossing of 35 years of age prior to sponsorship of his name, Kalachand Biswas's namely surely would not be struck off from panel and qualification marks for MA as awarded in favour of Mayukh Chattapadhyay would be deducted.
Since such communication is vital, the said decision of Director of School Education, West Bengal is set out herein below:-  "In reference to his above mentioned memo on the aforesaid Court case the undersigned has to state that the School Authority appears to have violated wilfully and deliberately the order of the District Inspector of Schools (SE) which was issued under his Memo No. 346(3)/Law/Se dt. 281295 in terms of the order 19.9.95 by not recasting the panel in question as per direction of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Nadia.
As a result the school authority may be requested to recast the panel properly in terms of the order of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Nadia, otherwise, he is requested to issue show cause notice to the Managing Committee of the school with observation why steps as per law will not be taken against them for such wilful and deliberate violation of the instruction of the District Inspector of Schools (SE) Nadia.
He is also advised to bring the notes to the notice of the Hon'ble High Court through the Ld.
State Advocate.
Hence, the panel should be recasted first as per instruction issued by him earlier and thereafter the separate of approval will arise."
6.
Despite the decision of the Director of School Education, West Bengal dated 17th, July, 1996 since the School Authority did not act by referring a new panel recasting the name of Mayukh Chattapadhyay, the respondent No. 8 being the writ petitioner moved this writ Court for implementation of the decision dated 28th December, 1995 of DI of Schools as confirmed by Director of School Education, West Bengal by his decision dated 17th July, 1996 in this Writ Court in Writ petition No. C.O 6867(W) of 1996.
By the judgment dated 12th August, 1996 BP Banerjee, J after hearing the School Authority, who was respondent No. 5, directed the School Authority to carry out order/decision of District Inspector of Schools dated 28th December, 1995 by recasting the panel within a period of one week from that date and directed the DI of Schools to decide the matter on taking steps accordingly.
Challenging this order, no appeal has been preferred and the order dated 12.8.96 in CO 6867(W) of 1996 passed by BP Banerjee, J reached its finality.
7.
In pursuance of the judgment of this court dated 12th August 1996, by which the decision of the DI of Schools dated 28th December, 1995 was confirmed, School Authority recasted the panel whereby respondent No. 8 retained his same position as first candidate of the panel but second candidate of the panel, Mayukh Chattapadhyay in view of deduction of his marks, went outside of the panel and the third candidate of the panel was elevated in the 2nd position one new incumbent had entered as 3rd man into panel, namely Jayabrata Biswas.
This panel was approved by DI of Schools on 10th October, 1996 and was communicated to the School Authority.
8.
On this juncture, the present petitioner moved this present writ application without assailing the decision of Director of School Education, West Bengal dated 17th July, 1996 confirming the decision dated 28th December, 1995 of DI of School concerned as well as without preferring any appeal challenging the judgment of this Court passed by BP Banerjee, J on 12th August, 1996 in CO 6867(W) of 1996 whereby and whereunder said two decisions of DI of Schools as well as Director of School Education was confirmed and positive direction was given to the School Authority to act accordingly.
Furthermore, in this writ application, the order of approval of recasting panel being the decision dated 10th October, 1996, also is not assailed, whereby in view of the recasting of the panel, the name of present petitioner went outside of the consideration zone of the panel that is his name came down far below the names of first three candidates.
However, this writ petition was moved on 10th September, 1996 before BP Banerjee, J when the matter was directed to appear "for Order" and the Secretary of the Managing Committee was directed to be present in the Court with records of the case.
On 12th December, 1996, however, BP Banerjee, J passed an order of status qua as on that date.
The respondent No. 8 who is the first man in the approved panel dated 101096 filed an application for vacating such interim order registered as CAN 173 of 1998.
This application was disposed of by the Order dated 9th June, 1999 by Basudev Panigrahi, J holding inter alia that since after expiry of the interim order, no prayer for extension was made, accordingly there was no existence of the interim order dated 19.12.96 and as such the vacating application was dismissed.
Despite the non-existence of any order of status quo, however, the School Authority did not comply with the judgment pased by the BP Banerjee, J on 12th August, 1996 as well as the decision of approval dated 10th October, 1996 of DI of Schools.
9.
In this matter, Affidavit in Reply has been held by writ petitioner with reference to the opposition of respondent No. 8 School Authority has also filed a supplementary Affidavit supporting the case of the present writ petitioner.
So far as the School Authority is concerned, School Authority again supported the writ petition though the issue relating to such has already been adjudicated by the Order dated 12.8.96 by BP Banerjee, J when the decision of Director of School Education, West Bengal dated 17th July, 1996 and the decision of DI of Schools dated 28th December, 1995 was confirmed on consideration of all the material facts as are placed in the present writ application namely the respondent No. 8, who is the first candidate of the panel crossed the age of 35 years when his name was sponsored and that qualification marks for MA as awarded in favour of the present writ petitioner was required to be deducted.
Applying the doctrine of res judicata, hence, this point cannot be raised by the School Authority and accordingly the contention of the School Authority as submitted in the supplementary Affidavit in rejected.
10.
Now the question is whether as per contention made by the present petitioner in his writ application namely his prayer that the panel dated 27th July, 1995 being the first panel and more particularly I can say a panel prior to recasting of the panel as per decision of the DI of the Schools as well as Director of School Education, West Bengal would be given life upon cancelling the name of first candidate of the panel that is of respondent No. 8, so that present writ petitioner whose name was in the second petition can join in the post in question.
The writ petitioner despite the knowledge of the judgment dated 12th August, 1996 passed by BP Banerjee, J on the identical issues as cropped up and the issues as were contested by the School Authority with reference to CO 6867(W) of 1996 has not preferred any appeal.
This Court sitting in Co-ordinate jurisdiction surely cannot exercise the power of appellate jurisdiction over the decision of BP Banerjee, J whereby and whereunder the name of the present writ petitioner went outside of the list due to deduction of marks for MA qualification and the present respondent No. 8 retained his first position in the panel as age bar was condoned by the Director of School Education, West Bengal by his decision dated 17th July, 1997.
Hence, so long the judgment passed by BP Banerjee, J is existing, the writ petitioner cannot assail those points in a fresh writ application without preferring any appeal against such.
11.
Furthermore, present petitioner has not assailed the decision of DI of Schools dated 28th December, 1995 as well as of the decision of the Director of School Education, West Bengal dated 17th July, 1996, which were confirmed by the judgment of BP Banerjee, J aforesaid in the said writ petition, though the writ petitioner got the knowledge of such event at the stage when Affidavit in Opposition was served upon him and filed a reply thereto.
However, besides the aforesaid jurisdictional point to decide the question again afresh, after adjudication of the same by this Court namely BP Banerjee, J this Court is also considering the impact of statutory provision in the field in question on the issues as raised by the petitioner as the petitioner was not a party in the earlier proceeding on considering the writ application as a review application with reference to the judgment and order passed by BP Banerjee, J relying upon the judgment in the case Shivdeo Singh v. State of Punjab & Ors., reported in AIR 1963 SC 1909 a judgment of Constitution Bench, whereby and whereunder it has been settled by the Apex Court that in the event in any earlier proceeding, a person is not a party but is affected by the judgment, the party has the option to file a writ application in the nature of review of the earlier judgment and the Court will consider the same accordingly.
12.
In that view of the matter, now I have to decide the questions as raised namely (1) Whether the sponsorship of the name of respondent No. 8 Kalachand Biswas when admittedly he crossed the age of 35 years by the Employment Exchange for the present post in question relating to which he stood first, was legal and as a corollary of such whether the letter withdrawing his candidature subsequent to completion of the selection process, by the Employment Officer vide his letter dated 18th April, 1996 was legal and valid.
(2) Whether the writ petitioner Mayukh Chattapadhyay was entitled to qualification marks on account of his MA degree by the Selection Committee when admittedly on such qualification his name was not sponsored and as a corollary of such whether the letter of Employment Officer dated 9121996 whereby after completion of the selection process it was opined that qualification MA in English was required to be taken into consideration for selection for the post of Assistant Teacher is valid and legal.
(3) Whether the decision of District Inspector of Schools (SE) dated 28th December, 1995 and the confirmation of such decision by the decision dated 17th July, 1996 by the Director of School Education, West Bengal is justified and as a corollary of such, the approval order dated 101096 on recasted panel cancelling the name of writ petitioner Mayukh Chattapadhyay is valid.
13.
On the aforesaid points, it is submitted by the learned Advocate of the writ petitioner that since the writ petitioner was not a party to the proceeding before BP Banerjee, J the writ petitioner can agitate this matter when entire facts have been brought before this Court in the nature of Affidavit in Opposition and a reply has been filed by the petitioner.
It is submitted by the petitioner that since the respondent No. 8 Kalchand Biswas already crossed 35 years of age, he was not entitled to have the sponsorship of his name and to have appointment in the post in question.
It is further contended that said Kalachand Biswas is not a fit candidate for relaxation of age bar up to 40 years even as per the Recruitment Rules.
It is further submitted that writ petitioner has registered his qualification MA in National Employment Exchange at Bentinct Street on 14th June, 1995, which is annexed at page 23 of the writ application, hence, on the date 14th June, 1995 when Employment Officer, District Employment Exchange, Krishnanagar referred his name for this post in question, his qualification was required to be mentioned as MA, and on that basis sponsorship of name was required to be done.
It is further submitted that in that view of the matter, decision of the Selection Committee adding marks for MA degree irrespective of the fact that the same was not sponsored by the Employment Exchange was legal and valid and the decision of District Inspector of Schools, directing to deduct the said marks and thereby to recast the panel was illegal.
14.
It is submitted by the learned Advocate of the respondent No. 8 that as per Recruitment Rules, the writ petitioner was eligible to appear before the Selection Committee even after on crossing of 35 years of age due to the relaxation clause of age up to 40 years as mentioned in the rule.
It is further submitted that considering this aspect, such relaxation has been allowed by the Director of School Education West Bengal by his decision dated 17th July, 1996.
It is further submitted that such decision relaxing the age bar was not impugned in the writ application and the petitioner cannot urge that point.
It is further contended that judgment of BP Banerjee, J dated 12.8.96 passed in CO 6768(W) of 1996 reached its finality, the writ petitioner without assailing the said judgment before the Appeal Court cannot submit the consideration of the matter in this writ application.
It is submitted further that the writ petitioner has not amended the writ application by challenging the decision of recasting of panel and approval of the same by the DI of Schools on 101096, the decision of DI of Schools dated 20th December, 1995 and the decision of Director of School Education dated 17th July, 1996.
15.
It is submitted by the learned Advocate of the respondent No. 8 that the writ petitioner since on the date of sponsorship of the name that is on 14th June, 1995 from the Employment Office of Krishnanagar was not at all an enlisted candidate with MA degree, the reference of his name with MA degree as suggested subsequently after selection process was completed by the Employment Exchange Officer is not legal and valid.
It is further contended that writ petitioner having knowledge of everything from the School Authority did not challenge the issue and accordingly such thing cannot be reopened now.
16.
The learned Advocate of the School Authority vehemently supported the case of the present writ petitioner and agitated the issue again and tried to reopen the matter as adjudicated by BP Banerjee, J wherein School Authority was a party.
17.
Considering the rival contention, the points as formulated earlier by me is decided now:-  One point No. (1) about sponsorship of name of respondent No. 8 even after he crossed 35 years of age by the sponsorship Memo dated 14th June, 1995 and the letter withdrawing his name after completion of the selection process by the letter dated 19.4.96 of Employment Officer is now being dealt with.
In this case prior permission was accorded on 27th March, 1995 by the DI of Schools, hence, Recruitment Procedure issued by the Director of School Education, West Bengal vide memo No. 1049 (19) GA dated 20th May, 1993 hereinafter for brevity mentioned as Recruitment Procedure 1993, is the guiding procedure as such procedure was amended by subsequent memo dated 27th October, 1995.
Hence, as per Recruitment Procedure of 1993, which is binding to the Managing Committee, Selection Committee as well as the District Inspector of Schools concerned, present case to be dealt with.
The relevant rule about age bar for selection and/or appointment is mentioned in Clause 4(g) of said Procedure, which speaks as follows:- 4(a)...... 4(g) No person shall be selected for appointment unless he/she is a citizen of India and 18 years of age or above.
The maximum age limit for appointment in aided institutions is 35 years and is relaxable upto 40 years in case of experienced and highly qualified candidates as per existing Government orders.
Maximum age limit as relaxed for certain categories by Government orders from time to time shall be taken into consideration at the time of selection."
From the aforesaid procedure, it is clear that so far as the selection for appointment, there is no upper age limit but a minimum age limit of 18 years or above has been mentioned.
The maximum age limit for appointment is 35 years but it is relaxable up to 40 years under certain contingency as mentioned therein.
The words 'appointment' and 'selection for appointment' are not synonymous.
The appointment means actual posting whereas selection means empanelment, enlistment under the field of Recruitment.
The distinction of the two words recruitment and appointment as the recruitment includes selection, empanelment etc. has been considered by different High Courts and however, it is now settled that appointment and recruitment, these two words are not synonymous.
Reliance is placed on the judgments in the case C Murugan & Ors. v. State of Kerala & Ors., reported in 1981(2) SLJ 620, where V Khalid, J (as his Lordship then was) held in paragraph 17 as follows:-  "The word 'recruitment' or 'recruited' has a connotation entirely different from the word 'appointment'.
It is not necessary to seek the assistance of a dictionary for the purpose.
Recruitment signifies enlistment, acceptance, selection or approval for appointment, all stages preceding appointment.
The two words cannot be said to mean the same thing."
Cases Basant Lal Malhotra v. State of Punjab, reported in AIR 1969 Punjab 178 and Man Mohan Kaushib & Anr. v. State of Rajasthan, reported in AIR 1971 Rajasthan 60 were relied upon by the V Khalid, J wherein it is held that appointment means actual posting and recruitment means enlistment/empanelment/approval for appointment.
18.
Hence on interpretation of the statutory provision, it is clear that under Clause 4(g), there is no upper age limit of selection for appointment.
Furthermore, it is clear from the said clause that for appointment, experience and highly qualified candidate's age is relaxable up to 40 years.
From the phraseology of the words as mentioned in Clase 4(g) accordingly, it is crystal clear that even up to the stage of approval of panel by the District Inspector of Schools concerned upper age of a candidate is not a factor to be considered.
Up to the stage of approval of panel is the stage within the domain of recruitment as per Recruitment Procedure, the field of appointment starts after the approval of panel by the DI of Schools.
Taking into account of Clause 4(g) and 4(o) which provides that after approval of the panel Managing Committee will issue appointment letter to the first empanelled candidate and thereafter in terms of such appointment, approval of appointment is required to be sought for, it is clear that question of consideration of the upper age limit and relaxation actually will arise after approval of the panel, hence, crossing of 35 years is not a bar and/or embargo for selection and for that reason the name of the candidate cannot be cancelled from the panel as prepared by the Selection Committee and forwarded by the Managing Committee for approval of the DI of Schools.
If the argument of learned Advocate of the petitioner is accepted then a situation would arise when Employment Exchange Officers will have to scrutinize the upper age limit and will have to take a decision as to whether relaxation of the age up to 40 years would be allowed or not but such situation is not stated by Clause 4(g).
Clause 4(g) provides that at the time of actual appointment, the relaxation of age up to 40 years under certain contingency to be done as per existing government orders.
In the case of School Service, such condonation/relaxation of age is done by the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
Hence, as per argument of the learned Advocate of the petitioner, if it is assumed that sponsoring of a candidate who was crossed the 35 years of age, is a bar for appearance before the selection Committee, then entire Clause 4(g) so far as relaxation of age up to 40 years in terms of the Government Orders by the appropriate authority would be redundant.
Furthermore, in the pre-selection stage when there is no question of any appointment, it is not permissible to scrutinize the matter of age bar by the Employment Exchange Authority.
Even under the statute, namely Clause 4(g) of Recruitment Procedure, Employment Exchange Authority has not been empowered to scrutinize such age issue.
Under the Employment Exchange Regulation, there is no such embargo since the Recruitment of teaching and non-teaching staff is guided by the Recruitment Procedure laid down by the Director of School Education on exercise of the power under Rule 28 of the Rules of Management of recognized non-government institute (aided and unaided rules 1969) hereinafter refer to as Management Rules, 1969 and when such rule as emanated from Section 45 of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, the Recruitment Procedure has a statutory flavour and it is a binding guideline to all the Officers of the Education Department as well as Managing Committee of the School including its Selection Committee as constituted under the said procedure.
Hence, the argument of the learned Advocate of the petitioner is not legally sustainable and in my view since there is no upper age limit of a candidate to be "selected for appointment" under Clause 4(g) of the Recruitment Procedure, the appearance of the respondent No. 8 before the Selection Committee and his empanelment was not bad in law.
Now the question is whether the decision for the Employment Officer withdrawing his name after the post-selection stage by his communication dated 18th April, 1996 is legal and justified.
In the letter dated 18th April, 1996 Employment Officer has shown a cause that the respondent No. 8 was employed in a Municipality and accordingly was not entitled for relaxation of the age.
Hence, it is clear that Employment Officer has assumed the power and jurisdiction for relaxation of age bar under Clause 4(g) of the Recruitment Procedure though Recruitment Procedure never has vested such power to such Employment Officer.
Even under the Government Circulars and orders, there is no such provision that such relaxation of age bar to be considered by the Employment Officer.
The Government Circular letter to that effect about relaxation of the age bar is stipulated in Memo No. 454- Edn.
(S) dated Calcutta, the 25th April, 1983, which speaks as follows:-  "In continuation of this Department G.O.
No. 530-Edn(S) dated 2nd September, 1982, the undersigned is directed to say that after careful consideration, the Government have decided that the upper-age limit for first entry into service of Assistant teachers and non-teaching staff should ordinarily be 35 years.
The age-limit is relaxable up to 40 years for experienced and highly qualified candidates and for candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe, disabled defence personnel and physically handicapped candidates.
As regards appointment as Headmaster/Headmistress it has been decided that there will be no restriction of age for the same if appointed before superannuation, but other conditions remaining the same --10 years continuous teaching experience in recognized secondary schools immediately before the appointment shall be required in the case of appointment as Headmaster/Headmistress in non-Government secondary schools.
It may be noted that in exceptional circumstances relaxation of these conditions may be made with previous approval from Government.
From the aforesaid Government Circular Letter, it is clear that age relaxation for appointment of selected candidates after completion of selection process would be done at the time of entry in School Service.
In Rule 28 of the Management Rules, 1969, it is provided that Managing Committee will appoint the teaching and non-teaching staff as per order or direction of State Government or the Director, that is Director of School Education, West Bengal.
Further under Clause 7B of the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 it is mentioned that for interpretation/explanation of any term, expression or clause, the decision of Director of School Education shall be final.
Hence, taking into account of Rule 28 of the Management Rules, 1969, Clause 7B and 4(g) of the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 and the Government Order under Memo No. 454- Edn.
(S) dated 25th April, 1993 it is abundantly clear that in the pre- selection stage, there is no upper age limit of the candidate seeking a job in a School either in teaching and or non-teaching category.
Furthermore, Employment Officer never has been authorized to consider this aspect of relaxation of the age.
It is a settled legal position that a statutory authority must act in terms of the statute.
There is a basic difference about action of the statutory authorities qua the individual.
An individual can do whatsoever he likes except those as are not prohibited by law, whereas a statutory body must act in terms of a statute and cannot do any acts, which are not prescribed under a statute.
Hence, under the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 there is no place of Employment Officer to decide the question of age relaxation.
Further under the Government Orders as referred to above and the Management Rules, 1969 there is no scope of Employment Officer, who is a statutory authority, to decide the question of age relaxation even at the stage of pre-selection stage or thereafter.
The Statutory Authority has the limitation in exercising the power, which is a settled law, reference is made to the Article 195 at page 335 from the book "The Construction of Statutes" by Eare T Crawford which reads as follows : Express Mention and Implied Exclusion (Expression Unius Est Exclusion Alterius.
-- As a general rule, in the interpretation of statutes, the mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another thing.
It therefore logically follows that if a statute enumerates the things upon which it is to operate, everything else must necessarily, and by implication, be excluded from its operation and effect.
For instance, if the statute in question enumerates the matters over which a Court has jurisdiction, no other matters may be included.
Similarly, where a statute forbids the performance of certain things, only those things expressly mentioned are forbidden.
So also, if the statute directs that certain acts shall be done in a specified manner, or by certain person, their performance in any other manner than that specified, or by any other person than one of those named, is impliedly prohibited.
This may also include the maxim "Expressum facit cessare tacitum" (when a law designates the actors, none others can come upon the stage).
Taylor v. Taylor, 66 W Va 238, 66 S.E.
690 and reliance is placed on the judgments in the case Maniruddin Bapari v. The Chairman of the Municipal Commissioners, Dacca reported in 40 CWN 18,....., reported in 90 CWN 94, M Pentiah & Ors. v. Middala Veeramallappa & Ors., reported in AIR 1961 SC 1107, Hukam Chand Shyam Lal v. Union of India & Ors., reported in AIR 1976 SC 789 and the judgment in the case Jhikira Howrah Bus Syndicate & Ors. v. Regional Transport Authorities, Howrah & Ors., reported in 1996(1) CLJ 397.
19.
Hence, in that view of the matter, I am of the view that in terms of Clause 4(g) of the Recruitment Procedure, 1993, the respondent No. 8 who crossed 35 years of age, was entitled to have the sponsorship of his name Selection of his candidature by the Selection Committee, forwarding of his name by the managing Committee in the event of his selection with reference to the panel and the approval of the panel by the DI of Schools concerned and further I am of the view that the Employment Officer had no jurisdiction to withdraw the name on deciding the question of entitlement or disentitlement of age relaxation as taken herein and his action is absolutely without jurisdiction and nullity in the eye of law and in that view of the matter, the decision of Employment Officer dated 18th April, 1996 is set aside and quashed.
I further hold that under Clause 4(g), there is no upper age limit "for selection of a candidate for appointment" in a teaching and non-teaching post but at the time of appointment, the upper age limit is to be scrutinized and relaxation of age to be decided.
In the instant case, since such issue has been considered and decided by the Director of School Education, West Bengal, by his decision dated 17th July, 1996 at page 23 of the Affidavit in Opposition filed by the respondent No. 8 on confirming the view on age relaxation, as passed by the DI of Schools by his decision dated 28th December, 1995, there is no embargo of appointment of the respondent No. 8 on the basis of the decision of approval of panel on 10th October, 1996 passed by the DI of Schools approving his name as a first candidate of the panel and as such the respondent No. 8 is entitled to be appointed in the School in question as his age has been relaxed by the appropriate authority so far as his appointment in the post is concerned.
20.
With reference to point No. (2), qualification marks of MA degree as allotted to present petitioner qua the letter of the Employment Officer to consider such qualification as issued long after the selection process was completed is now being considered.
Procedure of allotment of marks on qualifications by the Selection Committee is also enumerated in the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 under Clause 6 under the heading "allotment of marks", which reads as follows:-  "6(a) No credit shall be given to the qualification other than the qualification mentioned by the DIS.
(SE) in the prior permission and mentioned by the Employment Exchange.
6(b) The Selection Committee shall assess those qualifications which are relevant to the post from school level and award marks.
The full marks shall be allotted in three different aspects of the candidate eligibility in the following manner."
Hence, as per Recruitment Procedure, it is clear that Selection Committee had no jurisdiction to allot any marks relating to the qualification, which were not mentioned in the prior permission Order of DI of Schools and not mentioned by the Employment Exchange Officer while sponsoring the name.
The word 'and' is conjunctive and 'not' disjunctive.
Under the prior permission order dated 27th March, 1995 issued by District Inspector of Schools, appearing at page 8 of the Supplementary Affidavit by the Secretary of the School, the following qualification has been mentioned:- Hons/MA in English preferable BT/BEd/PGBT but the Employment Exchange by his Memo KRI/P/37/95/5858(i) dated 14th June, 1995 whereby referred the names of 20 candidates did not mention the qualification MA of candidate under Serial No. 20 that is the present writ petitioner.
This document is appearing at page 10 of the Supplementary Affidavit of the School Authority.
The writ petitioner's name has been referred to by the Employment Exchange Officer with qualification BA (Hons.
)-II, hence, taking into account of Clause 6(a) which starts with the negative word 'no', the Selection Committee committed gross illegality and irregularity in violation of Recruitment Rules by allotting marks for MA degree in favour of present petitioner.
Reliance is placed on judgments of unreported case Srikanta Pal passed by Division Bench is (In FMAT 633 of 1996 & Judgment of Division Bench in case of Pintu Acharyya v. State of West Bengal, reported 1997(2) CLJ 428 which relied said unreported case of Srikanta Pal Furthermore, under the Employment Exchange Regulation, seniority of registration is a factor for sponsorship of the name of a candidate, From the Employment Exchange Registration Card of the petitioner as annexed at page 23 of the writ application, it is clear that date of registration of MA degree was 14th June, 1995, under registration No. PE/P/4811/95 and such registration was done in the office of Employment Officer at 67, Bentinct Street, Calcutta 68, that is National Employment Exchange Office, which is the authority to register the names of candidates qualified with Post Graduate Degree.
The Registration of name of Post Graduate Degree holders are not made in the local Employment Exchange of a District, but when the requisition is sent from any School to the local Employment Exchange seeking names of candidates with the qualification of Post Graduate Degree, the said authorities are required to refer the requisition to the National Employment Exchange at Calcutta, who on turn forwards the names of the candidate who would be referred to from the list of Post Graduate Degree holders as per seniority of registration.
In the instant case, it is clear on record that on 14th June, 1995 local Employment Exchange, that is Employment Officer, District Employment Exchange, Krishnanagar, Nadia, referred the names of 20 candidates including the name of the present petitioner with his qualification BA (Hons.)
to the present School.
On the same date that is 14th June, 1995, the writ petitioner registered his qualification MA in the National Employment Exchange at Calcutta.
Accordingly, as per normal procedure, even at that date there was no scope of sending name from National Employment Exchange in respect of the writ petitioner's case was concerned and as such on that particular date 14th June, 1995 there was no scope before the Employment Officer of District Employment Exchange, Nadia to incorporate the qualification MA in favour of the writ petitioner and to sponsor his name.
Under the law, there is no scope to incorporate such qualification later on and more particularly when the selection of the candidates were completed by the Selection Committee holding the interview on 27th July 1995.
Hence, letter of the Employment Officer, which has been relied upon by the writ petitioner being the letter dated 19th February, 1996 cannot be given effect to with retrospective effect for consideration, of qualification MA degree of writ petitioner by the Selection Committee as the selection was completed on 27th July, 1995.
Furthermore, under the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 once the Selection Committee completes the selection process in terms of Clause 6(1), Selection Committee becomes functus officio, hence, incorporation of such qualification and addition of marks to that by a subsequent letter in the post-selection stage of the Employment Exchange Officer is not legally tenable in terms of the Recruitment Rules 6(k) and 6(1) which reads as follows:-  "6(k) The candidates should be selected from the list sent by the Employment Exchange and no second list should be obtained.
If two or more candidates for the post of teacher secure equal marks, preference shall be given to the academically better one.
For non-teaching post seniority in age shall be counted for giving preference.
6(1) Panel shall be prepared with average of marks awarded by each of the members of the Selection Committee.
If any of the members except external expert wants to keep his opinion reserved, average shall be calculated on the marks awarded by other members."
On 27th July, 1995, when the Selection Committee interviewed the candidates in terms of Clause 6(k), the Selection Committee was required to select from the list sent by the Employment Exchange upon taking into account of the Clause 6(a) of the Recruitment Procedure.
So far as allotment of marks, since on 27th July 1995, before the Selection Committee, the qualification MA of the writ petitioner was not appearing in the Employment Exchange document namely the sponsorship list, Selection Committee had no jurisdiction to allot such marks.
Hence, allotment of such marks for MA degree de hors the Recruitment Procedure.
Hence, the decision of the DI of Schools concerned directing to deduct such marks of writ petitioner from the marks as allotted and thereby recasting of the panel was justified and legal being a decision of DI of Schools on 28th December, 1995 and as was confirmed by Director of School Education on dated 7th July, 1996.
21.
Besides such, another factor namely the instructions on submission of applicants under chapter IX of National Employment Service Manual, Vol. 1 issued by DGE and T., New Delhi and the synopsis of Instructions on Employment Exchange procedure published by Directorate of Employment, 67 Bentinct Street, Calcutta, 69 which supplement to said service manual will prove that on 14th June, 1995 there was no scope to submit name of writ petitioner as an MA pass candidate.
Relevant provisions reads as follows:-  "National Employment Service Manual, Chapter 9.
Submission of Applicants If there are more applicants on the Live Register than required for submission to the employer, and all of them are equally suitable for the vacancy, selection should be based on the seniority of registration of the applicants.
Selection for Submission--Guidance Points For submission purposes, annual list of candidates will be prepared.
This list will contain the following items:- (i) Serial Number (ii) Registration Number and NCO Code number (iii) Date of Registration (iv) Name of address (v) Date of Birth (vi) Educational qualification (vii) Experience (viii) Remarks.
The following points may be kept in view while preparing the annual list:- (i) The 'Annual List' will be prepared in respect of all those occupations for which vacancies were notified to the Employment Exchange during the past two years.
(ii) The annual list should be prepared in advance so that it could be finalized before start of the year.
The two previous years should be taken from October to September, for example for the list for 1984 the two previous years will be 1 October 1981 to 30 September 1982 and 1 October 1982 to 30 September 1983.
(iii) The number of candidates in the annual (list) for a particular occupation should be (sic) times the average number of vacancies received in the past two years.
The number should be further inflated by 10 per cent to allow for additional demands.
However, size of the list is left to the discretion of the State Directors of Employment, who do not issue necessary instructions to Employment Exchange in their States.
(iv) The provisional list so drawn may be given wide publicity through local leading Newspapers and displaying it on the Notice Board in the Employment Exchange premises to enable the candidates to point out omissions if any, within a period of 30 days.
For giving publicity to the 'Annual list' information about the dates of seniority upto which the candidates are covered in the list in different occupations and not the entire list will be published through newspapers.
(v) The final list may be displayed in the Employment Exchange and one copy may be kept in the safe custody of the Employment Officer Incharge of vacancy work.
(vi) The annual list so drawn will be valid for one calendar year.
No changes in the annual list should be made until the end of the year.
(vii) The leftover in the annual list, i.e. those who could not be submitted or placed, may be included in the next year's annual list.
(viii) Registration cards received on transfer from one Employment Exchange to another, shall be given due seniority for inclusion of their names, in the select list even after the same has been prepared.
(ix) Submission should be made in order of seniority from the select list.
(x) The submission against private sector vacancies should be made out of the annual list without observing seniority.
In other words, the private sector employers may be given freedom to select anyone from the annual list for interview selection.
Similarly employers in public sector may also have freedom to select applicants from the annual list.
However, they will have to lay down a scheme of selection in consummation (Consultation ?)
with Employment Officer, before selecting applicants.
(xi) In case of shortage categories, or where the number of candidates on the Select List are relatively smaller, submission from the Live Register can be resorted to.
It should be ensured that all the cards are available on the Live Register while making submissions.
(xii) Every candidate on the Select List should be given three chances of submission against public sector vacancies of regular long term nature (i.e. Government, Quasi Government including local bodies organisations).
There should be a gap of one month between two submissions.
However, where there is evidence to show that the submission made earlier, has not been entertained by the employer for whatever reason or the applicant has not been selected, submission before one month can also be made.
(xiii) After a candidates has been given 3 chances of submission as referred to above his name should be kept dormant till such time, all candidates on the Live Register of an employment exchange having one year seniority have been given three chances of submission.
(xiv) The card of the candidate kept dormant, shall be suitably identified, by a tab indicating on it the date of his last submission.
(xv) For private sector vacancies and specific short term, leave arrangement/casual/daily wages vancancies in the Public Sector, restrictions for submission in the scheme or rotation will not apply.
In other words, such vacancies will not be counted for this purpose.
(xvi) If the name of a candidate has been kept dormant, he will continue to be submitted against private sector vancancies, as for this sector, it is more a question of job development and winning their confidence for better utilization of Employment Exchange.
(xvii) If a particular card is lapsed/cancelled/placed, entry to this effect will also be made against the concerned registration number.
Seniority of Registration  The following aspects may be kept in view while making selection of applicants for submission employers against notified vacancies :  A.
Public Sector (i) Submission may be made in accordance with the minimum educational qualifications prescribed by employer in his vancancy not publication.
Applicants having higher qualifications may also be considered on the basis of common seniority of registration.
(ii) If the number of applicants on the Live Register conforming to the minimum qualifications prescribed by the employer is large than the required number to be sponsored the required number may be identified on the basis of seniority of registration.
(iii) In case the employer has prescribed desirable qualifications for the post and has indicated clear preference for applicants possessing higher qualifications or experience of a particular type, only such applicants who possess the desirable qualifications and experience should be sponsored as long as such persons are available on the Live Register, subject to the fulfillment of ratio of submission.
B.
Private Sector In the case of submissions against vacancies notified by private employers there should be considerable flexibility in the referral policy so that the candidates sponsored not only meet the specific requirements indicated in the requisition but are also readily aceptable to the employers.
Efforts should be the private employers feel reassured that they can give (get ?)
through the Employment Exchanges the same type of candidates what they would have got through the open advertisements.
Number of submissions  On receipt of demands, a candidate should be submitted from the annual list strictly in order of seniority in the ratio of 1:20 in case of public sector vacancies.
The State Directors may, however, have the discretion to raise this ratio in case it is considered necessary, in case the local condidtions so demand.
However, in each case, a scheme of selection should be prepared on the basis of prescribed qualifications, experience, age, etc. and the applicant selected in order of seniority from the annual list fulfilling the criteria in the scheme of selection.
Submission by Rotation  The candidate submitted thrice may be kept in dormancy for a period of six months and should not be considered for submission during this period.
A notice to this effect should be displayed at a prominent place in the Exchange premises for information of the candidates.
Pre-Submission Interviews  Applicants who are selected for submission should as a rule, and when time permits be called by means of X-43 for an interview at the Exchange, before they are sent to the employer.
The number of applicants to whom call letters are to be issued will be determined, after allowing sufficient margin for the expected lack of response.
The call letters will be issued sufficiently in advance to give applicants time to respond.
Before despatch, the registration number and NCO No. of the vacancy and brief details pertaining to the vacancy will be recorded on the X-43.
The date of issue of the X-43 order number of the vacancy etc. should be noted in the FOU on the back of the Index Card.
Similarly, the date of issue and number of applicants to whom X-43(s) have been issued will be entered in the follow-up item of the Order Card.
22.
A tick mark should be made in ink on X-2A against registration numbers of applicants who report to the Exchange in response to the call letters.
An entry FTR (failed to report) should be made in the FOU of Index Card of applicants who did not respond.
Index Cards of those who do not respond on two occasions will be lapsed unless they give an explanation for their failure to the satisfaction of the Employment Officer.
The time-limit for receipt of the explanation will be decided by the State Director.
23.
At this stage, the applicants should be given sufficient information about the vacancy such as place of work, nature of duties, promotional prospects, recruitment practices etc.
The applicants should also be briefed about the manner in which they should conduct themselves at the interview with the employer, in order to increase their chances of selection for appointment.
24.
Applicants who agree to be considered against the vacancy and found suitable in all respects should be submitted to the employer.
Where the Employment Officer considers it necessary, the consent of the applicants may be obtained in writing, and filed in the order Card alongwith the X-43.
In respect of applicants who report in response to X-43 but who are not selected for submission, an entry RNS (reported but not submitted) as appropriate will be made in the appropriate column of the index card.
The registration of an applicant who decline the owner submission on three occasions should be lapsed, where the Employment Officer is convinced that the reasons offered by him are not satisfactory.
This step should, however, be taken after careful consideration of each case on merits and under written orders of the seniormost officer in post.
The applicant may appeal to the State Director who may exercise his discretion after considering the merits of each case.
Applicants who agree to be submitted should be told in advanced that their registrations are likely to be cancelled if they subsequently fail to report to the employer for interview or decline the offer of appointment.
Issue of Introduction Card (X-3)  Each applicant finally selected for submission against the demand should be given an Introduction Card (X-3) and advised to report (normally on the same day at a prearranged time) to the employer for interview.
Details of qualifications and experience of the applicant and his date of birth/age should be correctly and clearly entered on the reverse side of the X-3, with a view to introduce the applicant effectively to the employer.
If any professional or technical qualification (e.g. the speed in typewriting and or shorthand of typists and stenographers) has not been verified or if any previous employment has not been verified or if the applicant's date of birth/age has not been verified against documentary evidence, the fact will beindicated by making the endorsement 'not verified' against the relevant entries on the introduction Card.
The signature of the applicant will be appended on the Introduction Card, and he will be advised to present the Identity Card along with the X-3 to the employer at the time of interview.
In making submissions, officers and staff should develop the quality of salesmanship by taking care not to exaggerate or under estimate anything, but keeping in view that most of the work of registration culminates in the preparation of X-3.
Therefore, every possible effort should be made to introduce the applicant to the employer in the best possible manner.
Synopsis  DNES/SL-5/1982(3C-5/73/17129-191A dt. 5.7.82  Employment Officers should scrupulously observe all the steps like tick marking on X-2A, noting of RNS, FTR, (sic) Index cards as per para 922 of NESM Vol.
I Part I (1984 issue) so that the applicants who report but decline may not get another chance of submission, out of rotation without satisfactory explanation.
DNES/SL.NO.3/1984 (3E-137/3/84/19321-88A Dt. 21.6.84).
Preparation of Annual Select List In pursuance of the State Govt. directive issued under Labour Department No. 551-Emp/2R-3/83-LW dated 26784 vide Directorate of Employment No. 3E- 137/3/84/33449-519A dt. 30.7.84 the new procedure of submission vide para 912 of NESM Vol.
I Part I has been kept in abeyance.
Ratio of submission emerged as 1:10 instead of 1:20.
ANNEXURE --- A Employment Policy Circulars GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL LABOUR DEPARTMENT From - The Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal  To - (1) The Commissioner,...... (2) The Secretary,.......... (3) The District Magistrate,........ No. 5120(60) LW Subject : Compulsory recruitment through Employment Exchanges in all non- P.S.C.
vacancies in the State Government establishments, State Government undertakings, Quasi-Government establishments and Local Bodies.
Sir, I am directed to state that Government have decided that in future all recruitment in the State Government Establishments, the State Government Undertakings, Quasi-Government Establishments and Local Bodies under the Government shall be made through the Employment Exchanges with a view to providing equal opportunity to all in the State in the matter of employment.
In pursuance of this decision, henceforward, all recruitment to posts under the Government should be made strictly according to the procedure laid down below : "(1)........ (5) Names of unemployed persons are to be forwarded to the employers by the Employment Exchanges generally in order to seniority, that is to say, strength of the period of enrolment.
The idea is that where other factors and requirements in respect of qualification are identical, priority in the matter of appointment is to be given to those who enrol their names earlier unless they have already been given adequate chance or are already employed in comparable scales.
Other provisions of the Employment Exchange Manual shall be strictly followed."
From the aforesaid National Employment Service Manual as well as the Synopsis of Instructions of Employment Exchange Procedure as mentioned above, it is clear that selection for submission is done following procedures as stated thereto.
It involves identification of candidates on the basis of seniority upon keeping note of rotational formula as stated thereto.
Furthermore, it involves pre-submission interviews of the candidates by the Employment Exchange and thereafter submission of his name which is normally called as sponsorship in pursuance of the rotational formula qua the seniority.
In the instant case on 14th June, 1995, writ petitioner registered his qualification MA in the register of National Employment Exchange at Bentinct Street, Calcutta.
From the records of this writ application, it is clear that on that very date 14th June, 1995, the Employment Officer, nadia Office at Krishnanagar submitted the names that is sponsored the names of 20 candidates to the present school relating to the post concerned wherein the writ petitioner's name as well as the name of respondent No. 8 was sponsored.
Hence applying the rotational formula and the seniority list, the qualification of the MA was not at all adjudicated and or decided for submission in respect of the writ petitioner's case is considered by the Employment Officer at Krishnanagar.
In the pre-submission stage, which is obviously prior to 14th June, 1995 when the interview was taken in respect of the candidates prior to sponsorship of the names upon preparation of a list following the rotation formula and the seniority formula, surely the writ petitioner was not called for in such pre-selection test on the basis of his MA qualification as on that date, his such qualification was not at all registered in any Employment Exchange either Local Employment Exchange or National Employment Exchange.
Hence, as soon as pre-selection stage is over and final list on the basis of rotational seniority is prepared and thereafter the same is sponsored to the concerned employer that is School Authority, the function of Employment Exchange Officer ceases for that particular list is concerned and he becomes functus officio on that issue.
Under the Employment Exchange Manual as referred to, there is no such provision that after sponsorship of the names, the Employment Exchange Officer has any power to add any qualification further.
Hence, in the instant case, the reference of MA qualification even in the post-selection stage by the Selection Committee constituted by the School Managing Committee, is de hors of the rules and regulation of Employment Exchange.
25.
On simple scrutiny of the Memo of the Employment Exchange Officer by which the names of candidates was referred to on 14th June, 1995, it is revealed that writ petitioner got his sponsorship on the basis of such rotation and seniority being qualified with BA (Hons.)
Under the Employment Exchange Regulation as soon as a person acquires higher qualification, his NCO No. and Registration No is changed.
Since the writ petitioner registered his name with qualification with BA (Hons.)
in English in 1993, he got Registration No. KM/956/93 under NCO No. 0130 and accordingly he got his seniority of sponsorship of his name as a Honours Graduate.
On scrutiny of such memorandum, it is also clear that Employment Exchange referred the names who were qualified with only BA (Hons.)
in respect of the candidates who have Registration No. between KW/432/86 and KW/956/93.
So as per the Employment Exchange Regulation since the writ petitioner became a senior candidate in respect of his registration as a Honours Graduate, he got a chance for sponsorship of his name only as a Honours Graduate.
Now the question to be looked into as to whether being a candidate qualified with MA the petitioner had such right of sponsorship on 14th June, 1995.
Besides the point that on that particular date, his name was not forwarded as MA in the District Employment Exchange Register but his name was registered on that very particular date in the National Employment Exchange.
The local Employment Exchange that is Krishnanagar Exchange had referred the names of the candidates qualified with MA degree who registered their qualification even up to the year 1995 but the said was up to Serial No. 2577 of the Registration list of 1995 namely a candidate under Serial No. 14.
Writ petitioner admittedly was a candidate who got his registration under Serial No. 4811 on qualification MA in English and his name was registered on 14th June, 1995.
For having the eligibility for sponsorship with MA degree in this School, writ petitioner was required to prove that on 14th June, 1995, all candidates registered in between Registration No. P/P/2578/95 up to the Registration No. P/P/4810/95 got the call from the Registration Office that is their names were sponsored.
The writ petitioner failed to prove such factum in terms of the rotation of sponsorship of names of the candidates as per seniority as laid down in the Employment Exchange Manual.
Hence, it is clear that there were about 2500 candidates registered with MA degree in the National Employment Exchange awaiting call prior to the writ petitioner.
It is the rule of the Employment Exchange that as soon as a person wants to have sponsorship as per higher degree, his seniority with reference to the lower degree is not counted and he starts with reference to his such higher degree.
In the instant case, if the writ petitioner wants reference of his name with MA degree from Employment Exchange then his seniority of such rotation would be counted from the year 1995, when he registered his name but not under reference to his registration of the year 1993 with qualification BA (Hons.).
Being a candidate with BA (Hons.)
and registered with the Employment Exchange under Registration under Registration No. KW-956/93 surely writ petitioner got his seniority to be sponsored on 14th June, 1995 but as a candidate qualified with MA with Registration No. P/P/4811/95 and registered on 14th June, 1995, writ petitioner surely had no seniority or sponsorship as a MA candidate on that particular date that is on 14th June, 1995, when Employment Exchange Officer of District Employment Exchange of Krishnanagar had referred the names by his Memo dated 14th June, 1995.
In that view of the matter, the communication of Employment Officer dated 19th February, 1996 for consideration of his qualification as MA in English was absolutely against the Employment Exchange Procedure and manual and Employment Exchange Officer had no power and jurisdiction to issue such communication.
It is surprising that on 14th June, 1995 a person who enlisted his qualification in Bentinct Street, Calcutta for his MA degree and on that date he is claiming sponsorship of name from Krishnanagar District Employment Exchange.
It is further surprising that the Employment Exchange Officer had issued such a letter for consideration of his such qualification.
Furthermore, without any aid of the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 particularly Clause 6A, if the matter is looked into in other angle, it is clear that writ petitioner had no right to press his MA degree for consideration for the post in question.
It is settled legal position that those qualification would be considered for consideration in respect of a post in question by the Selection Committee as are accrued prior to the last date of submission of the application form as per advertisement in newspaper.
Reliance is placed to judgment in the case Ashok Kr.
Sharma v. Chandra Sekhar, reported in 1997(2) SCT 123 (SC) : 1997(4) SCC 18 and Division Bench judgment of this Court in case of Pintu Acharyya v. State of West Bengal & Others.
reported in 1997(2) CLJ 428.
Hence as a corollary, qualifications as are accrued and registered on the date when requisition is sent to the Employment Exchange for sponsorship of the names of the candidates is the guiding factor of considering the qualification by Selection Committee as well as Employment Exchange for sponsorship.
Taking into account on that legal proposition as settled, from documents, it is found that the School Authority submitted his requisition to the Employment Exchange Officer, District Employment Exchange, Krishnanagar on 5th April, 1995 by signing such by the Secretary of the School on 4th April, 1995.
Hence, only those candidates who had BA (Hons.)
degree and/or MA degree prior to 5th April 1995 got right to be sponsored with such qualifications subject to rotation formula qua seniority of Employment Exchange manual relating to sponsorship of a candidate as I have already discused.
In that view of the matter it is clear that on 5th April, 1995 when the requisition for sponsorship of the name was received by the Employment Exchange Officer, Krishnanagar as apearing at page 9 of the Supplementary Affidavit of the School Authority, the writ petitioner did not register his such qualification in the Employment Exchange.
It is admitted fact that on 14th June, 1995 writ petitioner registered his such qualification in the National Employment Exchange, hence, on the date when the Employment Officer, Krishnanagar got the requisition from the School authority relating to vacancy of the School that is on 5th April, 1995, the writ petitioner's qualification MA was not registered with the Employment Exchange and as such relying upon the aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court, I am of the view that there was no scope for consideration of his qualification MA degree on the date of Interview on 27th July, 1995.
Hence, considering all aspects of the matter, I am of the view that decision of the Employment Officer which has been relied upon by the petitioner to contend his eligibility to get marks on qualification of MA degree in terms of the letter dated 19th February, 1996 appearing at page 12 of the Affidavit in Reply is not legally sustainable and that letter dated 19th February, 1996 since being contrary to the Recruitment Procedure, 1993 under Clause 6(A) & (B) and Clause 7(K) and (L) and contrary to the judgment of the Apex Court as relied upon is hereby set aside and quashed.
As a consequence of such, the decision of the District Inspector of Schools dated 28th December, 1995 as confirmed by the Director of School Education, West Bengal on 17th July, 1996 directing to deduct the marks of MA degree as allotted in favour of the writ petitioner was justified and as a consequence of such recasting of the panel whereby the writ petitioner's name had gone down from the Serial No. 2 of the empanelled list also was justified and legal and accordingly the decision for approval of the panel dated 10th October, 1996 is valid and legal as done by the District Inspector of Schools.
26.
Hence, considering all aspects of the matter, this writ application fails and accordingly this writ application is dismissed on merit even on considering that the writ application is nothing but a review application with reference to the judgment and order passed by BP Banerjee, J on 12th August, 1996 in CO 6867(W) of 1996.
As a consequence of the dismissal of the writ application, further necessary direction to be passed by this Court.
From the records it is clear that long back on 17th July, 1996 Director of School Education decided the matter by passing the reasoned decision confirming the view of District Inspector of Schools dated 28th December, 1995.
The Managing Committee did not implement the decision for the reasons best known to them.
Further it is found that the Managing Committee wrote the letters to the Employment Exchange Officer touching the eligibility point of respondent No. 8 on issue of age bar as well as on issue of award of qualification marks on MA degree of the present petitioner.
Even after receipt of those letters from Employment Exchange Officer, those matter when referred to the District Inspector of Schools concerned, he immediately sent those to the Director of School Education, West Bengal, who is the authority to decide and that authority when finally decided the matter, the school did not act.
Further in a contested hearing, the School Authority suffered a judgment on 12th August, 1996 on those issue in CO 6867 (W) of 1996 but did not even implement that order.
Though it is true that on 12th December, 1996 a status quo order was passed by BP Banerjee, J in this writ application but such status quo order was limited up to 19th December, 1995 and furthermore, such status quo order was as on that date which means that the decision of Director of School Education was not touched as well as the judgment passed in the earlier proceeding by BP Banerjee, J on 12.8.96 also was not modified.
School Authority did not comply with those orders and did not give appointment in favour of the respondent No. 8.
Furthermore, the school authority now has come to challenge the selection of respondent No. 8 supporting the case of the present writ petitioner.
Considering the conduct of the School Authority, accordingly after dismissal of the writ application, this Court feels that a further mandatory direction must be passed for complete justice.
Hence, School Authority more particularly the Managing Committee and the Secretary of the Managing Committee are directed hereby to issue Appointment Letter in favour of the Respondent No. 8 within a week from the date of communication of this order and to allow his joining in the School in question and after joining of the Respondent No. 8 in the School in question must refer the documents for post appointment approval within afortnight from the date of joining to DI of Schools, concerned who in turn will accord approval of appointment within a week and will release all salaries, allowances of the service benefits of the respondent No. 8.
27.
Considering the conduct of the School Authority in this case namely even after adjudication of the issue by the Writ Court earlier in CO 6867(W) of 1996 after hearing School Authority, the said authority further contested the matter and raised the same issue in this writ, the Managing Committee of the School is hereby directed to pay a cost of Rs. 5,000/- in favour of the respondent No. 8 within two weeks from this date for their conduct which is nothing but abuse of the process of law.
But on the facts and circumstances of this case, no cost is imposed upon the writ petitioner.
Stay as prayed for by the writ petitioner is refused.
Parties are granted leave to take gist of the order.
Let an urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates on behalf of the parties within a week, if not delivered, the Registrar General is directed to take steps accordingly.
Petition dismissed.