Bakhshish Kaur, J - Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as the `management') invoking the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned Award dated October 1, 1997, Annexure P-6.
2.
Wazir Singh-respondent No. 2 (hereinafter referred as the `workman') was appointed as Conductor on temporary basis.
His services were terminated by the management which gave rise to the industrial dispute and the matter was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court, Patiala, under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (in short the `Act').
3.
The date of appointment of the workman given by both the parties is distinct.
According to the workman, he was appointed as a Conductor on 1101961 and he had been working as such up to 10.10.1964.
His services were terminated without any charge-sheet, enquiry or paying any compensation.
His retrenchment is, therefore, wrongful and illegal.
4.
The management resisting the claim of the workman averred that he was appointed as a Conductor on temporary basis for one month only w.e.f.
471964 vide order No. 2298/PRTC dated 2971964.
Since the record of the workman was not good and on account of shortage of Rs. 688/- in cash, he was removed from service on 11101964 in accordance with the provisions of law.
Appeal preferred by the workman was also rejected by the Deputy General Manager, PRTC, Patiala on 231982.
Thereafter, he served a demand notice on 531982, after a lapse of about 18 years.
The award passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court in answering the reference in favour of the workman is based on misrepresentation therefore, it is not sustainable in the eyes of law.
5.
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, answered the reference in favour of the workman with a direction to the management to reinstate him with continuity of service on production of a medical certificate of fitness from the Civil Surgeon, Patiala certifying that he is fit to perform the duties of a bus conductor.
6.
I have heard Mr. Ashwani Gaur, learned counsel appearing for Mr. Rajan Gupta, Advocate for the petitioner and Mr. Parminder Singh, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2.
7.
The mainstay of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the workman had raised demand notice after 18 years of the termination of his service.
It, therefore, shows that he was not interested in the job.
The demand raised by him after a lapse of 18 years is frivolous.
In addition to this, this fact has also not been taken into consideration by the Presiding officer that the services of the workman were terminated after complying with the provisions of law and full opportunity was granted to him.
A sum of Rs. 65270 is still due from him.
Reminders were issued repeatedly but he failed to make the payment.
Since the service record of the workman was not prepared, therefore, the same could not be produced before the Labour Court.
The workman was appointed in the year 1964 and not in the year 1961 as has been set up by him.
Therefore, the finding recorded by the learned Presiding Officer that the workman had served the management from 1101961 to 10.10.1964 is not substantiated from the record.
8.
On the point of delay in raising the demand, the matter has been set at rest by the Apex Court in Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-op.
Marketing-cum- Processing Service Society Ltd, 1999(2) SCT 667 that there is no limitation prescribed for raising demand by the workman and seeking reference under the Act.
For proper appreciation of the matter the observations made by their Lordships, under paras 8, 9 and 10 (part) are as under :-  "8.
In Sakura v. Tanaji, AIR 1985 SC 1279 it was held that the provisions of the Limitation Act applied only to proceedings in courts and not to appeals or applications before the bodies other than courts such as quasi judicial tribunal or executive authorities, notwithstanding the fact that such bodies or authorities may be vested within certain specified powers conferred on courts under the Codes of Civil or Criminal Procedure.
The view taken by this Court in case Municipal Council Athani and Nityanand M Joshi v. LIC of India, 1970(1) SCR 396 was reiterated with approval.
9.
In Jai Bhagwan v. Management of the Ambala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd and another, AIR 1984 SC 286 this court declined to set aside the order of reinstatement of the workman who was shown to have approached the court after a prolonged delay.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the court directed the workman to be reinstated in service with continuity from the date on which his services were terminated but having regard to the fact that he had raised the industrial dispute after a considerable delay without doing anything in the meanwhile, he was not awarded the back wages.
The grant of half back wages from the date of termination of service until the date of order and full back wages from that date till his reinstatement was found in the circumstances to meet the ends of justice.
In HMT Ltd v. Labour Court, Ernakulam and others, 1994 LLR 720 (SC) where there was a delay of 14 years in invoking the jurisdiction of the Court, this Court found that instead of full back wages, the grant of 60 per cent of the back wages upon the reinstatement of the workman would meet the ends of justice.
10.
It follows, therefore, that the provisions of Article 137 of the Schedule to Limitation Act, 1963 are not applicable to the proceedings under the Act and that the relief under it cannot be denied to the workman merely on the ground of delay.
The plea of delay if raised by the employer is required to be proved as a matter of fact by showing the real prejudice and not as a merely hypothetical defence.
No reference to the Labour Court can be generally questioned on the ground of delay alone.
Even in a case where the delay is shown to be existing, the Tribunal, Labour Court or board, dealing with the case can appropriately mould be relief by declining to the grant back wages to the workman till the date he raised the demand regarding his illegal retrenchment/termination or dismissal....." 9.
The plea of delay raised by the management is of no avail because the provisions of Article 137 of the Schedule to Limitation Act are not applicable to the proceedings under the Act and that the relief under it cannot be denied to the workman merely on the ground of delay, as observed by the Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court, as above.
It would not be out of place to mention over here that the learned Presiding officer while ordering the reinstatement of the workman had specifically ordered that he will not be entitled to the back wages as he had stated that he does not press for back wages.
The learned Presiding Officer has also taken care of the matter whether the workman is fit to discharge his duties as a bus conductor and for that purpose he had imposed a restriction on the workman to produce the medical certificate of fitness from the Civil Surgeon, Patiala certifying that he is fit to perform the duty of a bus conductor.
10.
Now coming to the other aspect of the case which is a finding of fact regarding the date of appointment of the workman.
The management has failed to produce the relevant record before the learned Presiding Officer.
Concededly, both the parties have not placed on record the copy of the order of appointment of the workman.
A heavy responsibility lies on the shoulders of the management to controvert the plea of the workman that he was not working as a bus conductor since 1101961.
The stand taken up by the management is that the workman was appointed as conductor on temporary basis for one month only w.e.f.
471964.
11.
Under para 11 of the Award, the learned Presiding officer has observed that, "On the contrary in para 2 of the written statement the management has admitted by clear implication that the workman had served as a bus conductor and that his services were terminated by it.
Therefore, the statement on oath of the workman as WW1 that he served the management as a bus conductor from 111961 to 10.10.1964 and that he was terminated from service by the management on 11101964 without any notice, charge-sheet, enquiry or payment of compensation must be accepted as materially and substantially correct.
Therefore, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were applicable to him."
12.
Thus, the finding of fact recorded by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court does not require to be interfered with as he has recorded the finding on proper appreciation of evidence.
In this regard, reliance is placed on Mgt.
of M/s. Indian Iron and Steel Co Ltd v. Prahlad Singh, 2001(1) SCT 101.
Though, learned counsel for the petitioner has tried to derive benefit from this authority that wherein the Labour Court has given a finding that the reference was stale and due to unexplained inordinate delay no relief can be granted, the findings recorded by the Tribunal on proper appreciation of evidence cannot be interfered with by the High Court.
13.
There is no dispute to the proposition of law that High Court cannot interfere with the findings of fact recorded by the Tribunal on proper appreciation of evidence, as has been done in the given case in hand.
Rather, in this case the learned Tribunal has answered the reference in favour of the workman, though it was made after sufficient long period, yet in view of the case law laid down in Ajaib Singh's (supra), there is no limitation prescribed for raising the demand by the workman and seeking reference under the Act.
However, the Court can only mould the relief on the ground of delay by applying reasonable cut on back wages.
14.
In the present case, the workman has not been awarded the back wages.
Rather, it is a case of simpliciter reinstatement.
No ground to interfere.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.