Satyabrata Sinha, J - This application is directed against a judgment and order dated 19298 passed by the learned West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal in T.A.
No. 17 of 1996, whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioners was dismissed.
By reasons of the said order, the learned Tribunal has upheld the preliminary objection raised by the respondents herein as regard maintainability of the said application stating, "the first technical objection taken on behalf of the private respondent is that the petition is not maintainable because the petitioners are 70 in number belong to different cadres holding different posts as would be evident from the cause title.
We accept such submissions and hold that the petition in the present frame by different petitioners cannot be sustained because of mis-joinder of cause of action."
The learned Tribunal further held that the petitioners cannot be granted any relief in terms of prayer (e) inasmuch as Rule 55(4) of the West Bengal Service Rules Part I cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
The fact of the matter is as follows :  2.
The respondent No. 11 was initially appointed as Fishery Extension Officer.
He was confirmed in the said post.
His substantive pay in the said post was Rs. 1615/- in the scale of 1390-2970 on 111991.
He thereafter was appointed (said to be upon tendering resignation) in the post of L.D.
Assistant, in the scale of pay of Rs. 1400-1920/-.
The State of West Bengal by reason of an office Order dated 29th April, 1983 relying on or on the basis of Rule 42(1)(ii) of the West Bengal Service Rules, Part I, protected loss of his substantive pay by allowing him to draw a personal benefit of Rs. 25/- in addition thereto with effect from 161991 which would be absorbed in future increments.
The petitioner as noticed hereinbefore, held different posts and different cadres while the impugned order has been passed.
3.
Mr. KK Moitra, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners herein very vehemently submitted that having regard to the phraseology used in Rule 42(1)(ii) of the West Bengal Service Rules Part I quoted supra, the said order dated 29th April, 1993 could not have been passed as the said respondent had tendered his resignation and thus the question of his holding any lien does not arise.
In support of the said contention strong reliance has been placed on a decision in Comptroller and Auditor General of India v. Farid Sattar, 2000(2) SCT 468 (SC) : reported in 2000(4) S.C.C.
13.
When questioned as regards locus of the petitioners to maintain this application, the learned counsel submitted that the seniority of the petitioners would be in jeopardy.
The learned counsel further submitted that in any event, seniors cannot be paid a salary lower their junior.
4.
Question which, therefore, arises for consideration in this application is as to whether the petitioners have any locus to question the aforementioned order dated 29th April, 1993.
5.
Before proceeding to answer the said question, we may notice that although in the writ application statements have been made by the petitioners to the effect that Rule 42 of the West Bengal Service Rules, Part I has no application in the instant case, no prayer had been made for quashing the said orders as such.
As noticed supra, apart from making a prayer for issuance of a writ of Certiorari as regards an earlier order passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal in T.A.
17 of 1996 dated 19298, the main prayer of the petitioners was confined to prayer (e) aforementioned.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that only because pay of the private respondent has been protected, the seniority of the petitioners had been put in jeopardy thereby.
The petitioners in the application had also not been able to show that in the gradation list, consequent to the said order dated 29th April, 1993, they had been shown as juniors.
6.
It is now a well settled principle of law that before a writ of or in the nature of mandamus can be issued, the petitioners must show existence of a legal right in themselves and corresponding legal duty in the respondents.
Rule 55(4) of the West Bengal Service Rules, Part I, ex facie cannot be said to have any application in the instant case inasmuch as the said Rules apply only in a case of promotion.
Even in a case of upgraduation of posts, the said Rules have no application as has been held by the Apex Court in a decision in State of West Bengal v. Subal Chandra Das and Ors, 1996(2) SCT 543 (SC) : reported in 1996(7) S.C.C.
191.
This aspect of the matter has recently been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in State of West Bengal v. Gobinda Nath Dey and Others, reported in Cal.LT 1993(3) HC 495, wherein this Court held :  "The question as to whether re-designation of the Muharrirs was permissible in law came up for consideration before the Apex Court in State of Bengal v. Subal Chandra Das and Ors, reported in 1996(7) S.C.C.
91, wherein it was clearly held that such re-designation is permissible and by reason of such re-designation intermediate scale of pay can be granted to LDCs and UDCs who were recruited directly.
The contention that the LDCs are entitled to higher scale of pay was rejected stating : "The contention of Shri Verma is that Moharrirs, who were holding lower scale of pay prior to their being fused into the category as LDC, are now getting higher scale of pay as LDCs while the direct recruitment LDCs are stagnated at the same scale of pay.
Therefore, the High Court was justified in directing to create intermediate scale of pay.
We find no force in the contention.
It is seen that once Moharrirs have been redesignated as LDCs and fused into the category of LDCs all become a class.
It would appear that in an earlier litigation filed by the parties, inter se promotion between the Moharrirs and LDCs and UDCs was considered and the High Court in a writ petition had directed the Government to prescribe 1:1 ratio between Moharrirs and LDCs for promotion to the post of UDCs.
The State Government had acted upon and issued rules in that behalf.
Therefore, each source, until exhausted, has channel of promotion to UDC within their respective 50% quota.
On the Muharrirs being integrated as LDCs no further distinction or discrimination in the scale of pay or promotion chances between Moharrirs and the direct recruit LDCs in maintainable.
All are now entitled to get the same scale of pay and other service benefits.
It would appear that in some instances some of the Moharrirs, due to length of service, are getting higher pay."
Furthermore, it is well settled that the Court may not set aside even a wrong order on the ground of locus.
This aspect of the Court has been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in which one of us was a member, in State of West Bengal v. Anil Chandra Chowdhary, reported in 2000(1) C.L.J.
39, wherein this Court noticed the law laid down by the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Gurdev Singh, 1991(3) SCT 91 (SC) : reported in A.I.R. 1991 SC 2219, in the following term :-  "5.
In the instant case, the respondents were dismissed from service may be illegally.
The order of dismissal has clearly infringed their right to continue in the service and indeed they were precluded from attending the office from the date of their dismissal.
They have not been paid their salary from that date.
They came forward to the Court with a grievance that their dismissal from service was no dismissal in law.
According to them, the order of dismissal was illegal, inoperative and not binding on them.
They wanted the Court to declare that their dismissal was void and inoperative and not binding on them and they continue to be in service.
For the purpose of these cases, we may assume that the order of dismissal was void, inoperative and ultra vires, and not voidable.
If an act is void or ultra vires it is enough for the Court to declare it so and it collapses automatically.
It need not be set aside.
The aggrieved party can simply seek a declaration that it is void and not binding upon him.
A declaration merely declares the existing state of affairs and does not `quash' so as to produce a new state of affairs.
6.
But nonetheless, the impugned dismissal order has at least a de facto operation unless and until it is declared to be void or nullity by a competent body or Court.
In Smith v. East Elloe Rural District Council, (1965) AC 736 at page 769 Lord Radcliffe observed :  "An order even if not made in good faith is still an act capable of legal consequences.
It bears no brand of invalidity upon its forehead.
Unless the necessary proceedings are taken at law to establish the cause of invalidity and to get it quashed or otherwise upset, it will remain as effective for its ostensible purpose as the most impeccable of orders."
7.
Apropos to this principle, Prof. Wade states : "the principle must be equally true even where the `brand of invalidity' is plainly visible; for there also the order can efectively be resisted in law only by obtaining the decision of the Court (see : Administrative Law, 6th End.
P. 352).
Prof. Wade sums up these principles :  "The truth of the matter is that the Court will invalidate an order only if the right remedy is sought by the right person in the light proceedings and circumstances.
The order may be hypothetically a nullity, but the Court may refuse to quash it because of the plaintiff's lack of standing, because he does not deserve a discretionary remedy, because he was waived his rights, or for some other legal reason.
In any such case, the `void' order remains effective and is in reality valid.
It follows that an order may be void for one purpose and valid for another, and that it may be void against one person but valid against another."
(Ibid p.
352)."
So far as the locus of the petitioners is concerned, we are of the opinion that the petitioners in this case have no locus as they cannot be said to be directly or indirectly adversely affected by reason of the impugned order.
Even in the matter of appointment, where a writ of certiorari is prayed for, the person filing the writ application must be a person aggrieved.
In RK Jain v Union of Inida, 1993(4) SCT 181 (SC) : reported in 1993(4) S.C.C.
119, the Apex Court has held, "Shri Harish Chander, admittedly was the Senior Vice-President at the relevant time.
The contention of Shri Thakur of the need to evaluate the comparative merits of Mr. Harish Chander and Mr. Kalyansundaram a senior-most member for appointment as President would not be gone into in a public interest litigation.
Only in a proceedings initiated by an aggrieved person it may be open to be considered.
This writ petition is also not a writ of quo warranto.
In service jurisprudence it is settled law that it is for the aggrieved person i.e. non-appointee to assail the legality of the offending action.
Third party has no locus standi to canvass the legality or correctness of the action.
Only public law declaration would be made at the behest of the petitioner, a public-spirited person."
7.
For the reasons aforementioned, we agree that the findings of the learned Tribunal that the petitioners had no locus standi to maintain the writ application, particularly when they could not be granted substantive relief as prayed for in prayer (e) aforementioned.
8.
The decision of the Apex Court in Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 2000(2) SLR 636 (SC) (supra), cannot be said to have any application whatsoever inasmuch as therein the Apex Court was considering a case of transfer.
In that case the respondent has sought for transfer.
The order of transfer was based on his prayer on certain terms and conditions which had been accepted by him.
It was, therefore, held that ignoring such terms and conditions of the transfers he cannot be allowed to challenge his pay which had been fixed with reference to the lower pay scale and not with reference to the pay drawn by him in the higher post, since in terms of the said order of transfer, he was to be considered as direct recruit in the lower post.
It is in that situation, the Apex Court has held that the pay the respondent was drawing in the higher post was not required to be protected.
The said decision, in our considered opinion, cannot be said to have any application whatsoever in the instant case.
9.
For the reasons aforementioned, there is no merit in this application which is dismissed with the aforementioned observation.
There will be no order as to costs.
Dismissed.