Amitava Lala, J - This writ petition relates to the appointment in the post of Assistant Teacher in the Primary School by adding the marks in BT/BEd/PGBT etc. while under Rule 2(n) of the notification being No. 768-Edn (P) dated 22nd November, 1991, the qualification for the purpose of appointment of the trained candidate as Primary Teacher is as follows :  "Trained candidate" means a candidate who has obtained a Junior Basic Training Primary Teachers Training Certificate or equivalent issued under the authority of the Director or any other officer empowered in this behalf by the Government."
2.
The grievance of the petitioners is that at the time of considering their appointments the marks obtained at par their qualifications were not added.
In the affidavit-in-reply the petitioners added two memorandums being Memo No. 306-SC/1 dated 7th February, 1967 and Memo No. 3283(16)/SC/P dated 27th July, 1971, wherein it was directed by the Director of Public Instruction, West Bengal, that there may not be any objection to treat the BT, B.Ed.
P.G.BT teachers who are at work in the Primary School as `A' category teachers.
It also appears from one of the Memorandums that such candidates may be recruited on condition that they will be treated at par with the Trained Mat/Schools Final/Higher Secondary passed candidates for the purpose of scale of pay.
The earlier Memorandum dated 7th February, 1967 says that the candidates will be treated as `A' category teachers for the purpose of payment of Government grants on deficit basis to the Schools in which the such teachers are at work.
3.
Therefore, if a conjoint reading is made in respect of two Memorandums the following points will be available as follows :  (a) M.A.BT/B.A.BT/P.G.BT/BT being graduate teachers are at work in the Primary Schools may be treated as `A' category teachers; and (b) Such candidates may be recruited on conditions at par with Trained Mat/School final Higher/Secondary passed candidates for the purpose of scale of pay.
Therefore, such circulars were issued by the concerned Director of Public Instruction not only in respect of the teachers who are in service but also to those teachers who are to be recruited.
4.
Mr. Dipak Banerjee, learned counsel appearing in support of the writ petition contended before this Court by citing a judgment in the case of Bidhubhusan Ghosh v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1998(1) CLJ 554, that no reasonable man with ordinary prudence can hold that Basic Training and Primary Teachers' Training Certificate holders are competent than that of B.Ed.
Degree holders.
Accordingly, the word `equivalent' used in sub-section (n) of Section 2 of the Act includes the B.Ed.
Degree.
Graduate having a B.Ed.
Degree must be considered as superior.
Person who has obtained higher training cannot be said to be disqualified.
It cannot be the intention of the legislature that the B.Ed.
Degree obtained from a University amounts to a disqualification on the ground that the same is inferior to Junior Basic Training/Primary Teachers' Training Certificate or equivalent.
Therefore, it is high time to ascertain the position once again in respect of the appropriate meaning of Section 2(n) of the Recruitment Rules under Memorandum No. 768-Edn(P) dated 22nd November, 1991 read with Memorandums dated 7th February, 1967 and 27th July, 1971 in the light of the judgment as referred to above.
Although it is contended by Mr. Rabilal Moitra, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, that the circulars in the years 1967 and 1971 cannot have any prevailing effect over and above the Rule which has already been framed in the year 1991 and no fresh circular has been issued in connection thereto but even in absence of such circular what is to be purport of Rule 2(n), the same has to be considered by the Court once again in the light of the judgment delivered by a single Bench of this Court in 1998(1) CLJ 554 (supra).
5.
It is to be remembered that although the single Bench judgment may not have any binding effect upon another single Bench but to keep the parity in between judicial pronouncements it is desirable the court of similar strength will follow the earlier judgment or refer the matter for the purpose of decision by a larger Bench but such pronouncement by the subsequent similar Bench will be made on the basis of the circumstances of each case.
It appears, in the instant case, that it is not much relevant at what stage the Rule will be applied, i.e. at the stage of work in progress or at the stage of recruitment or at the stage of promotion from the Assistant Teacher to Head Teacher.
It appears that the observation of the earlier Court has been made principally on the basis of appropriate implication of Rule 2(n) as above.
If it is so, there cannot be any variation of applicability of such Rules either in case of giving appointment or progress of work or at the time of any promotion to the post of Head Teachers etc.
There should be uniformity in respect of applicability of the Rules.
Nowhere under Rule 2(n) it is prescribed that it will be applicable at what stage.
Therefore when the Rule is silent and admittedly Rule will override the circular, the same will be applicable in each and every stage of service.
6.
Mr. Banerjee, learned Advocate for the petitioner, in support of his contentions also cited other judgments which are as follows :  1994(2) SCT 87 (P&H) : 1994(6) SLR 158 (Bimla Devi v. State of Haryana and others), 1991(2) SCT 364 (P&H) : 1991(2) SLR 299 (Manvinder Kaur v. State of Punjab and others), 1991(3) SLR 696 (Dr. Brahm Dutt v. State of Haryana and others), 1999(2) All India Services Law Journal 148 (Mr. Menmo Furtado v. State Bank of India by its Chairman and others).
7.
From the first judgment I get that by applying the Article 16 of the Constitution of India, the qualification of J.BT (Junior Basic Training) was considered equivalent for the purpose of initial recruitment by specifically holding that once a particular qualification is considered equivalent to another qualification, then the equivalence would ensure (enure ?)
the entire service including promotion and not for initial recruitment only.
It is held in the second judgment as referred above that the objection behind prescribing the minimum academic and professional qualifications is only to ensure that only qualified candidates having the academic and professional qualifications/training should be recruited to the service and not that the candidates with higher, better or equivalent qualification should be rendered ineligible on hyper-technical objections.
It was held in the third judgment as referred to above that qualification which is considered by the respondents equivalent for the purpose of initial appointment cannot be treated differently by granting increment while making promotion in fauture.
In the last aforesaid judgment a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court specifically held that as per the general rule "larger includes smaller" fittingly applies to the present case.
Therefore, there is absolutely no sound justification or reason for treating an employee with Post-graduate Degree as being not eligible for the benefit of graduate in increment/allowance.
Therefore, these are the judgments which are considered by this court as well as a single Bench judgment as delivered by this court and upon considering the same I am of the view that the candidates having higher qualifications aforesaid are eligible in all respects.
Save and except the argument of Mr. Moitra, learned Advocate for the respondent, on account of the circulars made in the year 1967 and 1971 are only in respect of scale of pay not fruitful submission came forward to defend the case.
Moreover, if it is admitted position that the same are superseded by the Rule, such Rule does not prescribe that it will be restricted only in respect of scale of pay only.
It is made in respect of entire process from the very beginning.
8.
A further plea was taken as to whether the panel has been exhausted or not and to that extent Mr. Banerjee, learned Advocate for the petitioner in support of his contention cited a judgment in the case of State of UP v. Ram Swarup Saroj, 2000(2) SCT 328 (SC) : reported in 2000(3) SCC 699, wherein it was held by the Supreme Court that the life of the panel cannot be expired during pendency of litigation.
In the instant case, actually the life of the panel has expired during the pendency of the writ petition.
Therefore, following the judgment of the Supreme Court and by applying the principle of lis pendens I hold that the panel has not been exhausted.
9.
Therefore, after taking into totality of the circumstances and also considering position of law I hold that the petitioners are entitled to the relief under the writ petition.
Therefore, I direct the Chairman, Ad hoc Committee, Dist.
Primary School Council, Nadia, respondent No. 5, to reassess the qualification in the light of the judgment of this court and if it is found that the petitioners are within the zone of consideration of as in principle of law as laid down hereunder, they should be given appointments within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order.
10.
With the above observations, the writ petition is disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of this order if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the parties within 7 days from the date of submitting of the requisites.
Orders accordingly.