M.HS Ansari, J - The question for consideration in the instant writ application is whether candidates who are entitled to be admitted on the basis of merit though belonging to a reserved category (OBC) can be considered to be admitted against seats reserved for reserved category (OBC).
2.
The question posed as above is no longer res-integra.
It has been decided by the Supreme Court in several judgments reference to which will be made at the appropriate juncture.
3.
Brief facts, in the circumstances, only need to be noticed.
They are that for filling up the post of Assistant Teachers in primary schools under the District Primary School Council, North, 24-Paraganas, names were requisitioned from the Employment Exchange.
The petitioners who are admittedly candidates in the reserved category (OBC) were sponsored by the employment exchange.
Based upon their qualifications petitioners amongst others were short listed for being called for the interview.
However, the petitioners after interview were not selected or empanelled.
The main thrust of the petitioners challenge, however, is to the preparation of the panel.
The main contention is that the quota reserved for OBC candidates has not been adhered to and candidates from OBC category have not been given appointment based upon the quota fixed by the State.
4.
In the affidavit-in-opposition, the stand of the respondent District Primary School Council is as under :  "Thereafter the final merit list (Panel) of such number of candidates as their were vacancies (Notified) plus 10% of such notified vacancies was prepared upon maintaining the statutory reservation quota for SC, ST, PH and OBC candidates.
It is further stated that as the Rule does not require for making a separate list for OBC candidates like the aforesaid reserve category candidates, they were included in the list of other eligible candidates maintaining their statutory 5% reservation quota out of the above said total number of notified vacancies within the said unreserved list meant for all other groups of candidates.
I may further state that 50% of the notified vacancies would be 70, whereas the total number of empanelled OBC candidates in the said combined list of all other candidates are 103.
Thus OBC persons have secured much more than 5%of the total number of notified vacancies.
A list of empanelled OBC candidates is annexed hereto as Annexure `E'.
I further state that the said final merit list in the form of panel was duly approved by the Selection Committee in its meeting held on 28.7.98."
Yet again, in the affidavit-in-opposition, it is stated as under;  "I state that four separate final merit list of candidates in the form of panel were prepared under Rule 9 @ mentioned above.
I further state that as indicated above the OBC candidates were identified by the Employment Officer as OBC as per their own rules obviously with a view to fill up 5% of the vacancies with the OBC candidates as per statutory provision in this regard.
As the Rules do not provide for making a separate merit list for OBC candidates, the successful OBC candidates were included in the combined merit list for all other category of candidates identified by the Employment Exchange as unreserved category of candidates as per their own rules.
As stated in the foregoing paragraphs, the reserved quota of OBC being 5% of the notified vacancies; whereas the total number of the OBC candidates selected for appointment and already appointed from the empapelled list is 103 as would appear from chart at Annexure `E'.
Thus the total number of OBC candidates appointed from the said panel is above 7% which is more than the said statutory reserve quota of 5%.
The provision in rules 8 and 9 of the New Rules, 1991 framed by the State Government under Section 106(i) of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 were strictly followed by the staff Selection Committee in preparing the panel as stated above.
The said Rule 9(d) fixed 20 marks for training certificate obtained in JBT/PTT or equivalent as defined in rule 2(n) and in terms of Rule 9(b)(iv) the trained candidates are required to be credited percentage of the full marks obtained by them in those training examination."
5.
The stand of the respondents thus appears to be that the reserved category candidates (OBC) have been included in the combined merit list and as their number in the said list is more than the statutory reserved quota, the question of preparing separate quota/panel for them does not arise.
It is in light of the said stand that the question as noticed supra, has been framed that is the only question for consideration in the instant writ application.
6.
Mr. Banerjee, ld.
Counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners who belonged to the OBC category have been denied the benefit of the reservation provided for them by the illegal action of the respondent authority.
The candidates belonging to the reserved category (OBC) who have been admitted on their own merit and selected thereby cannot be considered against the reserved seats.
Mr. Banerjee has relied upon the judgments of Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India and others, 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) : 1992(6) SCC 210; RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : 1995(2) SCC 745; Ritesh R Sah v. Dr. YL Yamul and others, 1996(2) SCT 525 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1378; M. Sreedevi v. University of Medical Sciences, AP and others, 2001(1) SCT 100 (SC) : JT 2000(8) SC 314.
7.
The West Bengal Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 (Act 1 of 1993) was enacted to constitute a State Commission for backward classes other than the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and to provide for matters connected therewith.
Under Section 9, the functions of the Commission have been laid down.
Its function is to examine request for inclusion of any class of citizens as backward class in the lists and hear complaints of over inclusion or under inclusion of any backward class in such lists and tender such advice to the Government as it admits appropriate.
Sub-section (2) thereof states that the advice of the Commission shall ordinarily be binding upon by the State Government.
8.
By a department Notification No. 346 dated 13th July, 1994 backward classes as defined in Clause (a) of Section 2 of the West Bengal Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 (West Bengal Act 1 of 1993) have been specified in the list as defined in clause (c) of Section 2 of the said Act.
9.
By a GO No. 347-TW/EC dated 13th July, 1994 issued in the name of the Governor in pursuance of the provisions of clause @ of Section 2 reservation in services and posts including the primary, secondary and higher secondary schools have been provided for and 5% of such posts have been directed to be reserved for Backward Classes.
By a GO No. 1056-BCW dated 6th November, 1997, the percentage of vacancies to be reserved for such backward classes of citizens was raised from 5% to 7%.
By a Notification issued in the name of the Governor being GO No. 735-BCW dated 8th April, 1999 a proviso has been added which reads as under :  "Provided that the member of any Backward Classed candidate qualifying on merit for appointment to unreserved vacancy in a service or post in any establishment to be filled up by direct recruitment shall not be deducted from the quota reserved in such service or post for such candidate."
10.
There is thus no dispute that for Backward Classes citizen reservation has been provided for filling up the post of Assistant Teachers in primary schools.
The stand of the respondents also is that such effect has been given and candidates more than the reservation provided for have been empanelled and selected for the post.
No separate panel or quota, however, has been prepared for OBC candidates for the reason that more than the reserved quota of candidates in OBC category find place in the merit list and the second reason being that the rules do not provide for preparation of a separate panel for OBC candidates.
11.
The judgments relied upon by Mr. Banerjee, ld.
Counsel for the petitioner unequivocally lay down the law on the question posed for consideration.
It has been clearly held that a candidate who is admitted on the basis of merit though belonging to a reserved category cannot be considered to be admitted against seats reserved for reserved category.
Such candidates will be treated as open competition candidates.
12.
In case Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Suppl(3) SCC 210(217) : 1992 AIR SCW 3682, commonly known as Mandal's case, the Supreme Court in paragraph 811 held thus :-  "In this connection it is well to remember that the reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a communal reservation.
It may well happen that some members belonging to, say, a Scheduled Castes get selected in the open competition filed on the basis of their own merit they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes; they will be treated as open competition candidates."
13.
In RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, 1995 AIR SCW 1371, Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered the question of appointment and promotion and roster points vis-a-vis reservation and held as follows;  "When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserved categories and the candidates belonging to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserved posts.
On the other hand the reserve category candidates can compete for the non-reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India permits the State Government to make any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any Backward Class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State if not adequately represented in the Services under the State.
It is, therefore, incumbent on the State Government to reach a conclusion that the Backward Class/Classes for which the reservation is made is not adequately represented in the State Services.
While doing so the State Government may take the total population of a particular Backward Class and its representation in the State Services.
When the State Government after doing the necessary exercise make the reservation and provides the extent of percentage of posts to be reserved or the said Backward Class then the percentage has to be followed strictly.
The prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply because some of the members of the Backward Class have already been appointed/promoted against the general seats.
As mentioned above the roster point which is reserved for a Backward Class has to be filled by way of appointment/promotion of the member of the said class.
No general category candidate can be appointed against a slot in the roster which is reserved for the Backward Class.
The fact that considerable number of members of a Backward Class have been appointed/promoted against general seats in the State services may be a relevant factor for the State Government to review the question of continuing reservation for the said class but so long as the instructions/rules providing certain percentage of reservations for the Backward Classes are operative the same have to be followed.
Despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the Backward Classes against the general category posts the given percentage has to be provided in addition."
14.
In Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan, 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC) : 1995(6) SCC 684 at 705 : 1995 AIR SCW 4309, it has been held that while determining the number of posts reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the candidates belonging to reserved category but selected/promoted on the rule of merit (and not by virtue of rule of reservation) shall not be counted as reserved category candidates.
15.
In Ritesh R Shah, 1996(5) SLR 135 (SC) cited supra, it was held in paragraph 13 as under :  "There cannot be any dispute with the proposition that if a candidate is entitled to be admitted on the basis of his own merit then such admission should not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or any other reserved category since that will be against the Constitutional mandate enshrined in Article 16(4)."
16.
Whatever doubt the respondent authorities entertained in this behalf, the same stands dispelled by the GO No. 735-BCW dated 8th April, 1999 (extracted supra) whereby the proviso was added.
It is clarificatory in nature and is in accordance with the law laid down by the Supreme Court, as noticed above.
17.
In the circumstances, it must be held that the member of any Backward Classes candidate qualifying on merit and based thereon is empanelled such empanelment of such candidate(s) shall not be deducted against the quota reserved for such category of candidates.
18.
Consequently, it has to be held that the respondent authority, has committed a mistake to the detriment of the candidates of the Backward Classes in the preparation of the panel and selection of such candidates for the posts of primary teachers.
Effect has not been given to the reservation and percentage of posts reserved for Backward Classes erroneously.
19.
This is amply demonstrated by the averments in the affidavit-in- opposition filed on behalf of the respondents No. 4 and 5 and extracted supra.
Even, from the panel of unreserved category, it is seen that the candidates belonging to Backward Classes are included therein are on their own merit and no separate quota or panel has been prepared for them.
Out of 761 candidates in the said panel of unreserved category, the candidate who obtained the rank 761 (general category) obtained 4735 marks and the Backward Class candidate who secured the rank 751 and is included in the said list obtained 4750 marks.
20.
It was strenuously urged by Mr. Basu that the respondents have acted in accordance with the Recruitment Rules.
It was strenuously urged by Mr. Basu that there is no provision under the Recruitment Rules for preparing a panel for Backward Classes.
The Recruitment Rules, it was urged, only provide for preparation of panel in SC, ST and Handicapped persons.
No separate panel is to be provided for OBC candidates and, therefore, no such panel has been prepared but the candidates have been considered in the OBC category and included in the panel for unreserved category.
21.
Mr. Basu sought to rely upon those line of cases wherein the Court held that no directions can be issued by a Writ Court in contravention of the Recruitment Rules.
It was, therefore, urged that when there is no provision in the Recruitment Rules for preparation of a panel for OBC candidates, it would not be proper for the Court to issue any directions for preparation of such panel.
22.
The aforesaid contention is misconceived.
On the one hand, it is being contended that effect has been given to the reservation for OBCs to the extent prescribed in the Government Notifications and on the other hand, it is sought to be contended that no quota or panel can be prepared for OBC candidates.
23.
Once the State has validly prescribed the quota or reservation for posts for being filled up by SC, ST, Handicapped and OBC candidates, it is only the remaining posts that can be filled up by general category candidates.
In other words, the seats for general category or open competition candidate is reduced by the percentage or quota reserved for such reserved category of candidates.
The candidates even though belonging to the reserved category (SC, ST, OBC) get selected in open competition filed on the basis of their own merit, they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes.
They shall be treated as open competition candidates.
24.
The Recruitment Rules have to be read harmoniously with the Government orders with regard to the reserved category of candidates.
Section 107 has been inserted in the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 by Amendment Act 19 of 1994.
Under the said Section 107 power has been reserved to the Government to issue any notification or order not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act in place of making rules under the said Act if the Government considers it necessary so to do.
The notifications issued by the Government, it admits of no doubt, have to be given effect to even if no rule has been made in that behalf.
25.
Next, Mr. Basu sought to contend that the panel having been approved on 10th December, 1998 and pursuant thereto appointments have been offered to the selected empanelled candidates, no directions as prayed for in the instant writ application can be issued after the life time of the panel which was for a period of one year from the date of approval.
The said contention overlooks the factual aspect obtaining in the instant case.
The instant writ application was instituted on 25.2.1999 that is during the life time of the panel and six (6) posts being equivalent to the number of petitioners, by an interim order dated 5399, the respondent District Primary School Council was directed not to fill up six(6) posts of Assistant Teachers without the leave of the Court from the panel in question.
26.
The further submission of Mr. Basu, ld.
Counsel for the respondents No. 4 and 5 is that the candidates who have been offered appointment not having been impleaded in the instant writ application no directions can be issued.
It must be stated here that there is no provision in the recruitment Rules nor any practice obtaining by the respondent Primary Council of publishing the result of the selections for the posts of Assistant Teachers.
Even the selected candidates would not know whether they have been selected and when the panel was approved.
They would also not know their position in the panel.
The candidates such as the petitioners who have not been empanelled would have no way of knowing as to who are the candidates selected and would be affected by the orders if any that may be passed on their application.
The panels prepared are kept in a register and even the respondents have not chosen to state in their affidavit-in-opposition, the candidates that are or would be likely to be affected by the orders in the instant writ application and who should be made parties.
The question as to non-joinder of parties and particulars of such parties ought to have been raised in the affidavit-in- opposition.
27.
In Purushottam v. Chairman, MSEB and another, reported in 2000(1) SCT 1121 (SC) : 1999(6) SCC 49, the Supreme Court considered the question of the right of the petitioner to be appointed against the post to which he has been selected in the light of the question of life of panel expiring during the period of litigation and usurpation of the posts by somebody else on account of the erroneous decision of the authority.
It was held as follows :  "The right of the appellant to be appointed against the post to which he was been selected cannot be taken away on the pretext that the said panel has in the meantime expired and the post has already been filled up by somebody else.
Usurpation of the post of somebody else is not on account of any defect on the part of the appellant, but on the erroneous decision of the employer himself.
In that view of the matter, the appellant's right to be appointed to the post has been illegally, taken away by the employer.
We, therefore, set aside the impugned order and judgment of the High Court and direct the Maharashtra State Electricity Board to appoint the appellant to the post for which he was duly selected within two months from today.
We make it clear that the appointment would be prospective in nature."
For the reasons aforestated, the impugned panel requires to be recast and modified and it is accordingly directed.
28.
In the result, the writ application is allowed with a direction upon the Director of School Education (Primary), the respondent No. 2 to exclude from the panel candidates who belong to the general category after considering the case of the 6 (six) petitioners based upon the marks, obtained by them and if they qualify for being empanelled in the quota reserved for OBC candidates then and in that event appointment shall be offered to the petitioners, if necessary by recasting the panel to that limited extent.
The said exercise, however, shall be taken up by the Director of School Education (Primary), the respondent No. 2 herein and thereafter action shall be taken thereon in accordance with the law within the period of six weeks from the date hereof.
WP No. 4871(W) of 1999  29.
The case of the petitioners in the instant case is similar to the petitioner in WPNo.
4870(W) of 1999 and similar interim orders dated 5399 had been granted by Court not to fill up for posts of Assistant Teachers.
30.
For the elaborate reasons in the WPNo.
4870(W) of 1999, as above, similar directions shall issue in the instant writ application as under;  31.
In the result, the writ application is allowed with a direction upon the Director of School Education (Primary), respondent No. 2 to exclude from the panel candidates who belong to the general category after considering the case of the four petitioners based upon the marks obtained by them and if they qualify for being empanelled in the quota reserved for OBC candidates then and in that event appointment shall be offered to the petitioners, if necessary by recasting the panel to that limited extent.
The said exercise, however, shall be taken thereon in accordance with the law within a period of 6 weeks from the date hereof.
CAN 7291 of 1999 & CAN 6594 of 1999 32.
The applicants claimed to be OBC candidates and have filed the respective applicants for being impleaded as party petitioners in the writ petition being WP No. 4871(W) of 1999.
A party can be transposed as petitioner if he is a respondent or can be impleaded as party respondent if the applicant is a necessary or property party.
The applicant in the instant case, if aggrieved by any action of the respondent authorities ought to have filed writ applications seeking such relief as was open of them.
If the applicants are impleaded as prayed for, then the writ application in so far as the applicants are concerned shall as regards them (applicants) be deemed to have been instituted when they have been made party (as of today).
In that event, the writ application would be one having been instituted long after the life of the panel.
For the said reason, I am not inclined to allow the said application as no useful purpose, in my view, would be served by the impleading them as petitioners.
The impleading applications are accordingly dismissed.
WP No. 4869(W) of 1999.
33.
The petitioners belonged to the general category candidates and have passed High School (old) Examination and possessed Training Certificates.
They have questioned the action of the respondent District Primary School Council in the matter of preparation of panel for appointment to the posts of primary teachers.
34.
Mr. AB Chatterjee, ld.
Counsel for the petitioners contended that by treating the HS (old) candidates along with the candidates who have subsequently passed qualifying examination and thereby unequals have been treated equally.
35.
A contention was also sought to be raised that the Selection Committee has not awarded marks in accordance with the law.
The writ application, however, is bereft of particulars in regard thereto.
No particulars have been furnished as to how the petitioners are aggrieved by the action of the Selection Committee in awarding the statutory marks according to norms.
36.
As regards the contention of the petitioners that by considering the candidates such as petitioners of old HS with the subsequent new Madhyamik Examination, the matter is one of policy relating to prescribing of qualifications.
A writ court cannot examine such policy or reframe it.
For filling up the posts of primary teachers, qualifications have been prescribed and it is not the case of the petitioners that ineligible candidates have been considered overlooking the claim of the petitioners.
37.
The writ petition accordingly lacks merits and WP No. 4869(W) of 1999 is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this judgment and order be furnished to the appearing parties, expeditiously if applied for.
Orders accordingly.