SB Sinha, J - In this writ application the petitioner has, inter alia, prayed for issuance of a writ of or in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his representation for appointment on compassionate ground on account of death of his father on 23.11.1977 who was a mazdoor of the Forest Department.
At the point of time when his father died the petitioner was a minor.
It appears from his representation dated 23788 as contained in Annexure `D' to the writ application, at that point of time he attained the age of 21 years.
2.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the case of the petitioner should have been considered by the Administration on humanitarian ground but the law in this regard is well settled.
The provision for appointment on compassionate ground has been made in order to ameliorate the immediate difficulties which may be faced by the family of the deceased.
Such a policy decision to appoint the heirs of an employee who has died in harness is by way of exception to Clause (2) of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is now well settled in view of several decisions of the Apex Court as also this Court that the right to apply for appointment on compassionate ground arises immediately on the death of the employee concerned.
3.
In Director of Education (Secondary) v. Pushpendra Kumar reported in 1998(5) SCC 1992 : 1998(2) SCT 790 (SC), the Apex Court held -  "The object underlying a provision for grant of compassionate employment is to enable the family of deceased employee to tide over the sudden crisis resulting due to death of the beard-earner which has left the family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
Out of pure humanitarian consideration and having regard to the fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a provision is made for giving gainful appointment to one of the dependents of the deceased who may be eligible for such appointment.
Such a provision makes a departure from the general provisions of making appointment by following prescribed procedure.
It is in the nature of an exception to the general provisions.
An exception cannot subsume the main profession (provision ?)
and thereby nullify the main provision by taking away completely the right conferred by the main provision.
Care has, therefore, to be taken that a provision for grant of compassionate employment, which is in the nature of an exception to the general provisions, does not unduly interfere with the right of other persons who are eligible for appointment to seek employment against the post which would have been available to them, but for the provision enabling appointment being made on compassionate grounds of the dependent of a deceased employee."
4.
The petitioner at that point of time was a minor and, therefore, did not have any right of appointment.
Such a right of appointment cannot be fructified when he attains majority.
It is also well settled that appointment on compassionate ground cannot be directed to be made after a long lapse of time.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Swamy's Hand Book for Central Government Servants as regard relaxation of age which is in the following terms:-  "Maximum age limit may be relaxed wherever necessary, but no relaxation is permissible in the minimum limit of 18 years.
If the ward is below 18 years of age at the time of death of the Government servant and if he alone is available for employment, he should apply as soon as he attains 18 years."
5.
The said rule runs counter to the submission of learned Counsel for the petitioner inasmuch as, the petitioner could not have been appointed, as noticed hereinbefore, as the cause of action for obtaining an appointment on compassionate ground arose only immediately after his father's death.
6.
On the other hand, the direction of the Government of India in this regard is to the following effect:-  "(a) Ministries/Departments can consider requests for compassionate appointment even where the death or retirement on medical grounds of a Government servant took place long back, say five years or so.
While considering such belated requests it should, however, be kept in view that the concept of compassionate appointment is largely related to the need for immediate assistance to the family of the Government servant in order to relieve it from economic distress.
The very fact that the family has been able to manage somehow all these years should normally be taken as adequate proof that the family has some dependable means of subsistence.
Therefore, examination of such cases would call for a great deal of circumspection.
The decision to make appointment on compassionate grounds in such case may, therefore, be taken only at the level of the Secretary of the Department/Ministry concerned.
(b) Whether a request for compassionate appointment is belated or not may be decided with reference to the date of death or retirement on medical ground of a Government servant and not the age of the applicant at the time of consideration."
7.
The Court may although have sympathy on the petitioner but it is now a well settled principle of law that sympathy cannot be a ground for granting a relief to a person to which he is not entitled to in law.
8.
In CBSE v. P Sunil Kumar, reported in 1998(5) SCC 377 : 1998(2) SCT 788 (SC) the  Apex Court held -  "We are unable to apply the reasoning given in the aforesaid case, in as much as there is no iota of material placed before us to indicate that the Central Board of Secondary Education, the appellants herein, either directly or indirectly had held out to the students at any point of time that the institutions in which they are prosecuting their studies have been affiliated or are going to be affiliated in the near future.
We are conscious of the fact that our order setting aside the impugned directions of the High Court would cause injustice to these students.
But to permit students of an unaffiliated institution to appear at the examination conducted by the Board under orders of the Court and then to compel the Board to issue certificates in favour of those who have undertaken examination would tantamount to subversion of law and this Court will not be justified to sustain the orders issued by the High Court on misplaced sympathy in favour of the students."
9.
In Ashoke Saha v. State of West Bengal & others, reported in C.L.T.
1999(2) 1 (HC) : 1999(3) SCT 785 (Calcutta)(DB), a Division Bench of this court has held :-  "In Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Mrs. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar & another, reported in AIR 1994 SC 2148 : 1995(4) SCT 298 (SC), the law has been laid down in the following terms:- `Thus apart from the directions as to appointment on compassionate grounds being against statutory provisions, such direction does not take note of this fact.
Whatever it may be the court should not have directed the appointment on compassionate grounds.
The jurisdiction under mandamus cannot be exercised in that fashion.'
In G Kalyan Sundaram v. UCO.
Bank and another., reported in CLT 1995(2) HC 201 : 1996(1) SCT 264 (Calcutta), I had observed that in the fact of that case even sympathy has no role to play and in that connection noticed: In Latham v. Richard Johnson and Nephew Ltd reported in 1911-13 AER (reprint) page 117, Farewell LJ observed - `We must be very careful not to allow our sympathy sentiment is a dangerous will O' the wish to take as a guide in the search for legal principles.'
In the State of Tamil Nadu and others v. St Joseph Teachers' Training College, reported in 1991(3) SCC Page 87 the apex Court observed that court cannot grant relief on humanitarian ground contrary to law."
10.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this application which is accordingly dismissed but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.