KJ Sengupta, J - In this matter the learned lawyer for respondents has raised a question on jurisdiction of this Court for entertaining this writ petition before I could proceed to enquire into on merit.
2.
It is submitted by Mr. Chatterjee, learned counsel, appearing for the respondents that in view of setting up of Central Administrative Tribunal on and from October, 1985 this Court cannot entertain this application as the claim and contention in the present writ petition amount to question and/or dispute related to recruitment of Group-D post under the Central Government.
In view of Section 14 read with Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 this Court is not empowered to entertain this writ petition.
3.
Mr. Samaddar, learned counsel, in support of this petition submits on the question of maintainability in his written argument, the substance of which is as follows :-  4.
The writ petitioners are not holding any civil post.
They are the casual workers and as such the Administrative Tribunal Act has no manner of application.
He argues that in order to bring this matter within the purview of Administrative Tribunals Act a person must hold a civil post.
He also traces legislative history of enactment of the aforesaid statute under which the jurisdiction of the Tribunal has been conferred upon.
He argues the whole idea for formation of the aforesaid Tribunal is to adjudicate the dispute relating to recruitment and other service conditions of the employees who are holder of civil post and/or the post held amongst other under the defence authority and also the Union Government.
He draws my attention to a Full Bench decision of Orissa High Court reported in 1992(4) S.L.R.
271 wherein it has been held amongst others that a casual worker like the Nominal Muster Roll Employee neither holds a Civil Post nor he is appointed to any Civil Service of the State.
He also cites Supreme Court decisions reported in AIR 1984 SC 161, AIR 1995 SC 1636 and 1989(4) S.L.R.
360 on this point.
5.
He contends that in this case the problem is of the casual workers who are not holding any civil post.
As such this Court can entertain this writ petition.
6.
In order to decide this preliminary but pivotal issue it is necessary to reproduce the Preamble of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and Section 14 of the aforesaid Act.
"Preamble - An Act to provide for the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of (any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government in pursuance of Article 323A of the Constitution) and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto."
"Section 14 - Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal - (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All- India service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post under the Union or to a post connected with defence or in the defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a civilian; (b) all service matters concerning - (i) a member of any All-India Service; or (ii) a person (not being a member of an All-India Service or a person referred to in clause (c) appointed to any civil service of the Union or any civil post under the Union; (iii) a civilian (not being a member of an All-India service or a person referred to in clause (c) appointed to any defence services or a post connected with defence, and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation (or society) owned or controlled by the Government; (c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the Union concerning a person appointed to any service or post referred to in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) or clause (b), being a person whose services have been placed by a State Government or any local or other authority or any corporation (or society) or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government for such appointment.
(Explanation.
- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that reference to "Union" in this sub-section shall be construed as including references also to a Union Territory).
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, apply with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification the provisions of sub- section (3) to local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India and to corporations (or societies) owned or controlled by Government, not being a local or other authority or corporation (or society) controlled or owned by a State Government : Provided that if the Central Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this sub-section in respect of different classes of or different categories under any class of local or other authorities or corporations (or societies).
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall also exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub-section, apply to any local or other authority or corporation (or Society), all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before the date by all courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation (or society); and (b) all service matters concerning a person (other than a person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) or sub-section (1) appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation (or society) and pertaining to the service of such person in connection with such affairs."
7.
Upon careful and proper reading in juxtaposition of the Preamble and Section 14 of the aforesaid Act it is absolutely clear that the Tribunal is competent to entertain, adjudicate, trial and decide the disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation (or society) owned or controlled by the Government in pursuance of Article 323A of the Constitution of India.
Sub-section (2) of Section 14 provides for the similar line and meaning.
8.
So, it is clear that the purview and scope of the aforesaid Act is also extended to service of such member, person or civilian in connection with other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.
There is no manner of doubt to ascertain the meaning upon plain reading of the aforesaid two provisions that any person whose dispute pertains to service in other authorities controlled by the Government of India is to approach for redressal of his grievance under the aforesaid Act.
9.
It appears from the averments made in the petition and the cause title that the petitioners have been working as casual peons in the office of the Ordnance Factory Board which is admittedly controlled and owned by the Government of India.
The reliefs claimed in the petition for regularization of the services of the petitioners by absorbing them in Group-D post of Peon in terms of the notes and/or directives dated 20th November, 1997 and 8th December, 1997.
10.
Having regard to the averments made in the petition and the reliefs claimed, there cannot be any doubt that dispute and/or question involved herein relate and/or pertain to the recruitment of Group-D post under Central Government.
The recruitment may be by way of initial appointment or by way of absorption and/or regularization or by way of promotion.
In order to invoke the jurisdiction of Tribunal or for that manner to oust the jurisdiction of this Court under the scheme of the aforesaid Act one is to satisfy that disputes pertain to recruitment.
The Full Bench judgment of the Orissa High Court, 1992(4) SLR 27, as referred to above by Mr. Samaddar is quite distinguishable on two grounds.
Firstly, in that case the petitioners therein engaged as nominal Muster Roll employee were held not to be holder of civil post, and secondly, in that case the disputes did not relate and/or pertain to their service conditions but for enforcement of their fundamental right guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution of India for equal pay for equal work.
11.
In my view the aforesaid judgment is not applicable in this case.
Moreover, the principle laid down in the said Full Bench decision was nothing new and it was the old principle laid down by the Apex Court and there is no dispute about the principle laid down.
12.
In this case, however, the petitioners ask for regularization of services which relate to recruitment of services.
Similarly, the decisions cited by Mr. Samaddar of Supreme Court as above are also not applicable in this case.
13.
Accordingly, I am of the view that this Court is not competent to entertain this writ petition.
The Central Administrative Tribunal having its place of business in Calcutta in the competent forum.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed on the ground of jurisdiction but not on merit.
The petitioners would be entitled to approach the aforesaid Tribunal for redressal of their grievance.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.