Dipak Prakash Kundu, J - The writ petitioners are all retired employees of Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation Limited (for short MAMC) a Government Company within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
2.
The short point to be decided here is whether charges of residential accommodation allotted by MAMC to the petitioners can be recovered from the gratuity payable to the writ petitioners.
3.
MAMC by virtue of Circular 4/89 dated 26th May, 1989 introduced a Voluntary Retirement Scheme (for short VRS) for its employees with immediate effect.
Clauses 6 of VRS contains two sub-clauses.
Sub-clause 2 of Clause 6 of VRS laid down that the payment under VRS shall be made after handing over all charges of the posts including tools, materials, accessories and residential accommodation allotted by the MAMC  4.
Clause 5 of the VRS dealt with benefits which are available under VRS to the employees who opt for voluntary retirement under the scheme.
Sub-clause `C' of Clause 5 of VRS laid down that the gratuity would be paid to the employees opted to retire under VRS as per Gratuity Act or the MAMC Gratuity Rules applicable to the employees.
In course of argument neither the learned Advocate for the petitioners nor the learned Advocate for the respondents referred to MAMC Gratuity Rules.
Both of them argued on the basis of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act).
5.
In the supplementary affidavit affirmed on 23rd April, 1999 filed on behalf of the writ petitioners, copies of some of the final bills of the petitioners have been annexed as annexure `M'.
There is no dispute about the amount of gratuity to be paid to the petitioners under the said Act.
The dispute is that the amount deducted from the gratuity payable to the petitioners under the said Act was not made in accordance with the provisions of the said Act.
6.
The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents raised preliminary objection regarding maintainability of the writ petition on two grounds namely, (1) the petition is not maintainable because there is misjoinder of cause of action, and (2) the petitioners have to pay Court fees of all the petitioners individually.
These two preliminary objections raised by the learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents may be disposed of at the first stage.
The petitioners in paragraph 2 of the writ petition clearly stated that they have common cause of action as they have retired from the services of MAMC under the VRS introduced by it for its benefit but inspite of acceptance of their retirement under the scheme, their retirement benefit of gratuity have not been paid by the respondent MAMC and as a result the petitioners had been suffering from tremendous hardship in these hard days and as such they have joined in a single writ petition to espouse their common cause for their survival and for interference of this High Court in the matter for their protection of earned benefits and survival.
Respondents in paragraph 41 of their affidavit-in-opposition while dealing with the paragraphs 1 to 8 of the writ petition stated - "Save as aforesaid and save that are matters of record allegations contained in paragraphs 1 to 8 of the petition are substantially correct".
Thus it is evident that the respondents did not controvert the statement made in paragraph 2 of the writ petition, on the other hand they accepted the averments made in paragraph 2 of the writ petition as substantially correct.
Under the circumstances I am unable to accept the first objection raised by the learned senior Advocate for the respondents that the petition is not maintainable on the ground that there is misjoinder of cause of action.
As regards Court fees I am of the view that Court fee is a matter between the petitioners and the Court and the respondents have no say in the matter.
Under the Court Fees Act, respondents cannot raise any objection regarding payment of Court fees.
Therefore, I do not accept the second objection raised by the learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents.
7.
The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents argued that the petitioners having already received the gratuity with ten per cent interest now the petitioners cannot raise any objection regarding deductions made from the gratuity.
The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents argued that the payment under the VRS could only be made after handing over all charges of the posts including tools, materials, accessories and residential accommodation allotted the MAMC to the writ petitioners.
It was argued by the learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents that respondents could not issue no demand certificate without deducting the admitted due and so long no demand certificate was issued the petitioners were not entitled to get the amount due under VRS The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents argued that having received the money with no objection and after vacating the premises allotted to the petitioners by the MAMC now the petitioners cannot raise any objection in respect of the deduction made from the gratuity.
It was argued by the learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents that the petitioners are estopped from arguing that no amount could have been deducted from the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioners.
The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents argued that the petitioners have waived their rights under the said Act.
8.
It is an admitted position that in the VRS it had been clearly stated that payment of gratuity would be made in terms of the said Act.
No argument has been made by either side on MAMC Rules for gratuity, if any.
Therefore, I shall confine myself to the said Act.
9.
The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents argued that having availed the benefit under VRS now petitioners cannot turn round any say that deduction from the undisputed amount of gratuity was illegal.
The learned Sr. Advocate for the respondents submitted that the petitioners are estopped from taking such stand.
I am of the view that if there is any violation of the provisions of the said Act then the petitioners are not estopped from arguing that the payment of gratuity under the provisions of the said Act have not been made in accordance with provisions of the said Act and the deductions made from the undisputed amount of gratuity are illegal.
It is well settled that there is no estoppel against statute.
10.
A Division Bench of this High Court in M/s. Sadasook Ram Protap v. Hoare Miller and Co. reported at AIR 1923 Cal.
719 held:  "If the object of the legislature is to protect or benefit an individual litigant, it is open to him to waive the positive provisions of the statute.
On the other hand, if the provision has been enacted from reasons of public policy, he cannot be permitted to waive it."
The provision of the said Act, in my opinion was not to protect or benefit an individual employee but the reasons for enactment of the said Act was of public policy.
Therefore, I am of the view that the rights conferred upon the employees under the said Act cannot be waived.
11.
It is now well settled that pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the employer to its employees on their retirement but have become, under the decisions of Supreme Court, valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty of payment of interest at the current rate till actual payment.
This view is supported by the decision of Supreme Court in State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair reported at AIR 1985 SC 356.
The relevant paragraph, paragraph 1 of the reported decision is quoted hereinbelow :  "Pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to its employees on their retirement but have become under the decisions of this Court, valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty of payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment".
12.
No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law that is the mandate of our Constitution contained in Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
MAMC being a Government Company is very much a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and it is also bound by the provisions contained in Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
No deduction can be made from the undisputed amount of gratuity payable under the said Act unless such deductions are made in accordance with law.
If deductions are made not in accordance with law then such deductions are hit by the provisions of Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
An action contrary to Article 300A of the Constitution of India is arbitrary within the meaning of Article 14 of the Constitution Therefore, I am of the opinion that if a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution deducts any amount from the admitted amount of gratuity payable under the said Act not in accordance with law then that shall amount to deprivation within the meaning of Article 300A of the Constitution of India and such deprivation cannot be made except in accordance with law for the time being in force and if any deductions are made not in accordance with provisions of law then such deductions will be arbitrary and will violate the fundamental rights of an employee guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution  13.
It is now well settled that gratuity due to an employee after retirement cannot be with-held merely because the claim for damages for unauthorised occupation is pending.
Right to gratuity is not dependent upon the employee vacating the official accommodation.
This view is supported by the decision of Supreme Court in R Kapur v Director of Inspection (Painting and Publication) Income-tax reported at 1995 AIR SCW 272 : 1995(1) SCT 233 (SC).
In paragraph 11 of the Reported decision it has, inter alia, been stated -  "The Tribunal having come to the conclusion that D.C.R.G.
cannot be withheld merely because the claim for damages for unauthorised occupation is pending should, in our considered opinion, have granted interest at the rate of 18% since right to gratuity is not dependent upon the appellant vacating the official accommodation".
(emphasis added) 14.
Section 5 of the said Act confers power on the appropriate Government to exempt any establishment, factory, mine, oil-field, plantation, port, railway company or shop to which the said Act applies from the operation of the provisions of the said Act.
Such exemption should be made by notification.
In the instant case no such notification by the Central Government has been brought to the notice of the Court.
The learned Senior Advocate for the respondents argued that VRS having been approved by the Central Government amounts to exemption from the operation of the provisions of the said Act.
I am sorry, I cannot accept that submission.
It is now well settled principle of construction that when a power has been given to do certain thing in a certain way that must be done according to that procedure or not at all.
Section 5 clearly lays down that a notification should be issued by the appropriate Government if it chooses to exempt any establishment etc. from the operations of the provisions of this Act.
Since no such notification has been issued in the instant case, I am of the view that power to exempt as conferred upon the Central Government under section 5 of the said Act had not been exercised by the Central Government and the provisions of the said Act squarely apply to MAMC  15.
Section 4 sub-section (6) of the said Act laid down the provisions when an employee's gratuity under the said Act can be touched.
Sub-section (6) of section 4 is quoted hereinbelow :  "(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), - (a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have been terminated for any act, wilful omission or negligence causing any damage or loss to, or destruction of, property belonging to the employer, shall be forfeited to the extent of the damage or loss so caused; (b) the gratuity payable to an employee (may be wholly or partially forfeited) (i) if the services of such employees have been terminated for his riotous or disorderly conduct or any other act of violence on his part, or (ii) if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act which constitutes an offence involving moral turpitude, provided that such offence is committed by him in the course of his employment".
None of the conditions contained in sub-section (6) of section 4 is applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Therefore, sub-section (6) of section 4 has no manner of application in the instant case.
There is no dispute about determination of the amount of gratuity payable to the employees.
Therefore, section 7 also has no manner of application in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Section 14 of the said Act has overriding effect on other enactments and instruments and gives total immunity to gratuity from attachment.
Therefore, I am of the view that provisions in VRS which are repugnant to the provisions of the said Act cannot prevail.
Section 13 of the said Act protected gratuity payable under the said Act even from attachment in execution of any decree or order of any Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court.
That being the Scheme of the said Act I am of the view that no deduction can be made from the undisputed amount of gratuity unless such deductions are covered by sub-section (6) of section 4 of the said Act.
In the instant case deductions not covered by sub-section (6) of section 4 of the said Act, have been made from the undisputed amount of gratuity payable under the said Act.
Therefore, I am of the view that such deductions are illegal and invalid.
Under the circumstances I direct the respondents to make the full payment of undisputed amount of gratuity unless such deductions are covered by sub-section (6) of selection 4 of the said Act.
In the instant case deductions not covered by sub-section (6) of section 4 of the said Act, have been made from the undisputed amount of gratuity payable under the said Act.
Therefore, I am of the view that such deductions are illegal and invalid.
Under the circumstances I direct the respondents to make the full payment of undisputed amount of gratuity and take appropriate steps for recovery of any amount due to the petitioners under the said Act.
The petitioner have been paid 10% interest on the amount of gratuity (after making deductions).
10% interest is now existing bank rate.
Under the circumstances I am of the view that the petitioners are entitled to 10% interest on the amount deducted from their undisputed amount of gratuity.
16.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove I direct the respondents to pay the petitioners, within three months from the date of communication of this order, the amount deducted from the undisputed amount of gratuity payable under the said Act plus 10% interest on such amount from the date of their retirement under VRS to the date of payment of amount deducted from the undisputed amount of gratuity.
The writ application is allowed to the extent mentioned hereinabove.
Letter on 2572000  Prayer for stay of operation of the order is considered and rejected.
Petition allowed.