P Sathasivam, J - Aggrieved by the recovery proceedings of the first respondent dated 3041998, the petitioner-company has filed the above writ petitions.
2.
The case of the petitioner-company is briefly stated hereunder :- It is stated that the petitioner-Standard Literature Company (P) Limited was founded in the year 1924 at Calcutta.
The company is engaged in the business of Distributing and Marketing education and reference books.
The company has headquarters at Calcutta and branches all over the country including Chennai.
Suddenly, by a notice dated 911990, the first respondent required the petitioner to show cause, why the Employees' State Insurance contribution should not be demanded form the petitioner-company.
The petitioner by this letter dated 3390, requested the first respondent to furnish the inspection report.
It is contended that the company has employed less than 20 persons and hence the Employees' State Insurance Act is not applicable to the petitioner- company.
However, the first respondent passed an order under Section 45-A of the said Act dated 25101991 determining that the Employees' State Insurance Act applies and ordered for contribution totally Rs. 1,60,670-30 for the period from 131983 to 30.11.1989 and contribution of Rs. 2,772/-, for the period from 111983 to 28.2.1983.
Aggrieved by the said order demanding contribution, the petitioner filed a petition under Section 75 of the Employees' State Insurance Act before the Insurance Court/I Additional Judge, City Civil Court, Chennai to set aside the above proceedings.
Subsequently, by an order dated 19111992, the petitions were dismissed, upholding the order passed under Section 45-A of the said Act.
The petitioner has not agitated the matter further as the Employees' State Insurance Act has no application to the petitioner.
For several years nothing happened, but suddenly the first respondent has initiated recovery proceedings under Section 45-C to 45-I of the said Act.
The recovery proceedings are time barred under Section 77 of the said Act, hence liable to be quashed and directions be issued to the respondent not to initiate recovery proceedings.
3.
The respondents have filed separate but identical counter-affidavit disputing various averments made by the petitioner.
It is stated that petitioner-company was given adequate opportunity at all the stages.
Admittedly the petitions filed by the petitioner-company before ESI Court at Chennai had been dismissed even on 19.11.92.
It is further stated that when the ESI Court had found that the contribution determined by the ESI Corporation was payable, it is not understandable as to how the petitioner thought that the ESI Act has no application to the petitioner and that no appeal had been filed on that ground.
There is no limitation prescribed under the Act and Section 77 is not applicable in these cases.
The recovery proceedings are neither time-barred nor unconstitutional, nor illegal, nor arbitrary, nor violative of either principles of natural justice or the provisions of the ESI Act, 1948.
The entire Section 77 deals with only the commencement of proceedings in the ESI Court and not for passing any order under Section 45-A or recovery of dues thereon.
Having exhausted the effective alternative remedy under Section 75 of the said Act, the present writ proceedings are nothing but abuse of process of court and both the writ petitions are liable to be dismissed.
4.
In the light of the above pleadings, I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as respondents.
5.
Mr. K Sridhar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in both the cases, after taking me through the relevant provisions of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and the impugned recovery proceedings, would contend that the same is barred by limitation.
In other words, according to him, the present recovery proceedings are beyond the 5 years' time prescribed under Section 77 of the Act; hence both the recovery proceedings are liable to be quashed.
In support of his above contention, he very much relied on a Division Bench decision of the Kerala High Court in the case of Vijayan Pillai v. ESI Corporation, (1998)1 Lab LJ 1190.
On the other hand, Mr. G Desappan, learned counsel appearing for the respondents- ESI Corporation, would contend that the Corporation had commenced their proceedings within the period prescribed under Section 77 of the Act and there is no limitation for passing an order under Section 45-A of the Act or recovery of dues thereon.
He also contended that inasmuch as the Employees Insurance Court has confirmed the order passed under Section 45-A of the Act and the petitioner failed to challenge the said order, absolutely there is no case for interference in respect of the recovery proceedings.
6.
I have carefully considered the rival submissions.
7.
Admittedly, against the order demanding ESI contribution, the petitioner filed a petition under Section 75 of the Act before the Insurance Court/I Additional City Civil Court, Chennai to set aside the said proceedings.
After hearing all the parties and after considering the defence taken by the petitioner, both the petitions were dismissed by the ESI Court upholding the order passed under Section 45-A of the Act.
As stated earlier, absolutely the petitioner has not agitated the matter further.
In such a circumstance, it is unnecessary for this Court to go into the other aspects of determination of ESI contribution, failure to pay the same and the ultimate order of the ESI Court affirming the earlier proceedings.
8.
The only point to be considered in these writ petitions is whether the impugned recovery proceedings are barred by limitation as claimed by the petitioner.
First I shall refer the relevant provisions of the Act :-  "Section 45-A.
Determination of contributions in certain cases.
- (1) Where in respect of a factory or establishment no returns, particulars, registers or records are submitted, furnished or maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 44 or any Inspector or other official of the Corporation referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 45 is prevented in any manner by the principal or immediate employer or any other person, in exercising his functions or discharging his duties under Section 45, the Corporation may, on the basis of information available to it, by order, determine the amount of contributions payable in respect of the employees of that factory or establishment : Provided that no such order shall be passed by the Corporation unless the principal or immediate employer or the person in charge of the factory or establishment has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) An order made by the Corporation under sub-section (1) shall be sufficient proof of the claim of the Corporation under Section 75 or for recovery of the amount determined by such order as an arrear of land revenue under Section 45-B or the recovery under Section 45-C to Section 45-I 45B Recovery of contributions.
- Any contribution payable under this Act may be recovered as an arrears of land revenue.
77.
Commencement of proceedings.
- (1) The proceedings before an Employees' Insurance Court shall be commenced by application.
(IA) Every such application shall be made within a period of three years from the date on which the cause of action arose.
Explanation.
- For the purpose of this sub-section, - (a) the cause of action in respect of a claim for benefit shall not be deemed to arise unless the insured person or in the case of dependents' benefit, the dependents of the insured person claims or claim that benefit in accordance with the regulations made in that behalf within a period of twelve months after the claim became due or within such further period as the Employees' State Insurance Court may allow on grounds which appear to it to be reasonable; (b) the cause of action in respect of a claim by the Corporation for recovering contributions (including interest and damages) from the principal employer shall be deemed to have arisen on the date on which such claim is made by the Corporation for the first time : Provided that no claim shall be made by the Corporation after five years of the period to which the claim relates; (c) the cause of action in respect of a claim by the principal employer for recovering contributions from an immediate employer shall not be deemed to arise till the date by which the evidence of contributions having been paid is due to be received by the Corporation under the regulations."
9.
A careful reading of the above provisions would show that the claim shall be made by the Corporation within a period of five years and for others within a period of three years from the date on which the cause of action arose.
It is also clear that the said limitation is applicable for commencemnt of the proceedings before the Employees State Insurance Court.
In our case, there is no dispute that earlier proceedings were initiated within the time and the same were confirmed by the Insurance Court.
Admittedly, the petitioner herein did not challenge the same before any other forum.
The reading of the other sections, namely, 45-A which speaks about determination of contribution and 45-B which speaks about recovery of contribution, would indicate that there is no time-limit prescribed as in Section 77.
In other words, the period of 3 years and 5 years are applicable only for commencement of the proceedings before the Employees' Insurance Court and there is no time-limit for recovery of contribution amount.
After going through the factual position in the decision of the Kerala High Court reported in 1998(1) Lab LJ 1190 (cited supra), I am of the view that the same is not helpful to the petitioner's case.
Further, the Division Bench has considered the proviso to Section 77 and in our case we are at the stage of recovery of contribution.
10.
Mr. G Desappan, learned counsel for the respondents has brought to my notice the Division Bench decision of this Court in L.P.A. No. 211/94, dated 2361997 reported in 1999(2) Mad LW 762, The Regional Director, ESI, Corporation, Madras-34 v. M/s. Henry Woleey and Company by Trustee Executor, Salem.
The very same question was considered by the Division Bench, and after analysing the very same provision, J Kanakaraj, J speaking for the Bench has concluded thus (para 7) :-  "The second point on which the claim of the appellant was rejected by the learned Single Judge is the point of limitation.
What was relied on by the learned Single Judge is the proviso to sub-section (1A) of Section 77 of the Act.
We are of the opinion that the proviso cannot independently give any meaning without reference to the main provision, Section 77 of the Act.
Section 77 of the Act relates to commencement of proceedings before the Employees' Insurance Court, sub-section (1A) prescribes the period of limitation.
Clause (b) of sub-section (1A) of Section 77 of the Act says that in respect of a claim by the Corporation for recovering contribution, the cause of action shall be deemed to have arisen on the date on which such claim is made by the Corporation for the first time.
It is under this clause (b), a proviso is added and the provision is as follows :- "Provided that no claim shall be made by the Corporation after five years of the period to which the claim relates."
We have absolutely no hesitation in holding that the proviso will apply only in respect of a claim made by the Corporation before the Insurance Court.
We are supported in our view by the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in A.A.O.
No. 60 of 1980, dated 13.2.1980, The Pondicherry Co-operative Milk Producers Union Limited represented by the Managing Director v. The Regional Director of Employees' State Insurance Corporation.
The following passage is of considerable relevance.
"The fourth point urged before the lower Court was that the claim was barred by limitation.
The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 does not provide for a period of limitation for recovery of the amount due from a defaulting employer, and the only period of limitation prescribed is in Section 77 and that applied only to the filing of an application before the Employees State Insurance Court under Section 75, and in the present case, it was the appellant which had filed the application, and if there is any question of bar of limitation, then it was for the appellant's application which was liable to be dismissed."
The view taken by the Division Bench is directly on the point; accordingly I hold that Section 77 of the Act relates to commencemnt of proceedings before the Employees' State Insurance Court and the proviso mentioned therein will apply only in respect of claim made by the Corporation before the Insurance Court.
I also hold that the Employees' State Insurance Act does not provide for a period of limitation for recovery of contribution amount due from a defaulting employer and the period of limitation prescribed in Section 77 is applicable only to the filing of an application before the Employees' State Insurance Court under Section 75.
The same view has been expressed by R Jayasimha Babu, J in the case of E.I.D.
Parry (India) Limited v. The Regional Director, Tamil Nadu ESI Corporation, (1995)1 Mad LJ 261.
11.
In the light of what is stated above, I do not find any error or infirmity in the impugned proceedings; consequently both the writ petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
All the miscellaneous petitions are closed.
Petitions dismissed.