NK Sodhi, J - The Army Institute of Law (AIL) has been established by the Indian Army under the aegis of the Army Welfare Education Society (for short the society) and is presently located at Patiala.
It offers BA LL.B.
5 years Degree Course and is affiliated to the Panjabi University, Patiala (for short the University) and the Bar Council of India too has given its approval for the affiliation.
There were a total of 60 seats for the academic session 2000-2001.
48 of those seats were meant for wards of Army personnel whereas 9 seats were reserved for `Punjab Residents' and 3 for All India General Category candidates.
A candidate who had passed 10+2 examination of Punjab School Education Board or any other equivalent examination recognised as such by the University securing at least 50% marks (45% in case of SC/ST candidates) was eligible for the course.
Admissions to the course were to be made on the basis of the merit of entrance test which was held on 2152000 on an all India basis.
AIL issued prospectus for the session 2000-2001 and the last date for the receipt of applications was March 31, 2000.
A note appended to clause 2.4.1 of the prospectus states that no application form would be entertained after the last date of submission i.e. March 31, 2000.
It further states that the applications received after this date due to any reason including postal delay would be rejected.
Clause 2.4.3 of the prospectus which is relevant for our purpose reads as under :  "243 Certificate of Reserved Category - To claim the benefits of ward of Army Personnel Category/Punjab Residents/All India General Category, the required certificate shall be submitted alongwith the application form for the entrance test.
In case, an applicant fails to submit the required certificate alongwith the application form, he/she shall be considered only in General Category."
(emphasis supplied) 2.
Petitioner who has passed his 10+2 examination in first division applied for admission against one of the seats reserved for `Punjab Residents' and also attached the requisite certificate alongwith the application form.
He appeared in the entrance test and the result was declared on 862000.
He secured 163 marks and his rank in the merit list of `Punjab Residents' category was 19 and he was duly informed and he was asked to report for interview as per the schedule notified in the prospectus.
However, before the interviews commenced the merit lists of `Punjab Residents' and All India General Category candidates were revised on the basis of category opted in the application forms and on that basis the merit of the petitioner was lowered and he was placed at serial No. 43 in the category of `Punjab Residents'.
What happened was that a large number of candidates had applied for admission to the course against the seats reserved for `Punjab Residents' and all those candidates who did not attach with their application forms the requisite certificate were treated in the general category and their result was declared accordingly in terms of clause 2.4.3 of the prospectus which has been reproduced above.
Thereafter, on receipt of a letter dated 14.6.1999 from the Sate of Punjab, AIL revised the merit lists and the candidates who had opted for seats against a particular category were considered in those categories as per their options no matter they had not attached the requisite certificates with their application forms.
As already observed, it was because of this revision that the merit of the petitioner came down in the category of `Punjab Residents' from 19 to 43.
It is against this action of AIL that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  3.
In response to the notice of motion, the respondent has filed a detailed reply.
The factual position as stated by the petitioner has not been disputed.
However, a preliminary objection has been taken that AIL is being run by the society which is not a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and, therefore, it is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this court.
It is averred that there is no financial control whatsoever of the Indian Army or of the Government of India or of any State Government.
The society is said to be a self-supporting institution which is not dependent on the Government or the Armed Forces for its sustenance.
Reliance in this regard is placed on a judgment of the Allahabad High Court in Kamlesh Chandra Tewari v. Union of India and others, Civil Misc.
Writ Petition 17380 of 1992 decided on 23111995 and on a judgment of the Jammu & Kashmir High Court in Mrs. Asha Khosa v. Chairman, Army Public School and others, Writ Petition (Service) 1415 of 1996 decided on 1721997.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties and, in our view, the writ petition deserves to succeed.
The prospectus issued by AIL is `law' for the purposes of admission to the course and both, the students as well as the institution, are governed by its provisions.
Reference in this regard may be made to a Full Bench judgment of this court in Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) RSJ 512 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H)(FB) wherein it was held as under :-  "The terms and conditions notified in the admission notice/Brochure issued by the Council are binding on it in the matter of granting admission and they have the force of law and the Council cannot be allowed to act in contravention thereof."
For this proposition of law, the Full Bench placed reliance on an earlier decision of a Full Bench in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab, 1993(2) PLR 212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB) wherein Chief Justice SD Agarwala speaking for the Bench observed as under :  "Since the prospectus issued for admission to the 1992-93 course in the medical college has the force of law and the students appeared in the examination on the basis of the instructions laid down in the said prospectus, it was not open to the State Government to issue contrary instructions and as such also the notification dated July 13, 1992 issued by the State Government is invalid in law."
5.
In the case before us, the prospectus clearly provides that the benefits of ward of Army Personnel Category/Punjab Residents/All India Category could be claimed by a candidate only if he submitted alongwith his application form the required certificate.
It is further provided that in case an applicant fails to submit the required certificate alongwith the application form he/she would be considered only in general category.
AIL acting in accordance with the terms of the prospectus declared the result of the students who appeared in the entrance test and placed the petitioner in the merit list at serial No. 19 pertaining to `Punjab Residents'.
The candidates who did not submit the requisite certificate were treated as general category candidates and their result was declared accordingly.
Thereafter relying on some circular letter issued in the year 1999 by the State Government purporting to permit admissions on the basis of options only without the production of certificates, AIL revised the merit lists of the candidates and treated them in the category opted by them in their application forms even though they had not furnished the required certificate alongwith the forms.
It could not be done as this action of AIL was clearly contrary to the provisions of clause 2.4.3 of the prospectus, according to which, the requisite certificate should have been supplied alongwith the form.
A similar question arose before a Division Bench of this court in Manish Nanda v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition 12164 of 1996 decided on 1191996.
Petitioner therein applied for admission to an Engineering course and wanted the benefit of reservation for sports person.
As per prospectus the sports gradation certificate issued by the Director of Sports, Punjab was to be produced for getting the reservation benefit under the sports category.
This certificate was not produced alongwith the application form though it was produced at the time of counselling.
The action of the respondents in not admitting the petitioner therein was challenged before this court and from the pleadings of the parties the question that arose for consideration was whether the requirement relating to the production of certificates mentioned in the prospectus was directory or mandatory ?
The requirement was held to be mandatory and Chief Justice K Sreedharan after referring to the Full Bench judgment of this court in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra) observed as under :  "We are bound by the said statement of law and we proceed on the basis that the provisions contained in the prospectus (admission brochure-cum-application form) issued by the respondents govern the rights of the petitioner.
In this case, since the petitioner did not comply with the provisions of the said prospectus, inasmuch as he failed to submit attested copy of the sports gradation certificate alongwith the application, the same was liable to be rejected."
We, therefore, hold that the action of AIL in revising the lists was illegal and cannot be maintained.
6.
Before concluding, we may deal with the preliminary objection raised by the respondent.
As already observed, it was contended that no writ petition was maintainable against the respondent as it is being run by a society which is not a State.
This question need not detain us for long as the same stands answered by a Full Bench of five Judges of this court in Ravneet Kaur v. The Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, 1997(3) SCT 210.
In this case also, the question arose whether a writ petition was maintainable against an unaided private medical college which was affiliated to a University.
A Full Bench of this Court considered this matter in Gurpreet Singh v. Punjab University, Chandigarh, 1983(85) PLR 46 and the question was answered in the negative.
The correctness of this view was doubted and the matter was referred to a larger Bench.
The larger Bench decided the question in the affirmative and over-ruled the earlier view of the Full Bench in Gurpreet Singh's case (supra), it being held that writ or a direction could issue against a body performing a public duty as in the instant case.
AIL is performing a public duty in providing legal education.
In view of this binding precedent of our own Court, it is not necessary to discuss the cases cited by the counsel for the respondent.
7.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned action of the respondent in revising the merit lists quashed and a direction issued to it to consider the claim of the petitioner for admission to the course by treating him at serial No. 19 on the merit list, pertaining to the `Punjab Resident'.
Petition allowed.