Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Considered.
Admit.
2.
The case in taken for final disposal on submission of the parties.
3.
Petitioner is employed in Border Security Force (BSF).
He joined the force on 18.10.1969 as Lower Division Clerk (LDC).
Later, he was promoted as SI (Clerk) on 191980 and thereafter further promoted as Subedar (Clerk) on 3171993.
The petitioner's case is that the petitioner during his service with BSF is being frequently transferred to hard areas and extreme hard areas without any reason or justification.
The guidelines are not being observed.
Petitioner was transferred in the year 1992 to Frontier Head Quarter BSF Shillong on 16692 (annexure-P1) and then by another order on 9.11.92 to Frontier Head Quarter Srinagar (annexure P2).
Again on 18.6.1993, he was sent to Frontier Head Quarter Jammu (Annexure P2) and then back to Srinagar and again on 471995 to Frontier Head Quarter BSF Jammu (Annexure P5).
He made representation on 31795 (Annexure P6).
His immediate officer at FHQ BSF Srinagar also took up the matter with IG (Pers) HQ DG BSF, New Delhi on 381995.
Instead of accepting his recommendation (annexures P7 & P8), the Inspector General BSF Jammu posted petitioner to Frontier Head Quarter at Jammu and therefrom to 90 BN BSF, Sunderbani Jammu (annexure P9).
Petitioner has impugned annexures P5 & P9 and also questioned his frequent transfers by the BSF Authorities.
The petitioner's posting to FHQ BSF Jammu and subsequent posting to 90 BN Sunderbani Jammu (annexures P5 and P9), are stated to be issued for extraneous consideration with the oblique motives of adjusting respondent No. 6, Subedar Dayakrishen Wazir in his place.
The impugned order is without jurisdiction, in so far as the order of his posting to Frontier Head Quarter at Jammu (annexure P5) was passed by Director General BSF, whereas, subsequent order (Annexure P9) was passed by IG BSF Jammu.
The impugned orders are outcome of arbitrariness and mala fides.
The orders are prayed to be quashed, so as to allow the petitioner to continue on the posting at Frontier Head Quarter BSF Srinagar.
4.
It merits to be taken note of that the petitioner has admitted that he has not been relieved from his present place of posting at Frontier Head Quarter Srinagar pursuant to impugned orders and is continuously discharging his duties at Srinagar.
Respondents have in reply admitted that the petitioner stands initially inducted as combatised staffer of BSF (Lower Div.
Clerk) and subsequently given promotion in higher grades as stated above.
It is further stated that the petitioner has been posted to various field units and head quarters of BSF in the valley.
Except for short stint of four months when he was posted at Gurdaspur (Punjab) from 21682 to 171082 and for second term of three months at Bareilly (Utter Pradesh) from 17585 to 24885, petitioner has been continuously, more particularly after 25885, posted at Srinagar.
Petitioner has been given least posting at hard areas and extreme hard areas.
For the most part he has been holding the post in Soft area and in Kashmir valley to which place petitioner belongs.
The impugned orders transferring him to Jammu, were passed on his longer stay basis in view of petitioner's continuous stay (as on the date of filing reply here) at one location for ten years in Kashmir.
Petitioner has not physically joined at Shillong and was retained at Srinagar.
The posting/adjustment of petitioner within the Frontier Head Quarter is a matter that falls within the powers and jurisdiction of the concerned Inspector General BSF.
The impugned orders have been passed within jurisdiction and by competent authority.
There has been no discrimination.
The petitioner's case has been dealt with fairly and the question of mala fide does not arise.
Petitioner who has around over two decades service in BSF, is normally expected to get both soft as well as hard stations.
The posting of petitioner throughout has been in normal course of events.
He has never been picked up for any maltreatment.
5.
Contention of counsel for petitioner is that petitioner has been transferred frequently.
No reasons have been given therefor.
The transfer has been made not in normal course.
But to accommodate respondent No. 6, petitioner has been dislocated and transferred mala-fidely without any justification.
He has cited AIR 1986 SC 1957 and AIR 1993 SC 1236.
6.
The counsel for respondents canvasses that the order has been passed because of the longer stay of petitioner in Srinagar in pursuance to policy decision and the guidelines issued by Directorate General of BSF (Personnel Directorate).
Petitioner has not been picked up for maltreatment.
He has been evenly dealt with and orders have been passed purely on administrative exigencies.
He further submits that the transfer of petitioner, a combatised staffer of the BSF from one place to another is entirely for the competent BSF authorities to decide.
He has referred to AIR 1993 SC 2486.
7.
In B Varadha Rao's case (AIR 1986 SC 1955), the Apex Court was primarily adjudicating the question "whether an order of transfer of Government servant made by an authority other than Government itself, is appealable before the Government under Rule 19 of the Karnataka Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 ?"
The Court found that unless order of transfer amounts to an order of penalty or any other order falling within rule 19, such an order is not appealable.
The Court further observed :-  ".....
It is well understood that transfer of a Government servant who is appointed to a particular cadre of transferable posts from one place to another is an ordinary incidence of service and therefore does not result in any alteration of any of the conditions of service to his disadvantage.
That a Government servant is liable to be transferred to a similar post in the same cadre is a normal feature and incident of Government service and no Government servant can claim to remain in a particular place or in a particular post unless, of course, his appointment itself is to a specified, non-transferable post......" Mr. Javid Iqbal lays stress on the following observation of the Apex Court in its judgment EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555 :  ".....Frequent transfers, without sufficient reasons to justify such transfers, cannot but be held as mala fide.
A transfer is mala fide when it is made not for professed purpose, such as in normal course or in public or administrative interest or in the exigencies of service but for other purpose than is to accommodate another person for undisclosed reasons.
It is the basic principle of rule of law and good administration, that even administrative actions should be just and fair."
In Rajendra Roy v. Union of India and another, AIR 1993 SC 1236 : 1993(2) SCT 65 (SC), the Court while appreciating that an order of transfer often courses a lot of difficulties and dislocation in the family set ups of the concerned employees, all the same holds that on that score the order of transfer cannot be struck down.
The transfer order is bad and Court can interfere, in case order is passed mala-fidely or even in violation of the rules of services and guidelines without any proper justification.
Otherwise, in a transferable post an order of transfer is a normal consequence and an incident of service, while personal difficulties are matters for consideration of the department.
The Court also observed that establishing malice in fact is not possible to be made out in a straight cut manner, but in a given case, reasonable inference of mala fide action from the pleadings and antecedent facts and circumstances can be drawn.
Though for such inference there must be firm foundation of facts pleaded and established.
Such inference cannot be drawn on the basis of insinuation and vague suggestions.
8.
Now adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case in hand, it is seen that the petitioner's transfer under the impugned orders, is for administrative reasons as combatised ministerial staffer on longer basis alongwith scores of other such ministerial staff members of BSF.
His further posting by IG BSF Jammu vide annexure P9 is within jurisdiction.
The chart and details of the posting of petitioner would reveal that the petitioner has for the most, remained posted in Kashmir valley.
Petitioner is posted in Srinagar continuously after 25th of August 1985.
Even it is seen that the petitioner has remained just for five years in hard/extreme hard areas and for the remaining period of his service extending over 22 years, he has remained posted in soft areas.
After 2581985, petitioner has been continuously to date for last over 14 years continuing as such posted at Srinagar.
The posting of petitioner outside valley to Jammu vide impugned orders dated 471995, issued by competent authority of Staff Section of the Director General BSF New Delhi and further posting of petitioner within Jammu Division by IG BSF Jammu vide his order dated 1681995 on the longer stay basis at Srinagar, cannot be said to be mala fide or in violation or rules of service and guidelines.
Petitioner's transfer from the transferable post is in routine and just a normal incident of service.
Only because that there have been in between some orders, a few of which have not been even given effect, cannot be called, in the facts and circumstances of this case, without sufficient reason so as not to justify such shuffling and posting of the petitioner within a Division/State.
There is noting on record to reveal that the transfer is not made for the purpose of and in the interests of the administration or even in public interest.
The administrative action in this case cannot be said to be unfair and unjust.
The impugned order takes care exigencies of service.
There is nothing to show that the orders have been passed maliciously or in colourable exercise of powers.
No such foundation is laid down in the pleadings nor any thing of the sort is established on record.
No inference of malice in law can be drawn from record, apart from share omnibus insinuatory allegations and vague suggestions.
Obviously, order is not at all found to be mala-fide.
The petitioner is continuing at Srinagar after 30895 on the strength of an interim direction of a Co-ordinate bench of the Court.
Apart from the question whether the final relief can be given in an interlocutory form, the fact remains that even on the strength of this order, petitioner is continuing in Srinagar for last over four years.
9.
It is apt and relevant to quote their Lordships in State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh Dhatt, AIR 1993 SC 2486 : 1995(4) SCT 225 (SC) as under :-  ".....This Court has time and again expressed its disapproval of the Courts below interfering with the order of transfer of public servants from one place to another.
It is entirely for the employer to decide when, where and at what point of time a public servant is transferred from his present posting.
Ordinarily the Courts have no jurisdiction to interfere with the order of transfer.
The High Court grossly erred in quashing the order of transfer of the respondent from Hoshiarpur to Sangrur.
The High Court was not justified in extending its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in a matter where, on the face of it, no injustice was caused."
In result, for the aforesaid reasons petitioner is not found entitled to any relief.
The writ petition is dismissed.
Interim directions shall go with the writ petition.
Petition dismissed.