ML Singhal, J - This Regular Second Appeal is directed against the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Sonepat dated July 30, 1998 whereby he maintained the judgment and decree dated February 21, 1998, passed by Civil Judge (Junior Division), Sonepat declaring the termination of the services of Ram Singh-appellant/plaintiff as illegal, arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice, entitled to be treated as always in service but without benefits towards salary, allowances etc.  2.
This Regular Second Appeal has arisen in the following circumstances:-  Ram Singh was Sewadar in Tehsil Ganaur in the year 1985.
His duty was to serve processes on the parties and also the discharge the duties of peon in the Tehsil Office.
It was not a part of his duty to make realisation of arrears of Taquavi etc. from their defaulters as he was merely a class-IV employee and as per the specific instructions of the State Government dated June 12, 1996 no low-paid peon could be authorised to recover Taquavi, etc. from the defaulters.
Defaulters and Lamberdars were required to pay sums due from them into the treasury either by themselves or through an agent or by postal money orders.
As Sewadar could not be authorised to recover Taquavi, etc. from their defaulters he was not entitled to claim any travelling allowance for depositing the money into treasury which is located at Sonepat.
Tehsildar and revenue accountant used to issue oral instructions to the peons and Sewadars to collect payments from their defaulters despite the instructions to the contrary issued by the Government.
As per the State of Haryana, the petitioner had realised money from the defaulters on various occasions, but failed to deposit the entire recovered amount in the treasury.
Enquiry was ordered into this act of embezzlement against him.
As a result of that enquiry, Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat terminated his services vide order dated June 17, 1985.
He went in appeal against the order terminating his services which was dismissed on November 30, 1987 by Commissioner, Ambala Division, Ambala.
He went in further appeal/revision to the Financial Commissioner, Haryana which was dismissed on August 19, 1988.
As per the plaintiff/Ram Singh there was no application of mind before his appeal was disposed of either by Commissioner, Ambala Division, Ambala or Financial Commissioner, Haryana.
He was never given personal hearing before the appeal was decided.
Plaintiff filed suit for declaration challenging the termination of his services.
It was alleged in the plaint that the enquiry officer did not act impartially and fairly.
He attempted to shield real culprits.
Evidence in deference was not recorded.
Punishing Authority accepted the report blind- foldedly without dispassionate application of mind to the material brought before the enquiry officer.
3.
State of Haryana contested the plaintiff's suit urging that the plaintiff was guilty of serious mis-conduct inasmuch as he realised Taquavi, etc. from their defaulters but committed some embezzlement thereof.
Charge was drawn up against him.
There was an enquiry.
Enquiry was in tune with the rules of procedure and the principles of natural justice.
Enquiry Officer found him guilty of embezzlement.
Deputy Commissioner accepted the report and ordered his dismissal from service.
If there were instructions issued by the Government that Class-IV (employee) was not be put to the realisation of Taquavi, etc. that gave him no licence to realise Taquavi, etc. and to embezzle it.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties the following issues were framed by the learned trial court :-  "1.
Whether the termination order dated 1761985 and other in appeal dated 19.8.1988 are illegal, arbitrary and unsustainable in the law on the grounds mentioned in the plaint ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is bad for mis-joinder of parties, if so its effect ?
OPD  3.
Whether the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try the present suit ?
OPD 4.
Whether there is no cause of action in favour of the plaintiff ?
OPD 5.
Relief."
5.
Civil judge (Junior Division), Sonepat decreed the plaintiff suit for declaration that the termination of his services was illegal, arbitrary and unsustainable in law and that he was to be treated always to be in the service of the Government in view of the finding that the enquiry was conducted not by the enquiry officer himself but by his clerk and stenographer.
The fact that there were specific instructions of the Government not to put class-IV employees to the realisation of Government money from their defaulters also influenced the findings of the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Sonepat.
Civil judge (Junior Division) Sonepat, however, refused to declare him entitled to the backwages.
6.
State of Haryana went in appeal.
Ram Singh also went in cross-objections.
Additional District Judge dismissed the appeal as well as the cross- objections.
7.
Ram Singh-petitioner has come up to this Court through this Regular Second Appeal against the dismissal of his cross-objections by the learned Additional District Judge, Sonepat.
He has prayed that his cross-objections be accepted and the decrees of the courts below be set aside/modified to the extent he as been deprived of backwages and he may be given compound interest on the amount of backwages for the period during which he remained out of job in the wake of the order date June 17, 1985.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant as well as the learned Advocate for the State of Haryana.
9.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that when the termination of the services of the plaintiff had been found to be unsustainable, illegal and arbitrary by the learned courts below, payment of backwages should have followed as a matter of course.
It was submitted that the plaintiff could not have been deprived of backwages when the Court found that he remained out of job not by his own volition, but because of the termination of services, illegally brought about by the impugned order dated June 17, 1985.
It was submitted that if order dated June 17, 1985 disappears/evaporates, it is as if he was always in that job and never terminated.
Faced with this position, learned Advocate for the State of Haryana submitted that the termination of the services of the plaintiff was set aside on July 30, 1998 by the Additional District Judge, Sonepat.
On July 30, 1998 the setting aside of the termination order became final as there was no further appeal by the State of Haryana.
It was submitted that he could ask for backwages for the period of 3 years preceding July 30, 1998.
Learned counsel for the appellant on the other hand submitted that in this case no question of limitation would arise because the plaintiff knocked the door of the court within the period of limitation for having the order terminating his services set aside, and the moment the order terminating his services was set aside he became entitled to the backwages for all that period during which he remained out of job in the wake of the order date June 17, 1985.
It was submitted that where was the occasion for the plaintiff to be entitled to backwages till there was declaration that termination of his services was bad in law.
He will have cause of action for backwages from the day the termination of his services was declared illegal, unsustainable and arbitrary.
It was held in Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala, 1983 Punjab Law Reporter Page 21, that the starting point of limitation for the claim of emoluments would be the date of the judgment setting aside the wrongful termination or the declaratory decree to the effect that the employee was deemed to continue in service and not earlier.
The original date of dismissal or removal thus becomes irrelevant for the purpose of limitation and no defence or bar on the said basis can, therefore, be raised by the employer to the claim for emoluments.
Once the relief of setting aside or quashing the order of termination has been granted, or a declaratory decree has been passed to the similar effect it necessarily follows that the employee in the eye of law continued to be in service and as a necessary consequence thereof he would be entitled to all the emoluments flowing from that status.
He must be deemed to be in a position identical with the existing prior to the passing of the order of termination of his services.
The emoluments of the post are a logical consequence of setting aside the order of termination.
In such a situation to insist upon the filling of second suit for a relief which directly flows from the declaratory decree can hardly be warranted.
The hallowed rule that the law disfavours multiplicity of proceedings would again require that the consequential relief should be recorded in the original proceedings itself.
This seems to be the more so in view of the recent judgments of the final court adverted to above holding that in essence the cause of action for the claim to salary and emoluments is coterminus with the decree setting aside the wrongful termination.
In a suit for declaration, the civil court or the High Court sitting in appeal or otherwise is competent to give any direction etc for the payment of the arrears of pay as a result of the dismissal order having been declared illegal or without jurisdiction.
These observations were made by the Hon'ble Full Bench of this Court on the following facts :-  One Radha Ram was appointed a Moharrir on a permanent basis by the Municipal Committee of Barnala on January 2, 1965.
However, by an order dated July 27, 1966 the respondent Municipal Committee terminated the appellant's services with immediate effect in pursuance of a Government direction purported to have been given under Section 41 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
On July 10, 1969, the appellant instituted a suit for declaration that the termination order dated July 27, 1966 was absolutely illegal, unconstitutional, without jurisdiction, null and void and that the appellant be deemed to be still in the service of the respondent Municipality enjoying full rights and privileges of monthly salary, dearness and other allowances including annual grade increments already accrued or yet to accrue in future.
Radha Ram's suit was dismissed by the trial court.
His appeal was dismissed by the Additional District Judge.
In Regular Second Appeal filed by Radha Ram, the learned Single Judge apparently felt inclined to accept the appeal and it was contended before him that in the event of the order terminating the services being set aside, the appellant-plaintiff was entitled to the relief claimed as a matter of course and in consequence thereof deemed to be in service with all the emoluments, including salary, increments, dearness allowance, etc. 10.
Following question was formulated for being answered by the Full Bench :-  "Whether, in a suit for declaration, the Civil Court or High Court sitting in appeal or otherwise is competent to give any direction etc. for the payment of the arrears of pay as a result of the dismissal order having been declared illegal or without jurisdiction ?"
Hon'ble Full Bench answered this question in affirmative.
11.
So following the view which the Hon'ble Full Bench has taken, I think the appellant is entitled to backwages for the period during which he remained out of job in the wake of the order dated June 17, 1985 terminating his services.
He will be entitled to 6% pa interest on the amount of backwages.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs so far as this Regular Second Appeal is concerned.
Judgments and decrees of both the Courts below stand modified accordingly.
Regular Second Appeal is accepted accordingly.
Appeal allowed.