GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for quashing of memo No. 2/171-99 Office.
Estt (4) dated 1101999 issued by the Director, Education Department (Schools), Punjab (respondent No. 2) vide which his application for employment of priority basis has been rejected.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner's mother Smt. G Kaur died on September 20, 1989.
At that time she was working as Arts and Crafts Teacher in Government High School, Rajpura Town, Rajpura.
She was survived by her husband Shri Narinder Singh and three minor children (two daughters namely, Gurpreet Kaur and Harpreet Kaur and one son, namely, Charan Singh i.e. the petitioner).
Gurpreet Kaur attained majority on 14101994 and became eligible for appointment on compassionate grounds but she did not submit application for that purpose.
After more than nine years of the demise of mother, the petitioner submitted application dated 1819999 along with affidavits of his father and sister-Gurpreet Kaur and requested that he may appointed under the policy of Ex-gratia.
Respondent No. 2 rejected his prayer on the tile following grounds:  (i) As per the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide circular dated 881998, the minor dependent of the deceased should have applied within six months after attaining majority and as daughter of the deceased-Gian Kaur had become eligible in 1994, she should have availed the benefit of the policy of ex-gratia employment.
(ii) The application filed by the petitioner after nine years and almost six months of the demise of his mother cannot be entertained.
3.
Shri R.P.
Chaudhary argued that the delay in the submission of the application could not have been made a ground for denying relief to the petitioner in terms of the policy framed by the Government of Punjab.
Learned counsel stated that elder daughter of the deceased, namely, Gurpreet Kaur, who had become eligible in 1994 for appointment on compassionate grounds could not apply because by that time, she had been engaged and her in-laws were not in favour of her taking employment in government service.
He further stated that the.
petitioner could not submit application for compassionate appointment within six months of his attaining majority because at the time he was doing ITI and it was not possible for him to leave the course half way.
Learned counsel argued that the period of six months stipulated in the circular dated 881998 issued by the government should have been relaxed so as to enable the petitioner to avail the benefit of the policy of ex-gratia.
He further argued that the provision relating to submission of application by the minor dependent within six months of attaining majority should be treated as directory, else the very object of the policy of compassionate appointment would be defeated.
4.
We have given serious thought to the submissions of the learned counsel but have not felt persuaded to agree with him.
The philosophy underlying the policy of compassionate appointment has been outlined in the decisions of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, JT 1994(3) SC 525 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC); LIC of India v. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar, (1994) 2 SCR 718 : 1995(4) SCT 298 (SC), State of Haryana.
v. Naresh Kumar Bali, JT 1994(4) SC 184 : 1994(3) SCT 590 (SC); Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1996(2) SCT 207; Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar, JT 1996(2) SC 542 : 1996(2) SCT 778 (SC); HRTC.
v. Dinesh Kumar, JT 1996(5) SC 319; Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd v. A Radhika Thirumalai, JT 1996(9) SC 197 : 1997(1) SCT 329 (SC) and HSEB v. Hakim Singh, JT 1997(8) SC 332 : 1998(1) SCT 511 (SC).
In Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra) their Lordships of the Supreme Court held as under :  "The whole object of grant of compassionate-employment is, thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crises.
The object is not to give member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The government or public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased and it is only if it is satisfied that but for the provisions of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
xx xx xx  The object being to enable the family to get over the financial crisis which it faces at the time of death of the sole breadwinner, the compassionate employment cannot be claimed and offered whatever the lapse of time and after the crisis is over."
5.
In Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar (supra), the Supreme Court rejected the claim of a minor dependent to be appointed on compassionate ground after attaining the age of majority by making the following observation:  "The very object of appointment of a dependent of the deceased employee who died in harness is to relieve unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family.
Since the death occurred way back in 1971, in which year the appellant was four years old, it cannot be said that he is entitled to be appointed after he attained majority long thereafter.
In other words, if that contention is accepted, it amounts to another mode of recruitment to the dependent of a deceased government servant which cannot be encouraged, de hors the recruitment rules."
6.
In Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar and another (supra) the Supreme Court reversed some of the orders of this Court directing appointment of dependents of the deceased employees who were minor at the time of the death of the concerned employee.
While setting aside the orders of the High Court, the Supreme Court reiterated the law laid down In Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra) in the following words:  "It has been indicated in the decision of Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra) that compassionate appointment cannot be granted after a long lapse of reasonable period and the very purpose of compassionate appointment as an exception to the general rule of open recruitment, is intended to meet the financial problem being suffered by the members of the family of the deceased employee.
In the other decision of this Court in Jagdish Prasad's case, it has been also indicated that the very object of appointment of dependent of deceased employee who dies in harness is to relieve immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family and such consideration cannot be kept binding for years."
7.
InC.W.P.
No. 10547 of 1996, Yogesh Kumar Malhotra v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 9121996, this Court held as under:  "The dependents of the employees cannot, as a matter of right, claim appointment on a particular post and the Court may be justified in not granting relief after long lapse of time because the very fact that the dependent of the deceased employee does not seek employment immediately after the death negates his claim for compassion.
We are also of the opinion that the policy of giving compassionate appointment to the dependents of the deceased employees cannot be treated as a regular source of recruitment and it is not possible to accept the theory that in our constitutional set up public employment can be claimed as a hereditary right."
8.
In Gurdarshan Singh v. State of Punjab, 1998(1) RSJ 557, this Court made an in depth examination of the issue and laid down the following propositions:  "(a) Appointment to the public service should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
(b) The public employer is duty bound to advertise the posts through newspapers, radio, television, news bulletins etc. and also send requisition to the employment exchange in order to enable all the eligible persons to compete for recruitment.
(c) However as an exception to the general rule appointment on compassionate grounds can be made without competitive selection in case such appointment is permissible under the rules or policy decision taken by the government/public employer.
(d) The sole object of compassionate appointment is to relieve the family of the deceased employee of the unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused due to the loss of the bread winner.
In other words the purpose of compassionate appointment is to enable the family of the deceased to overcome the sudden crisis caused due to the death of the employee.
(e) Compassionate appointment can be given only against Class III and IV posts.
(f) Before making appointment on compassionate grounds the government/public employer is duty bound to examine the financial condition of the family with a view to find out whether there is any source of subsistence and whether it is necessary to rescue the family from the state of financial destitution.
(g) The dependent member of the family does not have the right to seek appointment on the same very post which was held by the deceased.
(h) If the sole dependent of the deceased is a minor at the time of death then his case may be considered for compassionate appointment on his/her attaining majority provided there exists a rule or policy framed by the employer to provide employment in such a situation.
(i) In case the family of the deceased has more than one dependent then the government is not obliged to reserve one post for the minor dependent and appoint him on his attaining majority.
Only in the rarest of the rare cases, the Government may consider giving appointment to a minor on his attaining majority if no other family member is eligible for employment immediately after the death of the employee and there exists any rule or policy to consider such cases for compassionate appointment.
(j) If any period of limitation is prescribed in the rules or the policy instructions relating to compassionate employment then the government is not obliged to consider an application submitted after the expiry of the period of limitation.
In any case appointment on compassionate grounds cannot be claimed after long lapse of time calculated from the date of the death of the employee."
9.
Viewed in the light of the decisions of the Supreme Court and this Court, the circular dated 881998 issued by the Government of Punjab entitling a minor dependent to apply for ex-gratia employment within six months of his/her attaining majority cannot but be termed as extra liberal.
By virtue of this circular the minor dependent becomes entitled to compassionate appointment irrespective of the time gap between the demise of the bread winner and the submission of the application by the minor after attaining majority.
However, as there is no provision for relaxation of the limit of six months period within which the minor dependent has to submit application after attaining majority, we cannot issue a writ directing the respondents to entertain the prayer of the petitioner, who, as per his own showing, had applied for ex- gratia employment after more than nine years of the demise of his mother and almost one year after attaining the age of 18 years.
In our considered opinion, the petitioner's failure to apply within six months of his attaining majority has been rightly made basis for declining his prayer for compassionate appointment.
Therefore, there is no valid ground to nullify the order passed by respondent No. 2.
10.
We are further of the opinion that the other reason given by respondent No. 2 for rejecting the petitioner's prayer is also legally correct and justified.
Admittedly, one of the minor dependents of the deceased, namely, Gurpreet Kaur had attained majority in 1994 but she did not submit application for ex-gratia employment.
The assertion of the petitioner that she could not do so because of the disinclination of her in-laws deserves to be discarded as an after-thought because no such plea was raised till the submission of application by the petitioner,  For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.