Amitava Lala, J - The petitioner has made this writ petition for the purpose of issuance of writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to correct the date of birth in the service book as per recording in school final certificate reads as 28.10.1942 and allow him in continuing the service till the date of his retirement to be calculated as per the above date as appropriate date of birth.
2.
The petitioner contended that he was born in the District of Chitagarh now at Bangladesh.
He left the country when he was student of Class-X at Bairala, Karan Koyen, Pran Hari Bahumukhi Ucchya Vidyalaya.
He left the country and took shelter in his uncle's house.
For his survival, he had taken a job of Watchman on 141961 under Regional Director of Food, Eastern Region and while he was surviving (serving ?)
therein, he also prosecuted his studies and passed School Final Examination in 1968.
3.
At the time of his appointment, his date of birth was written as 711939.
4.
In the certificate of the School Final Examination his date of birth was recorded as 271942.
Subsequently in 14th August, 1998 the Head Master of the school as per the School record certified that his date of birth 28th October 1942 which Dhaka Board has approved by the following certificate as on 7121988.
5.
Therefore, I am getting three dates of birth.
One is dated 711939 as per the initial record while he was working.
Secondly, 271949 as per the record of the Board School Final Examination of the State.
Thirdly, 281042 i.e. date of birth given by the School at Bangladesh certified by the Dhaka Board.
6.
According to the petitioner, the correct date of birth is 281042 which has been given by the appropriate Board of Dhaka as per the school record as on 7.12.88.
It is to be remembered that in the case of correction of date of birth, court should be very much cautious in interfering with the same so that one cannot get any advantage of the situation.
I find the petitioner has come in clean hands for the simple reason that court normally passes an order in respect of the date of birth given in the record of the Board of Secondary Education as correct date of birth i.e. 2.7.49 but he did not take such advantage of the situation.
He specifically emphasized that 281042 is a correct date of birth as per Dhaka Board.
7.
Therefore, out of three dates of birth, two dates of birth given 2.7.49 and 281042 are supported by authentic documents.
But 7.1.39 is as per his declaration.
Correction of the date of birth is not the unknown procedure, sometimes Court intervenes on the basis of the authentic documents sometimes on the basis of the certificates issued by the appropriate Medical Board whether court will proceed on the basis when the certificate issued by the Board or not in depending upon circumstances of each case.
8.
The petitioner invoked the writ jurisdiction of this court in the year 1993 for the purpose of getting an appropriate order of correction of date of birth when the same was not considered by the appropriate authority.
However, upon hearing the application, ultimately on 31197, the order was passed by this High Court directing the respondent to consider the case for change of his date of birth based on materials already available with them.
9.
But ultimately the same was rejected as on 28497 as against of which the present writ petition was made.
From the impugned order dated 28497, it appears that the prayer of the petitioner was rejected on the ground that the petitioner is in habit of change of his date of birth very frequently.
He sat for the School Final examination after changing his date of birth for some wrongful gain in the service.
From the records it appears that the petitioner has failed to make out a bona fide case in his favour and, therefore, he is unable to consider his request for change of date of birth at this belated stage.
10.
Firstly, it is recorded that the letter of the Deputy Commissioner of Bangladesh shows the date of birth of the petitioner is 281042.
The certificate issued by the Head Master and Secretary of the school at Bangladesh also show the same date.
The certificate issued by the State of West Bengal Board of Secondary giving wrong date of birth on 2.7.49 was changed to the aforesaid dated i.e. 281042.
But only lacuna is that the certificate issued by the appropriate educational board of Dhaka shows that his date of birth is 11.7.42, but not 281042.
Therefore, it was held under the impugned order that the petitioner always fluctuates his date of birth in order to get benefit his service and it shows mala fides.
11.
Apparently, the observation under the impugned order is not acceptable to this court because if the intention of the petitioner would have been correct then he could have asked for relief as per earlier certificate issued by West Bengal Board of Secondary Education for about further 7 years upto 1949.
By not being so intention of the petitioner cannot be mala fide.
One may be confused about the date of birth for various reasons.
But at the time of interference of the court, it must look into it whether the petitioner has any grievance at all or not.
12.
If I place the facts as recorded under the impugned order, I shall find some of the authorities considered the date of birth being 281042 and certified accordingly which are as follows :-  (a) Letter of the Deputy Commissioner of Bangladesh.
(b) Certificate of Head Master and Secretary of the School at Bangladesh.
(c) Certificate issued by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
(d) But although the certificate issued by the appropriate educational board of Dhaka but by giving different date for the same year which is not very relevant for coming to a conclusion that the petitioner has not come with clean hands.
Under such circumstances as to whether the Court can refuse the order by abstaining from passing an order from recording the correct date of birth as 281042?
13.
The respondent opposed the prayer strongly by saying that under Rule 56 Note 6 of the circular regarding the retirement in respect of the service it was stated as follows :-  The date on which a Government servant attains the age of fifty- eight years or sixty years, as the case may be, shall be determined with reference to the date of birth declared by the Government Servant at the time of appointment and accepted by the appropriate authority on production, as far as possible, of confirmatory documentary evidence such as High School or Higher Secondary or Secondary School Certificate or extracts from Birth Register.
The date of birth so declared by 'the Government servant and accepted by the appropriate authority shall not be subject to any alteration except as specified in this note.
An alteration of date of birth of a Government servant can be made, with the sanction of a Ministry or Department of the Central Government, or the Comptroller & Auditor General in regard to persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department, or an Administrator of a Union Territory under which the Government servant is serving, if -- (a) a request in this regard is made within five years of his entry into Government service; (b) it is clearly established that a genuine bona-fide mistake has occurred; and (c) the date of birth so altered would not make him ineligible to appear in any School or University or Union Public Service Commission examination in which he had appeared, or for entry into Government service on the date on which he first appeared at such examination or on the date on which he entered Government service.
14.
All the sub-notes under note 6 being (a) which prescribes for the time period of five years are distinct and different from sub-note (b) and (c).
Therefore either all the sub-notes can be taken together or can be dealt with separately.
15.
Under such circumstances Rule 56 Note 6 prescribing the time period of 5 years is not mandatory in all cases irrespective of the factual position.
The question of taking 5 years period as a defence in the circumstances is not applicable since the consideration was made under the order of the Court.
Therefore, if the writ petition is made challenging the impugned order can it be said that the defence taking of limitation barrier of 5 years is an honest approach before the Court of law.
16.
Respondent has cited a judgment reported in AIR 1993 SC 1367 : 1993(3) SCT 120 (SC) Union of India v. Harnam Singh in its head note as well as paragraphs 7, 10, 11 and 14 to establish that entry of date of birth into the service book continued to exist for 3-1/2 decades was challenged and the employee having numerous opportunities only sought for correction after 5 years from the amendment of the appropriate note about period of limitation was not encouraged.
It was also considered that the application was sought for alteration of date of birth just a few months prior to the date of superannuation.
Had it been the position that the correction of the date of birth was sought for within a period of 5 years from the introduction of amendment, the earlier delay would not have non-suited him.
17.
It is to be noted that the above case was decided on the basis of the factual position therein which is different from the factual position herein.
The petitioner is fighting for its grievance from long back and this application is made challenging the impugned order on the basis of the direction of the Court on last occasion.
In the instant case, neither the petitioner sought for relief just before the retirement nor sitting tight over the matter.
Under the circumstances ratio of the judgment in the factual position of this case is not applicable.
18.
He also cited 1994(1) CLJ 79, a Division Bench of this court Sri Saraj Kumar Bhattacharjee v. Bengal Immunity Ltd & Ors. wherein it was held that date of birth recorded in school final certificate subsequent to the entry of the service appearing as private candidates cannot be taken as an authentic document for the purpose of correction of date of birth.
Correction only be made on the basis of contemporaneous document.
At the time of considering the case, the Division Bench of this Court held that there is a difference between a regular candidate and a private candidate.
There is little scope of hiding the actual date of birth in the case of a regular student.
But board has to believe the declaration of the candidates in respect of the private students.
Under such circumstances, such declaration of date of birth as private candidate without any verification cannot be taken away appropriate piece of evidence for the purpose of considering the appropriate date of birth.
19.
Significantly enough, the court held that any contemporaneous document which could not be produced because the reason is beyond the control of an employee concerned only in that event the said contemporaneous document may be made a basis for claiming the case of correction of a date of birth at a later date and not otherwise.
20.
It is to be remembered the candidate had come all the way from Bangladesh and joined in service without any document may not be said to be incorrect or the circumstances was not beyond control in declaring the appropriate date of birth.
He passed the examination as regular candidate.
Contemporaneous documents speak that 281042 is the appropriate date of birth.
21.
He also cited another Division Bench Judgment reported in 1996(2) CHN 356 where it is decided that the date of birth as available from the service or school final examination passed subsequent to joining of the service at best can be construed as declaration.
Here also 1 find that the petitioner appeared as private candidate in the examination which is no way concerned in this case where the candidate is regular candidate in such examination.
22.
Thereafter, he also cited a judgment reported in 1994(6) SCC 304 : 1994(4) SCT 375 (SC), State of Tamil Nadu v. TV Venugopalan to establish that there should be a harmonious construction in respect of the limitation every-where as to the correction of date of birth.
The delay in seeking correction at the fag end of the service would not be permitted to challenge.
23.
However, this court has considered the views at length.
This court has also taken note of the submissions of the petitioner and distinguishing features of the judgment.
The petitioner contended that the ratio of the reported judgment AIR 1993 SC 1367 was not applicable in any case since the amendment for making restriction to make an application for correction of date of birth from the entry of the service only in 1979 subsequent to the petitioner's cause.
24.
It appears to me that above and all the judgments cited before this court are based on delay in making application because the court thought fit that such belated prayer is allowed, that will be abuse of process of court of law.
I find from the cited decisions that in one matter application was made after 35 years of joining his service, in another case, I find the application was made after 32 years of joining of service, and also in another case, I find that at the fag end of the service career, the application was made and without any contemporaneous document.
Therefore, either the Supreme Court or the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court rightly rejected to prayers of the petitioners therein.
This case is factually different from the cited decisions.
25.
1n the instant case, the candidate had passed school final examination from any school but not a private candidate.
The correction of age was given effect by the Board of Secondary Education not on the basis of his own declaration but on the basis of the documents received from Government of a country to another Government of other country admittedly.
It is very difficult to refuse the case of the petitioner when the same is fortified with the letter of a Deputy Commissioner of a country, i.e. Bangladesh certificate issued by his school where the candidate had studied in Bangladesh and issued by the Board of Secondary Education of West Bengal.
Therefore, such contemporaneous document established the cause of the petitioner's favour.
Moreover, he has not started fighting for the cause on the other day ie at the fag end of the service but from 1989 for about 10 years to establish his case some way or other.
Last but not the least, the important point is a test of bona fide which goes in favour of the petitioner by refusing to accept date of birth as 271949 instead of 281042 by which he would have been benefited of having further 7 years of service.
26.
The petitioner has brought attention of this court as to the paragraph 15 of the Supreme Court judgment reported in AIR 1988 SC 1796, Biragmal Singhvi v. Anand Purohit to establish that the contemporaneous document should be (a) an entry relied on must be one in a public or other official register of record, (b) It must be an entry stating a fact in issue or relevant fact.
(c) It must be made by a public servant in discharge of official duty or any other person in performing of duty specially enjoined by law.
27.
Therefore, again the same question is coming forward regarding contemporaneous documents which will support the cause of a person for the purpose of having the date of birth corrected.
Under the circumstances, I do not find any reason but to hold in favour of the petitioner.
Therefore, the writ petition stands allowed.
The impugned order being ESTT-30(344)/93 dated 28497 being Annexure-E to the petition stands quashed.
This court declares that the petitioner's correct date of birth is 281042.
28.
Therefore, the petitioner will be entitled for all service benefits notionally.
He will get actual financial benefit on account of retirement upon calculating the date of birth as 28.10.1942.
This application is thus disposed.
No order is passed as to costs.
All parties are to act on a signed copy minutes of the operative part of the judgment.
Petition allowed.