SD Pandit, J - JB Transport Company, a proprietary concern and its proprietor have filed the present petition to challenge the order passed by the Labour Court of Ahmedabad in Reference No. 428 of 1997.
2.
The respondent Shankarlal @ Mavaram Nathuji Patel is working as driver with the petitioner.
His employment was terminated on 25 November, 1994 hence he raised an industrial dispute which resulted in reference of 428 of 1997.
In the said reference, the present petitioner initially filed a Vakalatnama on their behalf though their Advocate Sri SB Sharma which is at Exhibit in the said reference.
The workman raised an objection for the appearance of a practising Advocate.
Thereafter, another document purporting to be an authorisation as filed in the said reference and along with that authorisation the Annexure C of this petition and Annexure D certificate of registration under Trade Unions Act, at page 35 were produced before the Labour Court.
Even after filing of this authorisation the workman raised a contention before the Labour Court saying that he was raising objection under S 36(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was contended on behalf of the workman that Sri SB Sharma is a practising Advocate and, therefore, he could not be permitted to represent the employer in the said proceeding and he was not giving his consent of his appearance as such.
As against said contention of the workman, it was urged before the learned Labour Court that Sri SB Sharma was not appearing as practising Advocate but he was appearing as General Secretary, Akhil Gujarat Employers' Association and he was representing the present petitioner who is member of the Akhil Gujarat Employers' Association in this capacity as an officer of the said association.
The learned Labour Court didn't find favour with the said contention of the employer and didn't permit Sri SB Sharma to appear and conduct the matter on behalf of the employer by passing his reasoned order which is subject- matter of the present petition.
3.
Sri Sharma is appearing on behalf of the petitioners in this petition raised the contention before me that it is not open for the Labour Court to go into question as the motive of the legal practitioner as the office-bearer of said employers' association and if the employers' association has appointed him as an officer it must be accepted.
He further submitted before me that in view of the provision of S 36(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and he being the General Secretary of the Akhil Gujarat Employers' Union (hereinafter referred to a Akhil Union), he was entitled to represent the member of the Akhil Union in a proceeding before the Labour Court.
In order to consider this submission of him it is necessary to see the provision of S 36.
Though Sri Sharma is relying upon sub-sec. (2) of S 36, it is necessary to consider the whole S 36 in view of the controversy which I am going to consider running as under :  "36.
Representation of parties - (1) A workman who is a party to a dispute in any manner shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by - (a) (any member of the executive or other office-bearer) of a registered trade union of which he is a member; (b) (any member of the executive or other office-bearer) of a federation of trade unions to which the trade union referred to in Cl. (a) is affiliated; (c) where the worker is not a member of any trade union, by (any member of the executive or other office-bearer) of any trade union connected with, or by any other workman employed in the industry in which the worker is employed and authorised in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) An employer who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by - (a) an officer of an association of employers of which he is a member, (b) an officer of federation of associations of employers to which the association referred to in Cl. (a) is affiliated; (c) where the employer is not a member of any association of employers, by an officer of any association of employers connected with, or by any other employer engaged in, in the industry in which the employer is engaged and authorised in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any conciliation proceedings under this Act in any proceedings before a Court.
(4) In any proceeding (before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal), a party to a dispute may be represented by a legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceeding and (with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be).
If the above provision of S 36 is considered then it would be quite clear that in case of workman he could be represented in proceeding under the Act by any member of the executive or any officer-bearer of a registered union.
But under sub-sec. (2) only an officer of an association of employers' can represent a member of association.
Therefore, it is necessary to find out whether Sri Sharma could be treated as an officer of said Akhil Union.
It is true that neither the Industrial Disputes Act nor any other labour law pertaining to proceeding before the Labour Court order is giving the definition of word "officer".
If we see Webster International Dictionary, then the said dictionary says that the person trained and commissioned to engage in paid full time service, then he would become an officer.
An officer must be holding an office and taking part in the management or directions of the employer institution.
He must be trained and engaged in discharging a duty and he must be paid fully for the service rendered by him.
As stated earlier, the word used is an "officer" and not an office-bearer.
Sri Sharma has fairly stated before me that he is till today a practicing Advocate of this Court.
For appearance before the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal, a legal practitioner should be a regular officer of such employers' association/union, otherwise it will defeat the provisions of Ss.
36(2) and 36(4).
There must be regular appointment to become officer.
If the provisions of Advocates Act are then into consideration then it would be quite clear that a practising Advocate cannot be in employment in any other institution without the leave of Bar Council.
Sri Sharma has not produced any documentary evidence before this Court or before the Labour Court to show that the said Akhil Union has appointed him as an officer by its resolution or by any order of the said Akhil Union.
Merely because he happened to be a General Secretary, it could not be said that he is an officer of the association.
By becoming a General Secretary, he becomes an office-bearer.
There is difference between "office-bearer" and the "officer".
The officer is an employee of the association or an institution whereas, the office- bearer would become an employer.
4.
If the provisions of S 36 are considered then it would be quite clear that the same Act prevents as a rule the appearance of the Advocate in a proceeding before Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal without the consent of the workman and the practising Advocate is permitted to appear in proceeding under the Industrial Disputes Act only with the consent of the workman.
If the workman raises an objection for appearance of a practising Advocate on behalf of employer then in view of the provision of S 36, the practising Advocate could not be terminated (permitted ?)
to appear on behalf of the employer.
This specific provision of S 36 of Industrial Disputes Act could not be allowed to be defeated by allowing a practising Advocate to become nominal officer-bearer of association and come before the Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court as an officer of that association and to conduct the matter on behalf of the employer.
If such practice is submitted then it is definitely going to defeat the provision of Act.
5.
Shri Sharma has cited before me a case of Paradip Port Trust v. Their Workmen, 1977(1) LLN 5, and he has put reliance on the following head note :  "a lawyer can appear before the tribunal in the capacity of an office-bearer of a registered trade union or an officer of the associations of employers and no consent of other side and leave of tribunal will then be necessary."
But in the earlier portion of the said headnote, it is clearly stated that a lawyer simpliciter cannot appear before the Industrial Tribunal.
Then in para 16 at page 11 of the said judgment, the Apex Court has made following observations :  "If, however, a legal practitioner is appointed as an officer of a company or corporation and is in their pay and under their control and is not a practising Advocate the fact that he was earlier a legal practitioner or has a legal degree will not stand in the way of the company or the corporation being represented by him.
Similarly, if a legal practitioner is an officer of an association of employers or of a federation of such association, there is nothing in S 36(4) to prevent him from appearing before the Tribunal under the provisions of S 36(2) of the Act.
Again, an office-bearer of a trade union or a member of its executive, even though he is a legal practitioner, will be entitled to represent the workmen before the Tribunal under S 36(1) in the former capacity.
The legal practitioner in the above two cases will appear in the capacity of an officer of the association in the case of the employer and in the capacity of an office-bearer of the union in the case of workmen and not in the capacity of legal practitioner.
The fact that a person is a legal practitioner will not affect the position if the qualifications specified in S 36(1) and S 6(2) are fulfilled by him."
From the above cited decision of Apex Court it is quite clear that if a practising Advocate subsequently ceased to be practising Advocate and takes an employment with an industry or a company and happens to appear on behalf of that company-employer as an office-bearer of that company before the industrial Tribunal then merely because he was formerly a practising Advocate, his appearance could not be objected to.
Because once he accepts, the employment and once he becomes an officer of company or any institution, he ceases to be a practising Advocate or legal practitioner in view of the provision of the Advocates Act.
The Advocates Act does not permit a practising Advocate to take an employment without the leave of the Bar Council.
Generally, the said leave is granted by Bar Council to the practising Advocate to act as part-time lecturer in law Institutions and Law Colleges.
6.
In order to become an officer, the person must show that he is in employment of that institution or an undertaking or a company and it must be shown that he is on the pay-roll of the institution or company.
There is nothing on the record to show that Sri Sharma is on the pay roll of the said Akhil Union.
What is shown by Sri Sharma is that he is General Secretary of Akhil Union but merely because he is an office-bearer of the Akhil Union, I am unable to hold that he is an "officer" of the said Akhil Union.
As he could not be an "officer" of the Akhil Union, even as per the constitution of the said Union, he could not be permitted to appear on behalf of the member of the said Akhil Union.
If the Akhil Union happen to engage and appoint Sri Sharma or engage other person as an officer of that association, then alone that person can represent the member of the said association.
This question of "officer" representing an association of employers is also considered by the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of Andhra Pradesh Power Diploma Engineers' Association v. Andhra Pradesh Pradesh State Electricity Board and another, 1996(1) LLN 668 : 1996(3) SCT 465 (A.P.)(FB).
In the said case the said Full Bench has considered the word "officer" and has made the following observations, in Para 17 at page 694 :  "From the observations made it is clear that `an officer' was understood, so far as a legal practitioner is concerned, as one who is not a practising Advocate though he might have been one such earlier to his becoming an officer, and that in his present capacity as an officer of the association he is in its pay and under its control.
It is relevant here to quote a passage from Buckey's Companies Act, Twelfth Edition page 681 which was extracted in an earlier decision, of this Court in Mallela Suryanarayana v. Commercial Bank, AIR 1958 AP 756, regarding concept of the word "officer".
"The word `officer' not to be confined to a person who has in some way or other control over the assets of the company.
A person who by the term of his appointment is made and called an officer, who is appointed by the company, paid by the company, and whose function is to act on behalf of the company (sic) the directors, and whose appointment is made, not on a special occasion for a special limited purpose, but under the regulations governing the constitution of the company, is an officer."
It would hence be seen that the word conveys the meaning in its essentiality, as being subjected to some type of control and check and to be in receipt of some type of renumeration from the persons or body whose officer he is and that the engagement is not for a specific occasion only, it was pointed out in the decision in Prabhudas Mulji Doshi v. Governor General of India in Council, ILT 1951(1) Cal.
443, that the word "officer" imports the idea of an "office" and that to be an "officer" therefore, the person claiming must show that there is an office which he holds.
A Full Bench of this Court in decision in B Veeraswamy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1959 AP 413, also express similar view in saying :  "The individual who is invested with the authority and is required to perform the duties incidental to an officer is an officer.
For determining whether officers are subordinate or not, the test, is not whether a review of such of their determinations as are quasi-judicial may be had but whether in the performance of their various during they are subject to the decision and control of a superior officer, or are independent officers subject to such directions as the statute gives.
In Nandlal More v. R Mirchandani, AIR 1968 Bom.
208, the Court was of the view that `officer' and `office' are correlated and basically an officer, whether he occupies a specific office or not, must be in the relation of an employee or servant of a company, firm or individual who is his employer or master, being an officer pre-supposes a relationship of employer and employee of master and servant.
In that case the question to be considered was whether a power of attorney holder can be called an officer of the executor of the power of attorney.
It was pointed out that a power of attorney creates a relationship of principal and agent and not of master and servant."
7.
The Full Bench has also considered the case of Paradip Port Trust v. Their Workmen, 1977(1) LLN 5 (supra), before laying down the above observations.
I don't find any reasons to take a different view than the view taken by the Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
8.
Thus, I hold that the learned Labour Court has rightly refused the permission for Sri Sharma to appear on behalf of the employer in the said preceding.
I, thus, hold that the present petition will have to be rejected.
I, accordingly, reject the same will no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.