SS Sudhalkar, J - Respondent (now deceased) was working in the Police Department as a Constable.
He remained absent for a period from 2651986 to 1961986 and from 471986 to 2471986.
An enquiry was held against him and he was found guilty.
After the show-cause notice, the competent authority dismissed the respondent from service.
The case of the respondent is that in spite of the repeated requests, he was not given copies of documents.
The Enquiry Officer started examining the prosecution witnesses immediately after summary of allegations, that the respondent was not allowed to cross-examine the witnesses produced on behalf of the department, that there was no evidence before the Enquiry Officer to substantiate the charge of misconduct etc.
The suit was decreed and the appellant's appeal against the judgment and decisions passed in the suit and was also dismissed.
Hence, this is second appeal filed by the defendant in the suit.
During the pendency of the suit, respondent has died and his legal representative has been impleaded as a respondent.
2.
I have heard the learned D.A.G.
Mr. Maini for the appellants and Mr. RK Malik, Advocate, for the respondent.
3.
The Courts below, as mentioned above, have not upheld the order of dismissal.
It has been held that the dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct or the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service; and mere absence of the delinquent from duty without getting the leave sanctioned, on the ground of illness cannot be treated as the gravest act of misconduct although it might have been an act of grave misconduct.
4.
Counsel for the appellants argued that the Court cannot sit over the judgment of the enquiry authority nor they can substitute the punishment.
It is further argued by the counsel for the appellants that the duty of a police constable infers a lot of responsibility and it is a duty to be performed in a disciplined force and absence from duty cannot be less than the gravest act of misconduct.
This argument of the learned counsel for the appellants cannot be brushed aside.
However, it is found that in this case, the absence period has been treated as leave without pay.
The relevant part of the order as translated shall read :  "In view of the above, Constable Rur Singh No. 1446, District Jalandhar is dismissed today on 191987 afternoon from the Police Department.
The period of absence of 44 days is granted (manjoor kita janda hai) as leave without pay."
5.
Counsel for the respondent argued that when the period of absence was treated as leave without pay, the absence stands condoned and, therefore, no action can be taken regarding the period of absence as leave wihtout pay cannot be said to be condoning the absence.
He has cited before me the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Harihar Gopal, reported in 1969 SLR (SC) 274, in which it has been held that the order in that case granting leave was made after the order terminating the employment and it was made only for the purpose of maintaining a correct record of the duration of service, and adjustment of leave due to the respondent and for regularising his absence from duty.
For reproducing the facts of that case, it will be proper to quote paragraph 6 of that judgment, which reads as under :-  "6.
In our view, the conclusion of the High Court cannot be sustained.
The order terminating the respondent's service by paragraph 8 states : "Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by Rule 55 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, the State Government are pleased to order that the said Harihar Gopal is hereby removed from service."
This order bears No. 1481-288-(ii) I dated March 9, 1962.
Copies of this order have been forwarded to various authorities under Endorsement No. 1482- 288/I(ii) also dated March 9, 1962.
The oder granting leave is also dated March 9, 1962; its No. is 1491-299/I(ii) and it recites `Shri Harihar Gopal, Deputy Collector, is granted leave as hereunder :-  (a) Earned leave for 29 days with effect from 28.5.58 to 25.9.58;  (b) Half pay leave for 40 days with effect from 26958 t 4.11.158; (c) Leave without pay for 89 days from 51158 to 1259, for 76 days from 12.11.59 to 26160, and for 18 days from 16260 to 4.3.60."
6.
As against this, there is a judgment also of the Supreme Court in the case of The State of Punjab and others v. Bakshish Singh, JT 1998(7) SC 142 : 1997(3) SCT 401 (SC).
In that case there was a finding of the Additional District Judge as below :-  "In view of the above brief discussion, I am of the considered opinion that once period of absence is treated as leave of the kind whatsoever, the fact that the delinquent remained absent from duty cannot be sustained after the person has been treated on leave of whatsoever kind it may be.
Thus the findings of the learned lower court upon this matter are hereby confirmed."
7.
In that case, the lower appeallate Court having affirmed the findings of the trial Court that the charge of absence from duty did not survive, proceeded to consider the question whether absence from duty was a misconduct of the gravest kind so as to warrant the maximum penalty of dismissal from service or it was mere misconduct for which lesser punishment would be appropriate.
It was further held therein that having found that it was not a case of misconduct of the gravest kind, the lower appellate Court remanded the case back to the punishing auhority for passing a fresh order of punishment.
The appellant in that case filed a second appeal which was dismissed summarily.
In that case, the Supreme Court did not approve the later part of the order and passed the following order in the concluding part of the judgment :-  "(a) The appeal is allowed.
(b) The judgment dated 15.1.1996 passed by the lower appellate Court in so far as it purports to remand the case to the punishing authority as also the judgment of the High Court dated 2181996 are set aside.
(c) The judgment and decree passed by the trial Court is upheld."
8.
It can be seen that before the Supereme Court also it was State appeal and in that case the finding that the delinquent remained absent on duty could not be sustained after the person has been treated on leave of whatsoever kind it may be, was not disturbed.
9.
It can also be seen that in the present case, the order of dismissal treating the period of absence as leave are one and the same and not different as were in the case of Harihar Gopal (supra).
Therefore, the principles of the case of Bakshish Singh (supra) will apply to the facts of the present case.
This being so, granting of leave can be treated as condoning the absence.
Consequently, the order of the dismissal could not be sustained and when the Courts below have quashed the order, this apeal remains without any merit and deserves to be dismissed.
10.
As a result, this appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.