DP Sarkar-II, J - This judgment shall govern all the four Writ Matters mentioned above.
The C.P. No. 20915(W)/1995, relates to the District of 24- Parganas (South), S.O.
No. 2663(W)/1996 relates to the district of 24-Parganas (North), WP No. 18838(SW)/1998 relates to the district of Hooghly and WP No. 5381(W)/1998 relates to the district of Nadia.
2.
The principal petitioner in all the Writ Matters is a registered Samity of Basic Trained candidates under the name Paschim Banga Prathamik Shikshak Shikshan Prapta Bekar-O-Shikshak Samity, West Bengal.
The other two petitioners are the Secretary and the Vice-President of that Samity.
3.
The relief claimed in all the Writ matters are almost identical.
The Writ petitioners have prayed for cancellation of the earlier panels and a direction for giving chance to the members of that Samity for interview and absorption against the vacancies existing in the Primary Schools in the four districts as mentioned above.
There is also a common prayer for condoning the age-bar.
The petitioners have taken the ground, inter alia, that the State-respondents did not prepare the panels according to the existing rules and in conformity with the Decision of the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court dated 1051991 which Decision was affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
4.
The grievance of the petitioners was that in spite of the fact that they are candidates having Basic Training in Education, they were totally ignored and the earlier panels were prepared with the non-trained teachers according to the choice of the Respondent-authorities.
Thus those panels so prepared were challenged in a Writ Petition and that Writ Petition was disposed of by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mahitosh Majumder as His Lordship then was.
Hon'ble Justice Mujumder set aside the panels and directed the Respondent-authorities to prepare fresh panels with only the trained candidates.
This was again appealed against and the Division Bench as we have referred to above passed the Judgment on 1051991 directing that the panel should be prepared with 50% trained candidates and the rest 50% with trained and untrained candidates.
The State-respondents filed SLP against this Division Bench order before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the Hon'ble Supreme Court affirmed the order of the Division Bench.
In the meantime, there was change of recruitment Rules in November, 1991 and panels were prepared in terms of the direction given by the Division Bench and affirmed by the Supreme Court with 50% trained candidates and 50% trained and untrained mixed candidates.
But unfortunately, the panel constituted in Midnapore District and in Howrah District were challenged before the Division bench presided over by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Rajkhawa and Hon'ble Mr. Justice UC Banerjee.
This Division Bench appointed Special Officer to look into the allegations made by the petitioners before the Division Bench and the said Division Bench found serious type of irregularities in the preparation of panels so far as the Midnapore District is concerned, but not so much irregularities in Howrah District, Ultimately, the matter again went back to the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the Hon'ble Supreme Court at first directed the District Judge of each District within West Bengal to appoint Special Officer for making inquiry about the alleged irregularities committed at the time of preparation of panel for appointment of primary teachers.
However, by subsequent orders the sample inspection was limited to the panels prepared for districts of Maldah, Coach Behar, Hooghly, Purulia, Burdwan and the Apex Court considered the report of the Special officers in respect of the said districts and was pleased to hold that although certain irregularities have been committed in preparation of panel in the concerned district yet, keeping in view the number of candidates called for interview the entire panel need not be cancelled except the panel prepared for the district of Midnapore, Maldah and the Board or the Council of those two districts were directed to prepare fresh panels in terms of the Judgment of the Division Bench of this Court dated 10591 and to give appointment from those panels only.
The Supreme Court also observed that the Writ Petitions which were filed in the High Court by the members of the Society which gave rise to the application before the Apex Court ventilating thereby the legitimate grievance of the members for number of years, the members should not be debarred from being considered for appointment solely on the ground that they have crossed the age-bar.
The present petitioners have given much stress on this direction of the Apex Court and according to them the District Primary School Council in the four districts as mentioned above excluded large number of members of the Society on the ground of age-bar.
According to them such exclusion on the ground of age-bar is against the Decision of the Supreme Court.
5.
The learned Advocate appearing for the State-respondents has drawn my attention to the later part of the Judgment of the Supreme Court where the Apex Court has clearly observed that needless to say that the direction of the High Court is to be complied with while preparing the initial panels and not subsequent panels.
Therefore, according to the learned Advocates appearing for the different State-respondents, the question of preparation of initial panel as per the direction of the Supreme Court was confined to the district of Midnapore and Maldah.
Therefore, this direction of condoning the age-bar is applicable to the petitioners of those two districts.
But the panels prepared in other districts which were not disturbed by the Supreme Court, the question of preparation of initial panel so far as those districts are concerned does not arise and as such the petitioners relating to other districts cannot have the benefit of condonation of age-bar.
There is much force in this argument.
The purport and intent of the Supreme Court Judgment is quite clear so far as the point of age-bar is concerned.
The condonation of age-bar is available only at the time of preparation of the initial panel and not in cases of subsequent panel or existing panel.
Further direction was given in respect of other districts to bring to the notice of the Director of School Education (Primary) any individual irregularity.
The Director of School Education (Primary) was also directed to consider such grievances or allegations made individually, according to the existing Rules and in terms of the Judgment dated 1051991.
6.
It has been pointed out again by the petitioners that during the hearing of the SLP arising out of the Judgment of the Division Bench dated 10591 an undertaking was given by the Deputy Secretary of the Education Department, Govt. of West Bengal that the Recruitment Rules framed in November, 1991 fixing up thereby the maximum age limit of forty years for the first time will not be applied to the panels to be prepared as per the direction of the Judgment of the Division Bench dated 10591.
The direction was to prepare the panel, as we have already mentioned, with 50% trained candidates and 50% mixed trained and untrained candidates and direction was also given to complete the preparation of the panel with six months from the date of the Judgment.
Therefore, the undertaking mentioned by the petitioners as given by an Officer of the Education Department, Govt. of West Bengal will be binding on the Government if the panel as directed by the Division Bench could have been prepared within six months from the date of the Judgment.
But it could not be done.
As the matter went up to the Supreme Court and during such period six months expired.
It appears from the observation of the Supreme Court in its Judgment that perhaps by that time i.e. the date of the Judgment, preparation of the panel as directed by the Division Bench of this Court was completed.
But actually no panel was prepared.
So, the undertaking would be applicable if panel could have been prepared within six months from the date of the Judgment i.e. 10591.
Therefore, the question of condonation of the age-bar either on the basis of the direction of the Supreme Court or on the basis of the undertaking as mentioned above should not be condoned.
But the members of the Societies in those four districts are entitled to be called for interview if they are found to be within the age limit prescribed by the Recruitment Rules.
Otherwise, Societies cannot claim for its members any right for interview unless the requirement of the Recruitment Rules are fulfilled.
7.
The existing panels in the districts other than Midnapore and Maldah cannot be cancelled because the members of those panels are not made parties to these Writ Matters.
But if according to the prayer of the present petitioners those panels are set aside, that will affect the right of those whose names appear in the panels and such an order cannot be passed or considered even in the absence of those persons whose names appear in the panels.
8.
Again, the prayer for appointment of the members of the Societies or the absorptions does not arise because of the fact that mere right to appear in the interview or to be called for interview does not create any right to be appointed.
The question of appointment depends fully on merit, in other words, how a candidate fared in the interview.
Therefore, all those prayers or reliefs sought for are not maintainable in the present facts and circumstances.
9.
Accordingly, it is hereby directed that the members of the petitioner- Samity if found otherwise qualified and not barred by age shall be called for interview by the respondents within three months from the date of this order and if any member of the Samity is found to be eligible for appointment during interview the names of such members shall be added to the panels if already prepared.
So far as the Writ Petition No. 5381(W)/1998 is concerned out of 79 (Seventy-nine) petitioners, it is submitted by the learned Advocate for the District Council that 77 (Seventy-seven) have been called for interview.
But the learned Advocate could not explain why other two have been left out.
So, on the prayer of the respondents liberty was given to the District Council of Nadia to give appointment to the post of teachers in Primary Schools within the District of Nadia from the panel already prepared but reserving two posts till the disposal of this Writ matter.
It was done in consideration that two of the petitioners were not called for interview.
Therefore, as per previous direction the Nadia District Primary Education Council shall also call those two left out candidates for interview provided they are otherwise qualified and within age-limit within three months as mentioned above and if found eligible to appointment as teachers.
10.
All the four Writ matters are, accordingly, disposed of in terms as laid down above.
Orders accordingly.