GD Sharma, J - This appeal has been filed under Section 12 of the Jammu and Kashmir Letters Patent against the order of the learned Single Judge dated 8.7.1998 passed in SWP No. 1068 of 1998.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the application of the appellant wherein he had prayed for staying the order whereby he had been suspended from holding the charge of Director, Estates, Srinagar.
The appellant contends that the rejection of the application amounts to the refusal of some of the reliefs which had been prayed for in the main writ petition.
2.
The factual matrix of the case is that vide Govt. order No. 705-GAD of 1997 dated 3051997, the appellant herein alongwith other nine officials of different departments were suspended pending investigation by the Vigilance Organisation with the allegations of disproportionate assets accumulated by them.
The order is reproduced hereunder :-  "Government of Jammu and Kashmir General Administration Department.
Subject : Suspension of Officers.
Government order No. 705-GAD of 1997 dated 3051997 Pending investigation by the Vigilance Organisation into the allegations of disproportionate assets accumulated by the officers indicated below, the following officers are hereby placed under suspension with immediate effect :- S/Shri 1.
MA Hajam, KAS, Custodian General, J&K 2.
MA Laigaroo, KAS, Director Estates.
3.
ML Bhardwaj, FA/COA, J&K Mineral Ltd 4.
GH Rather, Superintending Engineer, Electrical Purchase Circle IInd Srinagar.
5.
Abdul Majid Khan, Executive Engineer, Irrigation and Flood Control, Kupwara.
6.
Vijay Gupta, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Project Officer Basantar Project West.
7.
JK Misri, Dy.
Superintendent of Police.
8.
Raghubir Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police.
9.
GN Wani, BDO Banihal.
10.
Hem Raj, Section Officer in the office of Dy.
Commr.
Kathua.
During the period of suspension, the officers indicated at serial Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 shall remain attached with Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir and those at serial numbers 3, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 shall remain attached with the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu.
By order of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir  Sd/- Commr/Secretary to Govt. General Administrative Department.
--- One of the officials namely, Hem Raj Gupta, SO in the Revenue Department challenged the said order by filing writ petition which was dismissed.
LPA (SWP) No. 04/98 was preferred on 641998 against the said judgment/order and the appellate Court stayed the operation of the judgment of the learned single Judge.
The suspension of the appellant therein was also stayed.
The appellant herein asserts that in the month of September, 1995, he received a communication from Additional Secretary to Govt. Home Deptt.
(Vigilance) bearing No. Home (Vig.)
M-32-/KAS dated 191995 whereby he was informed that he had not filed the property statement returns from 1986 and that the returns which he had filed showed extensive immoveable properties received by way of inheritance.
This was a self-contradicatory communication.
On the one hand, it showed that property statement returns were not filed from 1986 while on the other hand, it contained that large properties were possessed on the basis of inheritance.
The appellant had given a reply to the said communication and was labouring under the belief that the objection raised therein stood dropped.
It was a bolt from the blue for him when all of a sudden he came to know that a case under FIR No. 28 of 1995 Police Station VOK for the commission of offences falling under Section 5(2) of the J&K Prevention of Corruption Act, 2006 (hereinafter to be referred to as the Act) and under Sections 12 and 14 of Publicmen and Public Servants Declaration of Assets Act, 1983 was registered.
During the registration of the above said case, he was promoted to the senior K.A.S.
scale in the year 1996.
In the month of May, 1997 the house of the appellant was searched but no incriminating evidence was found.
This search was blown out of proportions by respondent No. 3 in order to prejudice the higher authorities with the result that on 3051997 the appellant was placed under suspension.
3.
The appellant has challenged the order of suspension by filing writ petition (SWP No. 1068/98) wherein relief in the nature of writ of certiorari was prayed for quashing the impugned order.
Further, relief of writ of mandamus was prayed commanding the respondents to post the petitioner at an appropriate place which should be commensurate with his status.
In the writ petition, the order was challenged on the grounds that it was passed in contravention of rule 31 of the Classification, Control, and Appeal Rules, 1956 (hereinafter to be referred to as CCA Rules).
The instructions appended to the rule are supplementary in nature and character and they have statutory force but they were not followed.
It was also pleaded that the police officers who conducted the investigation including the house search were not competent to do so.
The case of the petitioner was not reviewed by respondents or any competent authority and thus there was a violation of the mandates of rule 31 of the CCA Rules.
The order of suspension was passed without application of mind and on extraneous considerations.
When the investigation against the appellant was being conducted, the passing of the impugned order in the mid-stream was without jurisdiction.
The impugned order was not passed in the public interest.
The continuation in service of the appellant was neither prejudicial to the investigation of the case nor it would have caused a drain on the public exchequer.
4.
In the impugned order, the learned Single Judge has held that the appellant herein was placed under suspension by a competent authority and the instructions issued under rule 31 of CCA Rules are only guidelines and in case they are not adhered meticulously, the order of suspension could not be nullified.
It was also held that a periodical review of the suspension order was done and the subsistence allowance after suspension is being given to the appellant according to the rules.
Sanction of prosecution of the appellant was accorded by the Government vide Government Order No. 27-GAD (Vig) of 1998 dated 551998 and after the completion of the investigation, challan has been produced before the Special Judge (Anti-corruption).
After passing the impugned order on the lines stated above, the learned Single Judge posted the above said writ petition (No. 1068/98) for further consideration.
5.
The appellant has felt aggrieved and through the medium of this appeal the order has been challenged on the following grounds :-  1.
The learned Single Judge wrongly placed reliance on the entries of documents which were recovered from the house of Mohammad Anwar Mir, Div.
Manager SICOP while conducting the search in carrying the investigation of FOR No. 19/1997 Police Station, Vigilance Organisation Kashmir.
These entries recited that the appellant owns two residential flats (Nos. 7136 and 7258) in Basant Bihar New Delhi.
This attribution made to the appellant is totally wrong.
2.
Discriminatory treatment has been meted out to the appellant when the learned Single Judge has stayed the suspension of Ab Qayoom, who is an IPS Officer on the grounds of non-compliance of prescribed procedure but on the same basis suspension of the appellant was not stayed.
The learned Single Judge took no notice of the order passed in LPA No. 04/1998 by the Division Bench (Jammu Wing) when the suspension of the appellant Hem Raj Gupta, SO of DC Officer Kathua was stayed.
While ordering the suspension in question, the procedure to be followed as laid down in the case reported in AIR 1979 SC 1628 was not followed.
3.
The learned Single Judge wrongly had held that the instructions appended to Rule 31 of the CCA Rules are only guidelines and their non-compliance will not nullify the Suspension order.
4.
The learned Single Judge had failed to consider the implication of the procedure order issued by the Governor in exercise of his constitutional power which prescribes that the suspension can be ordered on the basis of an investigation lawfully conducted only after sanction for prosecution is granted by the Government against the government servant.
This instruction was issued after the High Court had held in Ghulam Mohammad Hurra's case (decided by the Division Bench in 1989 SLJ 536) that para 3(c) in the instructions issued in pursuance of rule 54 of the J&K Business Rules on 191988 was contrary to the provisions of rule 31 of the CCA Rules.
In view of the latter instructions, the grant of sanction for prosecution in respect of the cases registered under the Act would not amount to automatic suspension of the employee but in each case the appointing authority has to consider the question of placing an employee under suspension in the light of the material collected during the investigation of the case and other relevant factors including the likelihood of official hindering the investigation.
Since this procedure has not been followed in the instant case so the suspension is bad in the eye of law.
5.
The learned Single Judge had not appreciated the allegations that the search of his house was conducted by incompetent police officials.
6.
Particulars of some cases have been given in the memo of appeal showing that in those cases the allegations were of more serious nature but the suspension orders were not issued.
By issuing the suspension order in question, petitioner stands discriminated.
Heard the arguments.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant have contended that after the decision of the High Court given in the case of GM Hurra v. State of J&K and others reported in 1989 October Part S.L.J.
(J&K) page 536, para (c) of circular (No. GAD-(Adm) 194-78-iv dated 191988) was held as invalid on the ground that it was contrary to the provisions of Rule 31 of CCA Rules and the President/Governor in the year 1990 while exercising the executive and constitutional powers issued instructions in pursuance of Rule 54 of the J&K Business Rules, which are to the following effect :- "a. all cases relating to allegation of corruption against government servants falling under the J&K Prevention of Corruption Act, Samvat, 2006 or any other law for the time being in force, on the subject, shall be examined and processed by the Home Department, after they are received by it from the Vigilance Commissioner or any other authority authorised by the Government in this behalf.
b all cases which under law require previous sanction for prosecution of a public servant shall be submitted to the Chief Minister by the Home Department alongwith the views containing the full facts of the case and after the orders of the Chief Minister are obtained sanction for prosecution will be issued by the Home Department.
c where sanction for prosecution of a public servant has been granted, the Home Department shall endorse a copy of the sanction to the Administrative Department/appointing authority for consideration of the matter in terms of the provisions of rule 31 of the J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 and the instructions issued thereunder."
Circular No. GAD (Adm)-184-78-iv dated 191988 (stated above was) rescinded.
Continuing their arguments it is submitted that the above stated guidelines prescribe that suspension of a public servant against whom there are allegations of corruption under the Act, can only be considered under rule 31 of CCA Rules by the Administrative Department/Appointing authority after copy of the sanction order for prosecution is received from the Home Department.
In the instant case, the appellant was suspended on 3051997 (vide Govt. order No. 705-GAD of 1997 alongwith other nine officers) but the Government accorded sanction for his prosecution after a gap of more than eleven months (vide Government order No. 27-GAD (Vig) of 1998 dated 551998).
The instructions issued by the Governor as a guidelines (stated above) were of statutory nature issued under Section 43 of the Constitution of J&K and their non-observance renders the suspension as invalid.
In other-words, rule 31 of CCA Rules could only be invoked after the passing of the Government order No. 27-GAD of 1998 dated 551998.
The order of suspension required not to be passed as an administrative routine or automatic order but gravity of mis-conduct ought to have been investigated/inquired and nature of evidence placed before appointing authority and it should have been considered.
Suspension is not a punishment but is only one way of forbidding or disabling an employee to discharge the duties of office or post held by him.
In other words, it is to refrain him to avail further opportunity to perpetuate the alleged misconduct or to remove the impression among the members of service that dereliction of duty would pay fruits and the offending employee could get away even pending enquiry without any impediment or to prevent an opportunity to the delinquent officer to scuttle the enquiry or investigation or to win over the witnesses or the delinquent having had the opportunity in office to impede the progress of the investigation or enquiry etc Each case must be considered depending on the nature of the allegations, gravity of the situation and the indelible impact it creates on the service for the continuance of the delinquent employee in service pending enquiry or contemplated enquiry or investigation.
The suspension should have been a step in aid of the ultimate result of the investigation or enquiry but the authority who has suspended the appellant did not apply its mind because even the guidelines (stated above) were not followed and this shows that there was no consideration on the nature of evidence, the gravity of the offence and the other relevant factors stated above.
This automatic order passed in routine is bad in the eye of law laid down by the apex Court in the case of State of Orissa v. Bimal Kumar Mohanty, AIR 1994 SC 2296 : 1994(2) SCT 626 (SC).
6.
In rebuttal, it has been contended by the counsel of the respondents that the instructions in question issued in pursuance of rule 54 of J&K Business Rules cannot be equated with a rule itself framed under Section 43 of the Constitution of J&K because that Section deals with a rule-making power of the Governor for the more convenient transaction of the business of the State and for the allocation amongst Ministers of the said business.
This instruction cannot be equated with any Rule framed under Section 124 of the Constitution of J&K having statutory status as it is only a guideline issued under rule 54 which was framed under Section 43 of the Constitution.
7.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the respective contentions of the counsel for the parties and in order to resolve the controversy rule 31 of the CCA Rules shorn of its un-essentials is reproduced as under :-  "31(1) The appointing authority or any authority to which it is subordinate or any other authority empowered by the Government in this behalf, may place a Government servant under suspension where :- a. an inquiry into his conduct is contemplated or is pending; or b a complaint against him of any criminal offence is under investigation or trial".
From the plain reading of the above stated rule it is obvious that the competent authority has been given the powers to place the government servant under suspension inter-alia if any complaint of the alleged commission of criminal offence is under investigation or trial.
The Government has issued instructions for the guidance of competent authorities while exercising the powers given by the above-said rule.
The class of cases where charge of mis-conduct for possessing assets dis-proportionate to known sources of income falling under Section 5(2) of the Act is under investigation, the Government had initially issued circular No. GAD-(Adm) 184-87-iv contained in clause (c) which was struck down by this Court as ultra-vires to rule 31 of CCA Rules.
Thereafter, fresh instructions were issued in the year 1990 under President/Governor's Rule as reproduced hereinabove and by no stretch of reasoning it can be said that those instructions were Rules made under Section 124 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir regulating the recruitment and conditions of service but those are purely the procedural instructions dealing with according of sanction for prosecution of a public servant in corruption cases, and did not deal with the powers enshrined in rule 31 CCA Rules while ordering suspensions.
These instructions cannot be equated with any statutory status as they are only guidelines purely executive in nature.
They can only supplement rule 31 CCA Rules but cannot supplant it.
In case the argument as advanced on behalf of the appellant is accepted, then the public servants accused of contravening the provisions of the Act will form a privileged class as none of them can be suspended till order for sanctioning the prosecution is issued by the Government.
Indirectly it will amount to encouragement for indulging in corruption which is against public policy and contrary to the aims and objects of administering criminal justice.
The public demands eradication of corruption in every sphere of life as it is eating the vitals of the society.
8.
With the regard to the argument advanced by the counsel appearing for the appellant that his case was not reviewed by the competent authority for suspension, it is stated that under sub-rule (3) of rule 31 of the CCA Rules, the authority making the suspension order has the discretion to revoke it at any time and in this behalf the Government has issued the instructions to the competent authority.
In government instructions No. (2) at page 444 (Service Law in J&K) this instruction is reproduced as under :-  "Government Instructions (2) :- Competent authority should endeavour to have chargesheet filed in Court, in case of prosecution, or served on the Government servant, in case of departmental proceedings within three months from the date of suspension.
Cases in which this is not possible such authorities will report to the next higher authority, explaining the reason for delay.
The cases of Government servants under suspension should be reviewed by the competent authority periodically to see that steps be taken to expedite the progress of the Court trial/departmental proceedings, so as to reduce the periods of suspension to barest minimum".
In the case of Govt. of AP v. Sivaraman, AIR 1990 SC 1157 while interpreting AP CCA Rules, the apex Court observed as under :-  ".........the order of suspension after a period of six months would not become non-est giving an automatic right to reinstatement in service.
Our attention has not been invited to any provisions of law conferring such right on a Government servant who has been placed under suspension pending enquiry of a case against him.
Where the rules provide for suspending a civil servant and enquiry thereof to report the matter to the Government giving out reasons for not completing the investigation or enquiry within six months, it would be for the Government to review the case but it does not mean that the suspension beyond six months become automatically invalid or non-est.
The only duty enjoined by such a rule is that the officer who made the order of suspension must make a report to the government and it would be for the government to review the facts and circumstances of the case to make a proper order.
It is open to the government to make an order revoking the order of suspension or further continuing the suspension.
The order of suspension, however, continues until it is revoked in accordance with the law".
Same principle has been laid in the case of Director General of Police, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and others v. K Rathnagiri, AIR 1990 SC 1423.
9.
This apart, from record it is seen that in the instant case, review was initiated on 231998.
Report was called from investigating agency on 1831998.
Vigilance Organization submitted final report to Government Administrative Department with request for grant of sanction for prosecution.
The matter was considered.
Sanction was granted.
Again the progress of the case was sent for and the report of the Vigilance Organisation examined.
Challan was filed against the accused on 2361998 in the Court of Special Judge (Anti-corruption), Srinagar.
The petitioner-appellant filed a writ petition only thereafter notwithstanding mention is not made of all this in the writ petition.
The fact remains that the case has been subject of review of the competent authority periodically and substantially in accordance with the government instructions on the subject.
10.
With regard to the third submission made by the counsel for the appellant that he is being discriminated qua Hem Raj Gupta, SO, Deputy Commissioner office, Kathua who too was placed under suspension vide Government order No. 70-GAD of 1997 dated 3051997, it is stated that his suspension has been stayed under an interlocutory order passed by the Court in LPA No. 04/1998 (Jammu wing) while the said LPA is still pending disposal.
Considering that the matter has not been finally adjudicated by the concerned bench, it is in-appropriate for this bench to speak on the merits of the said stay order.
The existence of that order on the record of that case cannot be a ground available to the appellant herein for staying his suspension.
However, in order to keep the scales of justice even it becomes imperative that LPA No. 04/1998 (of Jammu wing) is also finally decided by the competent Bench.
The registry is directed to get that case listed with utmost despatch before the appropriate Bench for final adjudication.
11.
In the result, there is no force in this appeal which is dismissed.
Writ petition No. 1068/1998 be now listed before the concerned Single Bench at an early date.
Appeal dismissed.