GS Singhvi, J - The facts relevant to the decision of these petitions are that the petitioners were appointed as Drivers on ad hoc basis by an order dated 191997 issued by the Prohibition and Excise Commissioner, Haryana.
After about nine months, their services were terminated by an order dated 1661998.
The petitioners and other Drivers challenged that order in four different writ petitions bearing Nos. 9433, 9444, 9445 and 9462 of 1998.
During the pendency of those petitions, the Prohibition and Exice Commissioner, issued order dated 771998 for reigning in service 11 out of the 23 ad hoc Drivers till the availability of regular appointees recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (re-named as Haryana Staff Selection Commission).
After taking note of the order dated 771998 and considering the arguments of the learned counsel, a Division Bench dismissed the writ petitions except qua 11 senior-most Drivers.
2.
The order dated 771998 was challenged in C.W.P.
No. 10919 of 1998, Rajveer Singh v. State of Haryana and others, on the ground that the same was issued ignoring the policy of reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
That petition was disposed of by a Division Bench on November 6, 1998 with the following directions :-  "1.
Within 15 days from today the department should prepare a revised merit list keeping in view the reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes (A&B) category, Backward Classes (A&B category) and Ex-servicemen and notify the list of the candidates who may be found entitled to be retained in service as ad hoc Drivers against the 11 posts.
2.
If the petitioner is found entitled to be appointed against one of the posts reserved for Backward Classes (A category) then he shall be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
3.
The service of such candidates who are not found entitled to be retained in service but are continuing in service in the light of the observations made by the Court in Vijay Kumar's case shall be dispensed with after giving action oriented notice and opportunity of hearing.
4.
If any candidate who is found entitled to be appointed and is willing to join service as an ad hoc Driver, then he shall be given re- employment notwithstanding the fact that he may not have approached the Court by filing a separate petition."
In the purported compliance of the directions given by the High Court, respondent No. 2 issued notice Annexure P4 dated 521999 calling upon the petitioner and two other Drivers, namely, Shri Nesh Ram and Shri Shiv Kumar to show cause as to why their services be not terminated.
Copy of the revised merit list was also attached with the notice served upon the petitioners and others.
After considering the objections filed by them, respondent No. 2 issued the impugned order terminating their services on the ground that they do not fall in the merit list of 11 candidates.
3.
The petitioners have challenged the termination of their services mainly on the ground that respondent No. 2 has failed to act in accordance with the judgments of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney v. Union of India and others, AIR 1993 SC 477 and of this Court in Jaskaran Singh v. State of Punjab, 1995(1) RSJ 510 : 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H)(DB) and the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular letter No. 2/88/98-3GS-III dated 2561997.
4.
In the preliminary objections incorporated in the written statements filed today, the official respondents have averred that the impugned order has been passed keeping in view the observations made by the High Court while deciding four writ petitions filed by the ad hoc Drivers.
On merits, they have averred that the orders terminating the services of the petitioners have been passed after considering the objections filed by them.
They have also averred that only 140 of the 156 vehicles available with the department are road-worthy and as many as 142 regular Drivers are available and if the ad hoc Drivers are counted then 12 Drivers are surplus.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
At the outset, we may mention that although the official respondents have filed written statements to contest the assertion of the petitioners that merit list has been prepared ignoring the law laid down by the Supreme Court and the instructions issued by the government vide circular letter dated 2561997, at the hearing of the cases the learned Deputy Advocate General frankly and fairly conceded that the impugned order has been passed by respondent No. 2 without considering the true import of the judgments of the Supreme Court and of this Court and the instructions issued by the government for giving effect to the law laid down by the Supreme Court.
He also stated that a revised merit list will have to be prepared keeping in view the above mentioned decisions and the instructions issued by the government.
But, at the same time, he pleaded that the official respondents should be left free to take appropriate decision keeping in view the number of road-worthy vehicles available with the department.
Learned counsel for the non-official respondents made valiant efforts to defend the action taken by the official respondents by arguing that they have done so after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
In our opinion, the decision taken by respondent No. 2 to dispense with the services of the petitioners ignoring the law laid down by the Supreme Court and the instructions issued by the government will have to be invalidated.
Respondent No. 2, in our considered view, was bound to consider cases of the petitioner for appointment/retention in service against the general category posts on the basis of their overall merit vis-a-vis other candidates.
He could bring an end to their services only if it was found that they are less meritorious than other candidates.
However, the fact of the matter is that the petitioners have secured more marks than the general category candidates and even as per the criteria evolved by the department, they are entitled to be placed above other candidates.
Therefore, the termination of their services will have to be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
That we hereby do.
6.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed.
The impugned order terminating the services of the petitioner is quashed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to undertak fresh exercise for passing appropriate order in accordance with the order of this Court dated November, 6, 1998.
While doing so, he shall give full effect to the ratio of the decisions of the Supreme Court in Indira Swhney's case (supra) and of this Court in Jaskaran Singh's case (supra) as well as the instructions issued by the government.
At the same time, we make it clear that while passing fresh order, respondent No. 2 shall be free to consider the requirement of ad hoc Drivers keeping in view the availability of roadworthy vehicles.
Petitions allowed.