AK Ganguly, J - This review petition has been filed by the Bihar State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the said Board) for reviewing the order dated 17th November, 1997 passed by this Court in C.W.J.C.
No. 7526 of 1997.
2.
Heard learned Counsel for the parties in connection with the review petition.
From the argument advanced and also from the pleadings made in the review petition it is clear that the review is in respect of an observation made in the Judgement.
The observation in connection with which review has been filed is set out below :  "It is not the case of the respondent-Board that no appointment can be made from the said merit list."
3.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner-Board seeking review submitted that the said finding of the Court is contrary to the counter affidavit of the said Board inasmuch as it has been stated that in the paragraph 8 of the counter- affidavit it has been specifically stated that the panel dated 871996 had a life span of one year as per the PSEB Accounts Service Regulation, 1991 and the said panel has lapsed.
It has also been stated by the learned Counsel seeking review that the said stand made in paragraph 8 of the counter- affidavit has also been admitted by the petitioner.
4.
It is not in dispute that after the aforesaid case was heard by this Court, the order was not kept reserved but the order was dictated in Court and the offending part in the order in respect of which review is sought for was obviously dictated in open Court.
5.
It may be that the averments made in the counter-affidavit did contain a stand which was contrary to the aforesaid recital in the order but it is well known that the Court decides the matter only on the basis of the facts and the materials which are brought to the notice of the Court at the time of argument and thereupon the order is passed.
Many points are taken in the pleadings of the parties but the Court may not consider the materials contained in the pleadings of the parties if the same is not brought to the notice of the Court.
6.
Reference in this connection may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Daman Singh v. State of Punjab, reported in 1986 RRR 560 (SC) : A.I.R. 1985 SC page 973.
In paragraph 13 of the said judgment the following observations have been made :  "It is not unusual for parties and Counsel to raise innumerable grounds in the petitions and memoranda of appeal etc., but later, confine themselves, in the course of argument to a few only of those grounds, obviously because the rest of the grounds are considered even by them to be untenable.
No party or Counsel is thereafter entitled to make a grievance that the grounds not argued were not considered.
If indeed any ground which was argued was not considered it should be open to the party aggrieved to draw the attention of the Court making the order to it by filing a proper application for review or clarification."
7.
In this case when the order dated 17111997 was passed one learned lawyer appeared but the review petition was filed by another learned lawyer.
As such this Court wanted to hear the learned lawyer who appeared before this Court when the order dated 17111997 was passed and the said learned lawyer appeared and was heard.
The said learned lawyer admitted before this Court that the order dated 17111997 was dictated in open Court and the said learned lawyer did not urge that the Court recorded the aforesaid finding even though its notice was brought to the contrary stand of the said Board in its affidavit.
Therefore, the Court passed the order on the basis of the points urged before it and it is not stated by the learned Counsel for the petitioner-Board, who appeared when the order dated 17111997 was passed, that the Court recorded in its order something which was not argued before it.
8.
In fact this position is further affirmed by the conduct of the Board itself.
The Board did not initially file an application for review against the order dated 17111997 but the Board filed a Letters Patent Appeal against the order dated 17111997 before the appellate Court as the said Board is entitled to do if the Board felt aggrieved by the order.
9.
Now it appears from the averments made in paragraph 15 of the review petition that the appeal Court has orally observed that the petitioners should first file a review petition and in order to enable the said Board to file its review, the Appellate Court has adjourned the hearing of the appeal.
10.
Even though it does not appear from the order of appeal Court, these averments have been made in the review petition and such submission has also been made by the learned Counsel seeking review and this Court accepts the same.
11.
In the background of these facts, the question which emerges is whether the present review petition is maintainable.
12.
It is well known that the scope of relief by way of review is a very limited one.
It is well settled that even an erroneous order cannot be corrected by filing a review petition.
The remedy of appeal is the appropriate remedy in such cases.
13.
It is equally well settled that unless specifically provided for, even a judicial authority cannot review its own order.
But this limitation, however, does not apply to Courts of plenary jurisdiction and it is well settled that the High Court exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution can review its own order.
Reference in this connection may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court tin the case of Shivdeo Singh v. State of Punjab reported in AIR 1963 SC page 1909.
14.
In a subsequent decision, the Supreme Court has outlined the permissible limits within which the remedy by way of review is available.
In the case of Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma, reported in A.I.R. 1979 SC page 1047, the learned Judges of the Supreme Court outlined the parameters of remedy by way of review in the following words :  "It is true as observed by this Court in Shivdeo Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 1909, there is nothing in Article 226 of the Constitution to preclude a High Court from exercising the power of review which inheres in every Court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors committed by it.
But, there are definite limits to the exercise of the power of review.
The power of review may be exercised on the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was made; it may be exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record is found; it may also be exercised on any analogous ground.
But, it may not be exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous on merits.
That would be the province of a Court of appeal.
A power of review is not to be confused with appellate power which may enable an Appellate Court to correct all manner of errors committed by the Subordinate court."
15.
It is clear from the perusal of the aforesaid law laid down by the Supreme court that in demarcating the parameters of the remedy by way of review, the Supreme Court has closely followed the language of Order XLVII of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the Code).
Therefore, the Supreme Court has accepted that in matters of review principles of Order XLVII of the Code should be kept in mind.
Order XLVII, Rule 1 of the Code has basically two parts.
The first part, namely, Order XLVII, Rule 1(a), (b) and (c) provides who can apply for review and the second part states the grounds on which review can be exercised when such an application is filed by a person who is competent under Order XLVII Rule 1 clauses (a), (b) and (c).
16.
A conjoint reading of Order XLVII, Rule 1 Clauses (a), (b) and (c) makes it clear that review can be filed only by a person who is aggrieved by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed and from which no appeal has been preferred or if he is aggrieved by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed or from a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes.
We are not concerned with last clause (c) in this case as it is not relevant.
17.
So on a proper reading of Order XLVII, Rule 1(a) and (b) of the Code, this Court is of the opinion that the said Board is not competent to file this review petition because it has already filed an appeal and the said appeal is pending before the appropriate Court.
This Court is not investigating the case on merits any further in view of the fact that it has already passed an order and the correctness thereof is pending in appeal, before an appellate Court.
The Court has only examined the question whether it has recorded the aforesaid finding in its judgment dated 17111997 contrary to the case which was argued by the said Board before it.
This Court is convinced from the facts mentioned here-in-above that it has not done so.
It is very likely that the stand of the Board on affidavit was not brought to its notice.
The Court has adjudicated the case which was made out before it and the Court pronounced its order immediately thereafter in the Court itself.
18.
In that view of the matter, this Court does not exercise its review jurisdiction which is a very limited one especially when an appeal is pending.
19.
Learned Counsel for the Board cited before me the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Uptron India Limited v. Shammi Bhan and another, 1998(6) SCC 538 : 1998(2) SCT 169 (SC) in order to contend that even if there is a wrong concession by the Board's Counsel, the Board is not bound by it.
This Court cannot accept this argument for a variety of reasons.
Firstly in this case there was no concession.
Concession would involve a conscious giving up of a point.
But here the situation was different.
Apart from that in Uptron India Limited (supra) the Apex Court made the observation in the context of whether a wrong confession (concession ?)
on law can create a binding precedent.
The Apex Court held, it cannot, and made the following observation :  "a wrong concession on a question of law, made by a Counsel, is not binding on his client.
Such concession cannot constitute a just ground for a binding precedent."
20.
Here the judgment under review is under challenge before the Appeal Court and it is certainly not final.
Therefore, those observations in Uptron India Limited (supra) are of no assistance to the review petitioners.
21.
Learned Counsel for both the parties cited some other judgments but in view of the order which this Court is passing, this Court does not feel it necessary to consider them as they are not relevant to the issue.
22.
This review petition is, therefore, dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.