Nagendra Rai, J - The petitioner, who is an employee of the Project and Development India Limited, a Government of India Undertaking (hereinafter referred to as the respondent-Undertaking) has filed the present writ application for quashing the order contained in letter dated 30th July, 1997 by which the management of the Undertaking has accepted the option of the petitioner for voluntary retirement, a copy of which has been annexed as Annexure-6 to the writ application and for a direction to the management of the respondent-Undertaking to consider the withdrawal letter of the petitioner in which a prayer has been made to withdraw the prayer of voluntary retirement made earlier and pass an appropriate order and till the matter is decided he should not be relieved from the employment.
2.
The facts which are not in dispute are that the petitioner joined the service of the respondent-Undertaking in 1964 as a Draftsman trainee.
In course of time he was promoted to a higher post.
At the relevant time he was working as a General Foreman (Electrical), a drafting staff, under the respondent-Undertaking.
The respondent-Undertaking issued a Circular on 5985 giving option to the employees to opt for voluntary retirement with additional benefits.
This scheme was extended by another Circular dated 12.10.95.
The date for giving option was upto 18.10.95 which was later on extended upto 31st December, 1997.
Copies of the aforesaid two schemes dated 5995 and 12.9.95 have been annexed as annexures 1 and 2 to the writ application.
The petitioner filed an applicating opting for voluntary retirement in terms of the aforesaid scheme.
A copy of the application filed by the petitioner has been annexed as Annexure-A to the counter-affidavit.
The prayer of the petitioner for voluntary retirement was accepted by the Management on 30th July, 1997, a copy of which has been annexed as Annexure-6 to the writ application and Annexure-B to the counter-affidavit.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that he opted for voluntary retirement due to certain financial difficulties faced by him at the relevant time in the year, 1995.
However, the same was not accepted by the Management.
The petitioner withdrew the option of voluntary retirement through letters dated 3597 and 5597.
Copies of the letters have been annexed as Annexure-5 series to the writ application.
Even after sending the aforesaid two letters withdrawing the payer made by the petitioner for option of voluntary retirement the respondent-Undertaking by letter dated 30th July, 97 informed that his offer of voluntary retirement has been accepted.
There was no mention of the two letters sent by the petitioners withdrawing the option.
Thereafter, the petitioner immediately sent a protest letter to the respondents on 7897 under registered post with A/D which was received by them.
On 24997 the petitioner came to know that the respondents have issued a release letter to 186 employees of the respondent-Undertaking under the aforesaid scheme including the petitioner and thereafter the petitioner immediately made a representation on 24997 to the respondent No. 2 the Dy.
General Manager of the respondent-Undertaking with a request to retain the petitioner in service as he has already withdrawn his option prior to the issuance of the letter dated 30th July, 97.
Two copies of the letters dated 7897 and 24997 have been annexed as Annexure-7 and 8 respectively to the writ application.
Further case of the petitioner is that as he has withdrawn his offer of voluntary retirement before the acceptance of the resignation, the order accepting the voluntary retirement contained in Annexure-6 is invalid in the eye of law.
He should be allowed to continue.
It is also stated that the scheme of voluntary retirement was made only regarding the surplus staff.
As such the said scheme is not applicable in the case of the petitioner and accordingly the order accepting the voluntary retirement of the petitioner has no effect in the eye of law.
It is also stated that the respondent-Undertaking has acted arbitrarily while it has accepted the voluntary retirement of the petitioner and other 166 employees but it has not accepted the prayer of the voluntary retirement of 16 employees though they have not withdrawn their option.
The names of such employees have been given in paragraph 11 of the petition.
4.
The stand of the respondent-Undertaking on the other hand is that the voluntary retirement scheme was brought into existence to save the Organisation from closure.
The voluntary retirement scheme was applicable to all the employees whether they were surplus staff or not and in pursuance of that the petitioner opted for the voluntary retirement and the same was accepted on 30th July, 97.
Prior to acceptance the petitioner has not filed any petition seeking withdrawal of the petition for voluntary retirement.
The two letters alleged to have been sent by the petitioner on 3597 and 5597 (Annexure-5 series) under the Certificate of Posting are created documents.
These letters were created only to be filed alongwith the writ application.
The fact that these letters were created will appear from the fact that the stamp on Under Certificate of Posting has been obtained from Parsa Bazar Post office whereas letters Under Certificate of Posting have been sent from Dhanbad Address.
There is no mention of sending these two letters in the application filed by the petitioner on 7897 and 24997 and this indicates that these two letters are created ones.
The petitioner has sent two letters only on 7897 and 24997 after acceptance of his offer of voluntary retirement.
In the said letters he has prayed for revocation of voluntary retirement and allow him till normal retirement.
Since the order of voluntary retirement became effective and the petitioner ceased to be an employee of the Undertaking on the basis of the subsequent letters the voluntary retirement cannot be revoked.
With regard to the allegation of the petitioner that the voluntary retirement of some of the employees were not accepted though they did not withdraw the same it is stated that their prayer was not accepted because they had to complete to work assigned to them.
After they completed the work majority of them have been voluntarily retired and the cases of some of the employees are still pending for consideration.
5.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the offer of voluntary retirement/resignation can be withdrawn at any moment before it became effective and as the petitioner being an employee of Undertaking and the contract of employment being bilateral the order of voluntary retirement cannot be effective unless it is accepted and as before acceptance the petitioner has filed petition (Annexure-5 series) withdrawing the offer of voluntary retirement the respondent should not have accepted the voluntary retirement and thus the acceptance of voluntary retirement by the authority as contained in letter dated 30th July, 96 is invalid in the eye of law.
The petitioner will be deemed to be in service in pursuance of his withdrawal of prayer of voluntary retirement and accordingly a direction may be issued to the authorities to treat the petitioner in service till his normal retirement.
6.
The stand of the respondents on the other hand is that no letter was sent by the petitioner intimating his intention to withdraw the prayer of voluntary retirement before its acceptance on 30th July, 97.
Once his prayer for voluntary retirement has been accepted he is ceased to be in employment and subsequently the letters sent by him for revocation of the voluntary retirement cannot be given effect to.
7.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner in support of his submissions relied upon the judgments of the Apex Court in the case of Power Finance Corp Ltd v. Pramod Kumar Bhatia, 1997(1) CLR 1111 : 1997(3) SCT 354 (SC) and JN Srivastava v. Union of India 1998 SCC (L&S) 1251.
He has also relied upon the judgment of the learned single Judge of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Jayant Kumar Atmaram Bhatt v. Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, 1998 Lab.
LC 1435 : 1998(3) SCT 692 (Gujarat).
8.
Learned Counsel appearing for the respondents on the other hand relied upon the judgments of the Apex Court in the case of Raj Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1969 SC 180 and Union of India etc. v. Gopal Chandra Mishra and others etc., 1978 Lab IC 660.
9.
The facts enumerated above clearly show that in pursuance of the scheme of the respondent-Undertaking the petitioner opted for voluntary retirement.
The terms of the scheme do not show as to by what time the voluntary retirement is to be accepted nor the petitioner in his option letter has indicated the date for the acceptance to be effective.
10.
As to when the order of voluntary retirement would become effective depends upon the nature of the office and the provisions governing the same.
The relinquishment by voluntary retirement may be either unilateral or bilateral.
In case of unilateral the relinquishment would become effective after communication of the intention to relinquish to the competent authority or the employer.
Acceptance of the offer is not required.
The relinquishment becomes effective the moment it is communicated.
When the relinquishment is of bilateral character the retirement will become effective only on acceptance of the same by employer.
In case of relinquishment by way of voluntary retirement of prospective nature it will become effective on the date of the retirement mentioned in the notice or the petition seeking voluntary retirement.
Before the date of retirement is reached an employee has right to withdraw the prayer even if the prayer is accepted by the employer before the date of retirement is reached.
Unless the statutory rule provides generally contract of employment is of bilateral nature and the offer to relinquish the office by voluntary retirement or by resignation becomes effective after its acceptance.
The question as to whether the order of relinquishment by way of voluntary retirement will be effective is no longer res integra and had been decided by the Apex Court in catena of cases.
11.
In Jai Ram v Union of India, (Sic) 1954 SC 584, the Apex Court held as follows :  "It may be conceded that it is open to a servant who has expressed a desire to retire from service and applied to his superior officer to give him the requisite permission, to change his mind subsequently and ask for cancellation of the permission thus obtained; but he can be allowed to do so long as he continues in service and not after it has terminated."
12.
In Raj Kumar's case (supra) that has been relied by the Counsel appearing of the respondents, the Apex Court reiterated the same principle in the following manner :  "When a public servant invited by a letter of his resignation determination of his employment, his service normally stand terminated from the date on which the letter of resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority and in the absence of any law or rule governing the conditions of his service to the contrary it will not be open to the public servant to withdraw his resignation after it is accepted by the appropriate authority.
Till the resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority in consonance with the rules governing the acceptance, the public servant concerned has locus poenitentiae but not thereafter."
13.
A Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Gopal Chandra Mishra (supra) has considered as to when prospective resignation given by High Court Judge would become effective.
The Apex Court relying upon the aforesaid two cases held that in absence of anything to the contrary in the provision governing terms and conditions of the office/post an intimation in writing sent to the competent authority by incumbent to resign his office or post from a future specific date can be withdrawn by him at any time before it became effective.
It was held that the same principle will apply where it is a case of proposal to retire from the service or tender to resign from the office from the future date.
14.
In the case of JN Srivastava (supra) which has been relied upon by the petitioner the Apex Court has held that if the voluntary retirement notice is moved by an employee and gets accepted by the authority within the time fixed, before the date o retirement is reached, the employee has locus poenitentiae to withdraw the proposal for voluntary retirement.
15.
Thus, the law is well settled that contract of employment is of bilateral character and unless the relinquishment and the voluntary retirement is accepted the same could not be effective.
If no date of voluntary retirement is fixed the employee can withdraw the voluntary retirement at any time before it is accepted.
If some date is mentioned then the employee can withdraw the prayer of voluntary retirement before reaching that date even if the offer or acceptance has been accepted earlier to that.
16.
In this case the question is as to whether the petitioner withdrew the offer of voluntary retirement prior to its acceptance on 30th July, 97 or not.
17.
If it is found that the petitioner has made request to withdraw the prayer of voluntary retirement before its acceptance then the order of acceptance as contained in Annexure-6 has no value in the eye of law and employee will continue to be in employment of the respondent-Undertaking.
18.
The petitioner has relied upon the two letters in support of his assertion that before acceptance of the prayer of relinquishment he withdrew the option.
The said letters are dated 3597 and 5597.
They were sent under the Certificate of Posting.
It is admitted position that the address given on the Certificate of Posting is of Dhanbad whereas the stamps affixed on the same are of Parsa Bazar Post Office.
In the letters which were sent by the petitioner after acceptance of the voluntary retirement (Annexure-7 and 8) there is no mention of the fact that prior to acceptance of the voluntary retirement letters were sent withdrawing the prayer of voluntary retirement.
The respondents have emphatically denied that no such letter was received in the office at any point of time.
The above facts clearly support the stand taken by the respondents that these letters have been created for the purpose of this case.
No such letters were sent prior to the acceptance of the prayer of the voluntary retirement.
Thus, the said letters (Annexure-5 series) cannot be relied upon.
The result is that there is no material on the record to show that the petitioner withdrew the option prior to its acceptance of the offer of voluntary retirement on 30th July, 97.
19.
Once the letter of voluntary retirement was accepted in view of the settled law the relationship of employer and employee came to an end and the prayer of the petitioner for revocation of the voluntary retirement cannot be accepted.
At this stage, I would like to mention that the other two cases relied upon the petitioner in the case of Power Finance Corporation Ltd (supra) and JN Srivastava (supra) are of no help to the petitioner.
In the case of Power Finance Corporation Ltd (supra) it appears that in terms of the voluntary retirement scheme of the Corporation the respondent employee of the said case applied and the said prayer was accepted subject to the clearance of outstanding dues but before the condition could be complied with the Corporation withdrew the scheme.
Dealing with the said matter the Apex Court held that as the condition was not fulfilled the jural relationship of the employer and employee did not come to an end and as the scheme was withdrawn before the condition could be complied with the employee cannot take benefit of the order accepting the voluntary retirement.
In the case of JN Srivastava (supra) as the prayer of voluntary retirement was withdrawn before the notice date, it was held that the same is permissible in view of the settled law.
20.
So far the stand of the petitioner that the scheme is not applicable in the case of the petitioner because he was not surplus staff is concerned, the stand of the respondent is that the petitioner was the surplus staff.
The alternative stand was that there is no provision in the scheme that it will apply only to the surplus staff and a request was made to all the employees and in pursuance of the request or the offer the petitioner applied and his case has been considered.
The scheme as appended with the writ application does not show that it is applicable in the case of surplus staff.
21.
The averments made on behalf of the respondents show that the petitioner is the surplus staff but it is not necessary to dwell upon the said aspect in detail for the reason the provisions of the scheme on perusal do not show that it was applicable only in the case of surplus staff.
The offer was made to all the employees whether they were surplus or not and thereafter they applied and an appropriate order has been passed in their case after taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of each case.
Thus, on that ground the order accepting the voluntary retirement cannot be interfered with.
22.
The other grievance of the petitioner that he has been discriminated in the sense that prayer of other 16 employees of voluntary retirement has not been accepted is also of devoid of any substance as the averments made in the counter-affidavit show that the prayers of some of the employees were not accepted because they did not complete the work assigned to them and later on the prayer of majority of the employees has been accepted and the cases of others are under consideration.
This apart, non-acceptance of the prayer of some of the employees cannot be a ground to hold discrimination against the petitioner.
23.
In the result, there is no merit in the application and the same is dismissed.
Application dismissed.