KK Srivastava, J - The petitioners, who were working on the posts of Deputy Director, Dairy Officers and Manager Quality Control in Dairy Development Department, Haryana, have approached this Court by means of this writ petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, praying for quashing of the impugned orders, copies Annexures P5, P6 and P7, issued by the respondent/State to the extent that the benefit of the revised pay scale and revised grade be extended to them as well.
The petitioner SP Singh, was working on the post of Deputy Director (at the time of filing of the amended writ petition), whereas petitioners SC Sharma and SS Mehta were working as District Dairy Officers and petitioner Subhash Mann was working as Manager Quality Control.
The petitioners possessed the requisite qualification for recruitment to the post of the District Dairy Development Officer/Project Officer and Manager Quality Control.
All the petitioners joined the Dairy Development Department as Direct recruits.
The academic qualifications and experience required for direct recruits on the posts of Project Development Officer prescribed by the State of Haryana is a shown in column No. 1 of appendix B of Annexure P/8.
These were mentioned initially in the draft-rules and now converted into the rules, which fact is not disputed.
The qualifications mentioned in column No. 1 are as under :-  1.
Project District Development Officer Officer/Dairy i) Degree in Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry/Dairy Science/Animal Science from a recognized University/Institution Degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry/Dairy Science/Animal Science from a recognised University/Institution ii) 5 years experience in the field of Dairy Development/Animal Husbandry extension work 5 years experience as Demonstrator in the Dairy Dev./Animal Husbandry extension work iii) Adequate knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard So far as the post of Manager (Quality Control) is concerned, which has been shown at serial No. 3, and the requisite qualification/experience for recruitment to this post has been shown in column No. 8 of Annexure P8, which reads as under :-  3.
Manager (Quality Control) i) Bachelor of Science in Dairy Technology/Food Technology or Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry i) Bachelor of Science in Dairy Technology/Food Technology or Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
The State of Haryana revised the pay-scales of District Dairy Development Officer and granted revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 in place of the existing pay scale of 2000-3500, as will appear from copy of the letter No. 1/155/92/10R(FD), Annexure P7, which is impugned in this petition.
The comparative pay-scales, i.e. existing and revised, have been shows as under :-  Existing Pay-scale Further revised scales of pay Rs. 2000-3500 i) 2200-4000 (TS) ii) Selection Grade of Rs. 3000-4500 on completion of five years of regular satisfactory service.
iii) 4100-5300 (SG) limited to 20% of the Cadre post provided they have put in 12 years or more of regular satisfactory service.
The petitioners are aggrieved by the impugned notification, copy Annexure P7, from the condition imposed therein, which is to the effect that the revision of pay scales of the District Dairy Development Officer of the Dairy Development Department is confined to such District Dairy Development Officers, who hold and possess the degree of Bachelor in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry degree only.
The impugned orders are extracted as Annexure P5 and P6.
Annexure P5 is about the decision of the State Government to revise the pay scales of some categories of employees with effect from 141992 and shown at serial No. 1, which reads as under :-  1.
Animal Husbandry Veterinary Surgeon 2000-3500 i) 2200-4000 (TS)ii) Selection Grade 4100-5300 limited to 20% of the posts of Veterinary Doctors upto the level of Joint Directors (Vet.
side) provided they have put in 12 years of more of regular satisfactory service.
Veterinary Surgeons, SDOs (AH) Assistant Directors, Deputy Directors and Joint Directors will form one cadre for this purpose.
The cadre strength will be determined by the Administrative Deptt.
as per relevant rules/instructions.
All the officers of the rank of SDOs (AH)/Assistant Directors or equivalent and above have been declared as Class-I Officers w.e.f.
141992.
Annexure P6 shows the revision of pay-scales of Veterinary Surgeons of Animal Husbandry Department, Haryana w.e.f.
141995.
The comparative pay scales, i.e. existing and proposed are as under :-  Existing pay scales Proposed pay scales i) 2200-4000 (ST) i) 2200-4000 ii) 4100-5300 (SG) limited to 20% posts of vets.
upto the level of Joint Director (Vets.
side) provided they have put in 12 years or more regular satisfactory service, ii) 3000-4500 on completion of five years of regular satisfactory service.
iii) 4100-5300 (SG) limited to 20% posts of veterinary doctors upto the level of Joint Directors (Vety.
side) provided they have put in 12 years or more of regular satisfactory service.
Vets, SDOs (AHO, ADs, DDs and JDs) will form one cadre for this purpose."
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2, taking a preliminary objection that it is the inherent administrative power of the State Government to prescribe and grant scales of pay to any class or category of Government employee borne on different and distinct cadres and governed by separate set of statutory rules, keeping in view the financial constraints, its repercussions on other similarly situated cadres, hardship involved and so many other factors having bearing on the overall revision of scales of pay as also the pay structures etc.
It was contended that this is done after due consideration keeping in view various administrative factors, such as qualification and job responsibilities and other considerations from time to time.
It was further contended that the revision cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
On merit, it was contended that no discrimination has been done by the respondents to the officers having qualification in Dairy Science.
It was contended that the pay scales of Demonstrator and Veterinary Surgeons were not equal even prior to 1979.
It was submitted that in the year 1992, the pay scales of Veterinary Surgeons of Animal Husbandry department were further revised from Rs. 2000-3500 to 22-4000 (2200-4000 ?)
(TS) with Selection Grade of Rs. 4100-5300 to 20% of the Veterinary Surgeon.
It was also mentioned that the petitioners never requested for any kind of higher pay scales recently granted to the Veterinarian for consideration before filing of the present petition in this Court.
In para 14 of the written statement, it was contended as under :-  "That the contents of para 14 are partly admitted and denied with the submission that all the officers of the department, i.e. District Dairy Development Officer, Manager Quality Control etc., who are already in possession of the qualification of Bachelor of Veterinary of Science and Animal Husbandry are already getting the same status pay/Selection Grade or other benefits equal to those of officers of Animal Husbandry Department.
However, the draft service rules also lay down qualification of Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry as an alternative to the degree of the Bachelor of Science (Dairy Science) for the post of District Dairy Development Officer."
It has been further stated that the petitioner No. 1 has already been promoted to the post of Officer Incharge, State Training Centre Dairying as he fulfilled the requisite qualification and experience for the said post.
In para 16 of the written statement, it was submitted as under :-  "That the contents of para 16 are contested with the submission that as far as the issue regarding the grant of pay scale equal to those of officer of Animal Husbandry department is concerned, it pertain to Finance Department, whereas the other issue regarding equation of duties and qualifications of the post of District Dairy Development Officers concerned, i.e. totally different in nature.
It is further submitted that in view of the submissions made, no law point is involved for consideration of this Hon'ble Court."
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned Assistant Advocate General, State of Haryana, appearing for the respondents and have perused the record of the case.
At the very out-set, it may be mentioned that the State Government has prescribed the qualifications for the post of District Dairy Development Officer so far as the direct recruits are concerned and which have been extracted in the earlier part of the judgment.
The Government gave equivalence to the qualifications to the degrees in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry with the degree in Dairy Science or degree in Animal Science from a recognized University or Institution.
The other qualification required for the post is about 5 years experience as Demonstrator in the field of Dairy Development or Animal Husbandry extension work and thirdly adequate knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard.
There is a note appended at the foot of the qualifications, reading as under :-  "Preferentially, Master of Science in Dairy Technology/Dairy Bacteriology/Dairy Chemistry/Dairy Microbiology."
Undisputedly, all the petitioners possess the requisite qualification of degree in Dairy Science for the post of District Dairy Development Officer.
All the petitioners were found suitable for appointment to the post of District Dairy Development Officer and were accordingly recruited and appointed on the said posts.
It is noteworthy that the respondents treated the academic qualification of degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry at par with degree in Dairy Science from a recognised University or Institution.
This is apparent from Annexure P8, Appendix B of which has been issued under the rules governing the service.
There is no material on record to hold that till the issuance of the impugned letter Annexure P7, revising the pay scales of the District Dairy Development Officers, there was any special significance given to the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, being better and higher qualification over the degree in Dairy Science or Animal Science.
Moreover, the petitioners, also performed the same work which is being performed by the District Dairy Development Officers possessing the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
Since the respondent-State gave equivalence and treated at par the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry with degree in Dairy Science and Animal Science, as the requisite qualification to hold the post of District Dairy Development Officer, the respondent/State cannot discriminate those district Dairy Development Officers, who are not possessing the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry and on the other hand, are possessing the degree in Dairy Science or Animal Science.
Apart from the principle of equal pay for equal work, in the instant case there is equivalence of the academic qualifications possessed by the District Dairy Development Officers having either degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry or degree in Dairy Science or Animal Science.
The respondent/State cannot differently treat the District Dairy Development Officers, who do not possess the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry and give a better scale of pay to such District Dairy Development Officers, who hold and possess the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry and particularly in the absence of any material to show that the Government treated the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry superior over the degree in Dairy Science and Animal husbandry.
This view finds support from the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in State of Mysore v. Bassavalingappa, 1986(4) SLR 169, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court held that there was discrimination in the grant of revised pay to the diploma holders and denying the same grade to the certificate holders as there was no material on record to show that diploma became a better qualification than the certificate holders.
The Hon'ble Apex Court held in para 5 as under :-  "It is not disputed before us that so far as the facts stated in the judgment of the High Court is concerned are not disputed.
It is admitted that at the time when this respondent was recruited there was only one cadre and that was of Instructor and only one pay scales and the Certificates holder or a diploma holder both were entitled to be requited on that post.
No material is on the record on the basis of which it could be contended that there was any substantial difference at that time between the two qualifications although they were described differently.
It was argued that a diploma is a higher qualification than a certificate.
But neither there is any curriculum on record nor any other material to draw that inference.
On the contrary this circumstance that at the time when respondent was recruited a diploma holder or a certificate holder both were entitled to be recruited as Instructor on the same pay scale and this indicates that in those days the two were considered to be alike."
In the case of P Savita and others v. Union of India 1985(3) SLR 29 SC the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the grant of pay scale to Senior Draftsmen of Defence Production and held that the classification of Senior Draftsmen in two groups and recommending higher pay scale for one group not on any merit-cum-seniority basis but only on seniority/fitness basis amounted to discrimination and was hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It was held that the Draftsmen could not be treated differently.
In para 15 the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "The case on hand is much stronger than the facts of the Randhir Singh's case.
In that case, the drivers belonged to two different departments.
In this case, the Senior Draughtsmen, divided into two groups are in the same department doing identical and same work.
It is not a case of different grades created on the ground of higher qualification either academic or otherwise or an entitlement by any other criteria laid down.
The justification for this classification is by the mere accident of an earlier entry into service.
This cannot be justified."
In Sandeep Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1992(6) S.L.R.
722 : 1992(2) SCT 252 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court did not approve the distinction between the Diploma-holder petitioners and the Regular Diploma holders, particularly when the Diploma Holder petitioners were required to perform similar duties which the regular Diploma-holders were doing.
In para 2 it was observed as under :-  "From the facts placed before us, it appears that the scheme under which the petitioners are working is of a very specific nature.
There is no permanent need for the work and since it is a project for a particular purpose, it will not be possible to direct that the petitioners may be regularised in service.
From the materials, however, it appears that similarly qualified engineers when employed for the work which the petitioners are called upon to do, on regular basis are paid a minimum grade pay of Rs. 1,400/-.
We see no justification to discriminate between the petitioners and regularly employed Junior Engineers who on appointment, receive Rs. 1,400/-.
Accordingly, we direct that the petitioners shall be paid a sum of Rs. 1,400/- per month instead of Rs. 1,000/- as at present and since the pay shall be for the month the question of holidays will not be taken into account."
Dealing with the case of degree-holders working in UP Bridge Corporation, it was observed in para 5 as under :-  "Some of the petitioners in these applications under Article 32 of the Constitution are degree-holders in Engineering and are designated as Assistant Engineers while the others are diploma-holders in Engineering and are designated as Junior Engineers.
They are employed on daily rate basis under the UP Bridge Corporation-respondent No. 3 which is a public sector undertaking of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The main dispute convassed in these writ petitions is two fold :- (1) regarding the appropriate salary for the work done; and (2) regularisation of service.
From the papers placed before us and submissions advanced at the bar we find that the regular employees are being paid at the rate of Rs. 1,400/- for diploma holders and Rs. 1,800/- for degree holders, whereas the petitioners who are employed on casual basis are being paid at the rate of Rs. 1,800/- (for degree holders) and Rs. 1,280/- (for diploma-holders).
The distinction maintained has been explained by saying that since they are not regular employees no payment is being made for the holidays when no work is taken.
It is difficult to accept this contention.
The petitioner-degree holders are paid at the same rate as the regular degree-holders.
There is no reason to make distinction between petitioner-diploma holders and the regular diploma-holders.
Besides even under the Minimum Wages Act a paid day of rest in every period of seven days is mandatory.
The diploma/degree holders among the petitioners should, therefore, be paid Rs. 1,400/- pm"  Learned State counsel, on the other hand, contended that the State was justified in prescribing the revised pay scale to such District Dairy Development Officers, who hold the qualification of degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry only, which was a qualification higher than the degree in Dairy Science or Animal Science.
He further contended that the petitioners could not claim benefit of the pay scale as the State Government had a right to give pay scales to such employees, who possess a better and higher qualification, though performing the same work.
The learned State counsel placed reliance on Mewa Ram Kanojia v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1256.
The parity of pay scales was framed on the basis of Equal Pay For Equal Work by Hearing Therepist and Audiologist in All India Institute of Medical Sciences.
In para 5, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "While considering the question of application of principle of `Equal Pay for Equal Work' it has to be borne in mind that it is open to the State to classify employees on the basis of qualifications; duties and responsibilities of the posts concerned.
If the classification has reasonable nexus with the objective sought to be achieved, efficiency in the administration, the State would be justified in prescribing different pay scale but if the classification does not stand the test of reasonable nexus and the classification is founded on unreal, and unreasonable basis it would be violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Equality must be among the equals.
Unequals cannot claim equality."
In the instant case, as has been discussed above, the petitioners possessed the qualifications of degree in Dairy Science, which the State itself put at par with the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
It is not the case of the respondent/State that the Bachelor's degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry was higher and superior to the Bachelor's degree in Dairy Science.
In the instant case, equality is being claimed by the petitioners, who are equal in qualification and performing the some duties on the same post with those employees, who hold degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
Viewed from this angle, the State/respondents are not justified in carving out a classification for giving a different pay scale to the employees performing duties of the same post, who possess degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry and differentiate those employees including the petitioners, who hold the equivalent degree in Dairy Science.
It cannot be said that there is a reasonable nexus with the objective sought to be achieved the classification is founded on unreal and unreasonable basis and as such the same is violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Now coming to the next authority relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents, i.e. State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 1788 : 1997(2) SCT 151 (SC), it may be pointed out that in State of Haryana (supra), it was a case of grant of different pay to the employees working as Mali-cum-Chowkidars/Pump Operator on daily wages from the pay given to such Mali-Chowkidar/Pump operators, who were holding the post on regular basis as regular employees.
Dealing with two sets of employees, the Apex Court held in para 10 as under :-  "The respondents, therefore, in the present appeals who are employed on daily wages cannot be treated as on a par with persons in regular service of the State of Haryana holding similar posts.
Daily-rated workers are not required to possess the qualifications prescribed for regular workers, nor do they have to fulfil the requirement relating to age at the time of recruitment.
They are not selected in the manner in which regular employees are selected.
In other words, the requirements for selection are not as rigorous.
There are also other provisions relating to regular service such as the liability of a member of the service to be transferred, and his being subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the authorities as prescribed, which the daily- rated workmen are not subjected to.
They cannot, therefore, be equated with regular workmen for the purposes for their wages.
Nor can they claim the minimum of the regular pay-scale of the regularly employed."
The facts of the case in State of Haryana (supra) are different and distinct from the facts in hand.
In the instant case, the petitioners are regular employees and they possess degree in Dairy Science, which has been treated as equivalent with the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry by the State of Haryana.
It is not a case where the petitioners are performing duties with different responsibilities than the other employees on the same post having the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
The last authority relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents is State of Uttar Pradesh v. JP Chaurasia, 1989(5) S.LR 788.
The question which cropped up before the Hon'ble Apex Court in this case was whether it is permissible to have two pay scales in the same cadre for persons having the same responsibilities.
It was observed in para 17, interalia, as under:-  "....... the answer to the question depends upon several factors.
It does not just depend upon either the nature of work or volume of work done by Bench Secretaries.
Primarily it requires among others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of the respective posts.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be same or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon the averments in affidavits of interested parties.
The equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government..........." The dispute before the Hon'ble Apex Court was regarding the pay scales admissible to Bench Secretaries and Section Officers of the Allahabad High Court.
As mentioned earlier, in the instant case the State has tried to confine the benefit of the impugned revised pay scale to the District Dairy Development Officers who possess the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry only.
The petitioners are also working on the same post, i.e. District Dairy Development Officers.
There is no difference in the two posts, and as a matter of fact, the posts held by the petitioners are the same, as are mentioned in the impugned order (copy Annexure P7), which confines the revised pay scale to the aforesaid set of employees working on the post of District Dairy Development Officers with the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
There is no dispute regarding the District Dairy Development Officers performing the duties in the same degree and responsibilities.
The facts of the instant case are, thus, distinguishable from the facts of the case reported in State of Uttar Pradesh (supra).
The contention of the learned State Counsel, in my considered view is, thus, not in accordance with the settled law regarding grant of same scale of pay to the employees who possess the same or equivalent qualification and performing the same duty.
As mentioned earlier, the petitioners No. 1 to 3 possess the qualification in Dairy Science, which the State Government itself treated at par and equivalent with the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
So far as petitioner No. 4 is concerned, the post of Manager (Quality Control) required a Bachelor's degree in Dairy Technology/Food or in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, besides Master of Science in Dairy Technology/Dairy Bacteriology/Dairy Chemistry/Dairy Microbiology.
There is no material placed on record to show that the Government treated the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry better and higher qualification than the remaining requisite qualification aforesaid for the post of Manager (Quality Control).
Resultantly, the Government has discriminated the petitioners in the grant of revised pay scales vide Annexure P7, by confining the same to such District Dairy Development Officers, who possess the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry only and to this extent the impugned order, copy Annexure P7 is held to be discriminatory and violative and Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and the said condition is liable to be quashed.
It is held that the condition of application of the revised pay scales to the District Dairy Development Officers who possessed only the degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry is discriminatory and arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and is accordingly quashed.
The writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.
Petition allowed.