VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Mamta Tripathi seeks issuance of a writ for quashing the letter Annexure P-2 and rule regarding eligibility for matriculation examination.
2.
The relevant facts giving rise to the present writ petition are that the father of the petitioner is a permanent resident of village Gurbara in Distt.
Gonda, Uttar Pradesh.
He is posted as Chief Chemist at Sugar Mill, Kaithal.
The petitioner was studying at Junior High School Batora Lohangi, Gonda.
She passed her middle examination in April, 1997 from Uttar Pradesh.
She was admitted in 9th class in Om Prabha Senior Model School, Kaithal, respondent No. 2.
She even passed her 9th class examination.
Admission form of the petitioner was sent to the Board of School Education Haryana, Bhiwani (for short "the Board"), respondent No. 1, as a private candidate.
Respondent No. 1 rejected the application form of the petitioner on the ground that she has not passed the middle class examination from the Board of School Education Haryana.
It is alleged that she was informed that as per rules and instructions for eligibility of private candidate, the person concerned should be of 14 years; should have passed eighth class from Board of School Education Haryana and there should be a gap of two years after passing the middle examination.
3.
The action of the respondent-Board in rejecting her application form was challenged to be illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It has been pointed out that at the time of sending the application form of the petitioner, she was kept in dark.
She had studied for two years in the school i.e. respondent No. 2 and that the application form could not be rejected merely because she has passed her middle examination from the Board of Uttar Pradesh.
4.
Both the respondents have contested the writ petition.
Respondent No. 2 admitted that the petitioner had joined 9th class in the school and had passed her 9th class examination.
It was denied that respondent No. 2 had sent the admission form of the petitioner to the respondent-Board for matriculation examination to be held in March, 1999.
In fact, it was asserted that the petitioner had left the school after passing 9th class.
Respondent No. 2 further asserted that the petitioner and her father were told about the eligibility conditions for taking matriculation examination from respondent No. 1 but still they insisted for her admission in the school.
5.
Respondent No. 1, on the contrary, asserted that since the petitioner had not passed her middle class examination from the respondent-Board, therefore, being a private candidate she is not eligible to take the matriculation examination.
The reason given by respondent No. 1 was that thousands of students managed to obtain bogus and forged school leaving certificates and when the documents were scrutinized, it was found that these candidates were ineligible.
The purpose of allowing the candidate is to provide educational facilities to those unfortunate students who could not pursue their studies because of one or the other reason.
To keep the interest of candidates and to avoid hardship from bogus certificates, Rule 8(1) of the relevant Rules was amended.
It was denied that this is discriminatory.
6.
The short question that comes up for consideration is whether the rule whereby a private candidate who has passed his middle class examination from any other Board other than the respondent-Board is not entitled to take the matriculation examination is valid or not.
The relevant rule reads as under :-  "Rule 8(1) - Candidates who have passed 8th class examination from this Board with atleast two years gap shall be allowed to appear as private candidates and those who have passed their middle examination before 1976 and in the year of 1988 from the concerned school shall also be allowed to appear as private candidates subject to the satisfaction and verification of the Board.
The decision of the Chairman in this regard shall be final: Provided that no one on the rolls of a recognised school after November 30 preceding the year of examination shall be allowed to appear as a private candidate."
7.
A perusal of the relevant rule reveals that the necessary conditions are : (i) that the candidate should have passed eighth class examination; (ii) there should be two years gap after passing eighth class examination and before he or she takes the matriculation examination; and (iii) in case of private candidate, he or she should have passed the middle class examination from the respondent-Board.
8.
The objection of the learned counsel for the petitioner is pertaining to words `whereby the candidate must have passed eighth class examination from the respondent-Board'.
According to the learned counsel, this is discriminatory.
9.
It is well known that equality in Article 14 of the Constitution has acquired new and important dimensions.
In the case of EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555, the Apex Court said :-  "Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be cribbed and confined within traditional and doctrinaire limits.
From a positive point of view equality is antithesis to arbitrariness.
In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies.
One belongs to the rule of law and the other to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is, therefore, violative of Article 14."
A few months later in the case of Maganlal Chhagganlal (P) Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 2009, Supreme Court again enunciated the same principle pertaining to Article 14.
Unreasonable and arbitrary decisions were held to be violative of Article 14.
It was observed as under :-  ".......But one point we wish to make, and we cannot over-emphasise it, that Art. 14 enunciates a vital principle which lies at the core of our republicanism and shines like a beacon light pointing towards the goal of classless egalitarian socio-economic order which we promised to build for overselves when we made a tryst with destiny on that fateful day when we adopted our Constitution.
If we have to choose between fanatical devotion to this great principle of equality and feeble allegiance to it, we would unhesitatingly prefer to err on the side of the former as against the latter.
We should be breaking our faith with the Constitution if we whittle down in any measure this high and noble principle which is pregnant with hope for the common man and which is at once a goal as well as a pursuit, for history shows that it is by insidious encroachments made in the name of pragmatism and expediency that freedom and liberty are gradually but imperceptibly eroded and we should not allow the same fate to overtake equality and egalitarianism in the name of expediency and practical convenience."
The same principle was reiterated by the Apex Court in the famous case of Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others etc., AIR 1981 SC 487.
It was held that if the classification is unreasonable, the same would be violative of Article 14.
Supreme Court went on to observe as under :-  "......If the classification is not reasonable and does not satisfy the two conditions referred to above, the impugned legislative or executive action would plainly be arbitrary and the guarantee of equality under Article 14 would be breached.
Wherever therefore there is arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the executive or of an "authority" under Article 12, Art. 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such State action.
In fact, the concept of reasonableness and non- arbitrariness pervades the entire constitutional scheme and is a golden thread which runs through the whole of the fabric of the Constitution."
The shift towards broader notion of fairness and fair procedure in administrative action was noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Km.
Neelima Misra v. Dr. Harjinder Kaur Paintal, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1402, wherein the Supreme Court held that the duty is to act fairly and judicially.
The findings arrived at by the Supreme Court are as under:-  ".....The duty to act judicially or to act fairly may arise in widely different circumstances.
It may arise expressly or impliedly depending upon the context and consideration.
All these types of non-adjudicative administrative decision making are now covered under the general rubric of fairness in the administration.
But when even such an administrative decision unless it affects one's personal rights or one's property rights, or the loss of or prejudicially affects something which would juridically be called at least a privilege does not involve the duty to act fairly consistent with the rules of natural justice.
We cannot discover any principle contrary to this concept."
More close to the facts of the present case is the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Meenakshi Malik v. University of Delhi and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1568 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
192.
The facts in the cited case were that the candidate was seeking admission in one of the Medical Colleges in Delhi.
She was compelled to leave India for a foreign country by reason of the posting of the parent by the Government to such foreign country.
She was denied admission for not fulfilling the condition that she should have received the last two years of education in a school in Delhi.
The Supreme Court held that the condition was unreasonable because such a rule should take into account the variety of circumstances.
Thus, the condition in prescription of qualification for admission to a medical college providing that last two years of education should be in a school at Delhi was not accepted.
10.
The position herein is identical.
It is not denied that the petitioner's father was a resident of Gonda.
He has started working in a Sugar Mill at Kaithal Necessarily, the petitioner has to shift to Haryana and join 9th class in the school.
She studied for two years in Haryana.
It is not the case of the respondent-Board that the middle class school leaving certificate produced by the petitioner is forged or fabricated.
When such is the situation, thus, imposing a condition that merely because who has not passed her middle class examination from the respondent-Board is most unreasonable.
Since there is an arbitrariness which is implicit in such an action, it must be struck down to be discriminatory.
Merely because certain bogus and fake certificates were produced, indeed, will not be a ground that individual should be discriminated.
It is for the respondent-Board to check the said menace by drawing proper rules but unrealistic and arbitrary decisions, indeed, being violative of Article 14 cannot be protected.
The ratio of the decision of Full Bench of this Court in the case of Meenal Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 464 : 1994(4) SCT 493 (P&H)(FB), that reservation can be made by the State Government in preference to candidates who had studied in a particular institution or region; as well as the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Anant Madaan v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments 901 : 1995(2) SCT 449 (SC), that in medical and dental colleges where the condition requiring a candidate to have studied 10+1 and 10+2 classes in a recognized institution in the State of Haryana is not unreasonable, will have little impact on the facts of the present case.
Those cases were confined to admissions to professional courses.
The seats was were numbered in those professional courses.
It is not the condition herein.
The very purpose to permit private candidate to take matriculation examination is to provide educational facilities to those unfortunate students who could not pursue their studies for one reason or the other.
Therefore, the abovesaid decisions so much thought of on behalf of respondent-Board will not come to the rescue of the respondent-Board.
The result would be that the condition that the candidate must have passed eighth class examination from the respondent-Board must be struck down to be arbitrary and discriminatory.
Rest of the rule requires no interference.
11.
For the reasons, the decision of the respondent-Board in not permitting the petitioner to take the matriculation examination is held to be illegal.
The same is quashed.
As a necessary consequence impugned order Annexure P-2 is also quashed.
On 4.3.1999 this court had permitted the petitioner to take the matriculation examination subject to further orders of the Court.
If the petitioner had taken the said examination, her result shall be declared.
Petition allowed.