Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner appeared in the PMET for admission to the various Government/private Medical/Dental Colleges situated in the State of Punjab for the session commencting in the year 1998-99.
As per the Prospectus issued by the Punjabi University-respondent No. 3 the Agency that had been deputed to conduct the test, 2% seats were reserved for sportsmen/sportwomen.
The petitioner secured the requisite 35% qualifying marks in the Entrance Test as provided by Clause 52 of the Prospectus, and sought admission as a Sportsman against one of the reserved seats on the basis of the grade `B' Certificate Annexure P-5 dated 26th September 1997 issued by the Director, Sports Punjab, which revealed that the petitioner had been a Member of the Indian Team, which had participated in the 4th Asian Junior Fencing Championship in the year 1996-97 at Jakarta.
The petitioner was, however, not granted admission whereas the private respondents who had also been given grade `B' Certificates on being awarded Silver Medals (second position) in local tournaments, were granted admission instead.
The petitioner has, accordingly, come to this Court, praying that as grade `B' postulated different levels of proficiency within itself, the petitioner, who was in grade B(i) would have precedence over the private respondent Nos. 6 and 7 who were in grade B(iv) and B(v), respectively.
2.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed by the respondents.
In the reply filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 4, i.e. the State of Punjab and the Director Sports, it has been pointed out that the instructions Annexure P-1 provided that National Medalists who had secured Ist, 2nd and 3rd position, were to be placed at a higher position than those sportsmen who had merely participated in International competitions as the mere participation in these tournaments could not prove their proficiency in comparison with position holders in local tournaments.
It has also been pleaded that the issue was fully covered against the petitioner by the judgment of this Court in Review Application No. 345 of 1997 in C.W.P.
No. 9259 of 1997 dated 17th December, 1997.
A separate reply has also been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 i.e. the Secretary, Medical Education and Research, Punjab and the Principal, Government Medical College Patiala, whereby a list of selected candidates has been placed on the file.
A third reply has been filed by respondent No. 6 Ms. Sunit Sidhu reiterating the stand of respondent Nos. 1 and 4.
3.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that Clause 52 of the Prospectus when read alongwith Annexure P-1, the State Government's instructions on the subject issued on 10th December, 1997, clearly visualised that the petitioner was to be given precedence in the light of his higher proficiency within the same grading and as such, the petitioner who had a grade B(i) vis-a-vis the lower grading of the respondents was entitled to admission over them.
He was argued that the observations made in the order in the Review Application were not relevant as the points raised herein were not in issue in that matter.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents have, however, pointed out that this court had been called upon to interpret Clause 52 in the review application, and as such, the present matter was fully covered against him by the order aforesaid.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in this petition.
To my mind, the matter stands concluded against the petitioner for a number of reasons.
This Court in its judgment dated 18th September 1997 in Prabhabir Singh v. State of Punjab and others, C.W.P.
No. 9259 of 1997, had quashed the selection of Viresh Chopra-the present petitioner (then arrayed as a respondent) and the other candidates on the ground that their admission under the sports category, was not justified.
Viresh Chopra alongwith the others so effected then filed Review Application No. 345 of 1997 in C.W.P.
No. 9259 of 1997 before this Court and the same was disposed of by order dated 17121997.
The argument raised on behalf of the applicants with regard to the determination of merit inter se was replied by the learned Single Judge by observing that "the participation in an event irrespective of its level is placed lower to winning of a gold medal in any tournament or championship.
For example, winning a gold medal in the National Games or a sport would be placed higher to the participation in International Tournaments and securing no position whatsoever".
In Shalu Gupta v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(6) S.L.R.
161 : 1994(2) SCT 428 (P&H), likewise, a learned Single Judge while observing that no classification could ever be perfect and that every classification could result in hardship to some student or the other held that "the implication of the instructions is that a mere participant in the event held for the senior category, cannot have precedence over a Gold Medalist in the Junior category.
This is just and reasonable.
It cannot be dubbed as arbitrary and consequently, the instructions cannot be said to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It is true that the instructions referred to in this judgment were those of 1992 but in essence, both the sets of instructions are the same.
It has also been pointed out by Mr. Dhaliwal appearing for the private respondents that the SLP filed by the petitioner Viresh Chopra against the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 9259 of 1997 had been dismissed as withdrawn with the following observations :-  "The learned counsel appearing in these petitions after arguing for a while submitted that the petitioners will approach the High Court seeking review/clarification in their individual cases on the basis of the material already on record, and, therefore, they withdrew this Special Leave Petition, at this stage.
We record the statement of the learned counsel for the petitioners and dismiss all the three S.L.Ps.
as withdrawn.
On 1101997, a direction was given by a three judge Bench of this Court to the effect that the seats which have been allocated to the petitioners should not, in the meanwhile, be filled up by giving admission to any other candidate against those seats.
We direct that the said direction shall continue to remain in force and apply to all the petitioners in all these Special Leave Petitions for a further period of two weeks, during which time, the petitioners may seek appropriate orders from the High Court".
It is the conceded position that Review Application No. 345 of 1997 had been filed on account of the liberty granted by the Supreme Court.
6.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, has argued that the reliance of the learned Single Judge, on Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab and another, 1993(4) S.L.R.
673 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB), while making the order in the review application was wrong as the said matter dealt with the grading inter se between senior and junior categories of Sports Category candidates.
That may be so but the fact remains undenied that the observations of this Court in Review Application were totally against him irrespective of the judgment in Sahota's case (Supra).
7.
The matter has been considered by me independently of the judgment cited.
Clause 52 of the prospectus provides as under :-  "Admission shall be made strictly on the basis of relative merit of candidates determined on the basis of the Competitive Entrance Examination (PMET) marks.
In the case of reserved seats, relative merit of the candidates shall be determined within each category of reservation.
In the case of sports category, relative merit of the candidates shall be determined on the basis of sports performance during 10+2 academic course in each sub-category within the main categories A, B, C and D and candidates should have obtained atleast 35% marks in PMET.
All certificates on the basis of which reservation is being sought will have to be appended with the application forms for admission to PMET/Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges.
No claim made at later stage will be entertained."
It has been emphasised by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram that the word "in each sub-category within the main category A, B, C and D", would determine the performance inter se between senior and juniors provided that the candidates would have to be graded as per the proficiency level given in the instructions.
He has, accordingly, urged that the petitioner who had grade B (i) would have precedence over the respondents who were lower in proficiency as being mere participants.
The learned counsel for the respondents has, however, relied on paragraph 6 of the instructions Annexure P-1 and has pointed out that a winner irrespective of the nature of the tournament would have preference over a mere participant.
The relevant part of paragraphs 2 and 6 of the instructions Annexure P-1 are reproduced below :-  GRADE-A ----------------------------------------- GRADE-B Sportsmen/women who have participated and achieved position in the following tournaments/meets/competitions/championships.
Gradation will be done for 1st, 2nd and 3rd position.
Participation will be graded from (i) to (v) Categories mentioned below :- (i) International tournaments for senior and junior organised by International Federation of that discipline and where at least 10 countries have participated, other than those mentioned against Grade-A (ii) All India Combined University Teams which participated in Senior National/World University Championship/International competitions.
(iii) National Games Organised by Indian Olympic Association.
(iv) Senior and Junior National Championships organised National Federation of that game under the banner of India Olympic Association where at least 15 States have participated.
(v) National Championship for women Organised by Sports Authority of India.
(vi) Position Holder of All India Inter University Tournaments where at least 15 Universities have participated, participation in these competitions, will not be graded.
(vii) Position Holders of Punjab School Team/Kendriya Vidyalaya schools and Navodaya Sangathan Schools Teams participated in school National Championships.
Participation in these competitions will not be graded.
(viii) Position Holders of All India Rural Meet under sixteen by SAI.
Participation will not be graded.
GRADE-C ---------------------------------------------- GRADE-D ---------------------------------------------- 6.
In the matter of rating `inter se' the preference in the same grade will be given in the following descending orders :- (i) Winner.
(ii) Runner up.
(iii) Third position holder.
(iv) No. of participations.
Regarding senior and junior tournaments/Championship, senior shall have precedence over junior in the same performance i.e. for example Gold Medalist in Senior Category shall have precedence over Gold Medalist in Junior Category and Gold Medalist in Junior Category of Silver Medalist in Senior Category and so on which imply that participation in Grade `B' category in the same order as of medalists, if after considering the performance criteria as mentioned above the candidates having higher marks obtained in the examination which is considered for admission will decide the seniority from highest to lowest marks obtained by the candidates."
A reading of the two paragraphs quoted above would clearly reveal that the instructions have laid down the method of determining the proficiency inter se between various categories of sport persons.
Paragraph 2 divides the certificates into four categories depending on the level of the candidates proficiency in sports.
Clause 52 of the Prospectus postulates that the level of proficiency has to be determined in each sub-category within the main categories A, B, C and D and the method of computing the proficiency level has been given in paragraph 6 of Annexure P-1.
It is, therefore, apparent that the sub-categories visualised in the Prospectus and the instructions are not the categories within the main categories as suggested by Mr. Atma Ram i.e. B(i), B(ii) and B(iii) etc, but the inter se merit has to be determined under paragraph 6 and in that eventuality, a position holder falling in B category would have precedence over a mere participant, though it be in an International event.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Dasti Order.
Petition dismissed.