SB Sinha, J - This application for contempt has been filed for alleged wilful disobedience of this court's order dated 14.5.97 passed in Writ Petition No. 2754(W) of 1997.
The said writ application was disposed of with the following directions :-  "(A) The petitioner should not be attached with 115 Battalion.
The competent authority shall consider the question of attaching the petitioner with another battalion and may upon taking into consideration the materials on records consider the desirability to attach him with a battalion which is situated in or around the State of West Bengal.
(B) If for some cogent reason, the same is not possible, be may be attached with any battalion posted in the State of Jammu and Kashmir and in that event : (i) the trial subject to the following directions be held at one of the principal towns of the State where the petitioner would be able to obtain the services of a lawyer, (ii) the trial may be held at Calcutta for the purpose of examining the petitioner's defence witness, (iii) in the event, the court of enquiry does not agree thereto, the entire expense for examination of the defence witness shall be borne by the respondents, (iv) in the event, any difficulty arises for bringing any original document, the same would be xeroxed in presence of the petitioner and the petitioner would be entitled to compare the same with the original which may be marked as exhibits and such xerox copies may be brought to Calcutta, (v) however, in the event, the petitioner intend to get the said documents examined by another handwriting expert, such an opportunity may be provided to him, and (vi) the period during which the petitioner was at Calcutta upon expiry of his leave period shall be adjusted against his due leave, if any, and the same shall not be considered as break in service."
2.
The petitioner contends that despite the said judgment he had not been allowed to join service nor any salary has been paid to him.
In fact, according to the petitioner the respondents had asked him to report to 115 battalion itself for the purpose of participating in further evidence although it would appear from the said judgment, it has been accepted that the pre-trial enquiry was over.
3.
By reason of an order dated 26.11.97 the petitioner had been attached to the report to BSF, Jammu for disciplinary purposes and according to the petitioner no cogent reason had been assigned as to why he could not be attached to a battalion stationed in West Bengal.
4.
The alleged contemners on the other hand submitted that although at the time of the petitioner's appointment, 115 battalion was stationed at Calcutta but the same had now moved to Gurdaspur in the State of Punjab.
It is stated that all the relevant documents are lying at Gurdaspur.
It has been stated that the petitioner had been attached to another battalion at Jammu and Kashmir where he can avail the services of Lawyers.
It has further been averred that no trial of the petition has yet started, the question of giving effect to the other directions, does not arise at this stage.
5.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that no reason whatsoever has been assigned as to why all of a sudden the evidences taken in a court of enquiry were found to be inadequate and it was decided to go for additional record of evidence.
It has further been submitted that the petitioner could have been posted with a different battalion, stationed outside the State of West Bengal only on assignment of cogent reasons and as no reason has been assigned the alleged contemnor must be held to have committed contempt of this court.
6.
Mr. Mihir Chakraborty, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the alleged contemners, on the other hand, submitted that the petitioner could not be attached in West Bengal as all the documents and prosecution witnesses concerned with the case are attached with 115 batallion which is now located at Gurdaspur, Punjab.
It has been stated that the main grievance of the petitioner that he would not be able to defend himself properly at Tharang in the State of Jammu and Kashmir does not subsist as the said batallion has moved to Gurdaspur, Punjab.
7.
It is true that when the judgment was pronounced it was given out that the pre-trial stage evidence was over.
Therefore, it was taken into consideration by this court as regard the insistence on the part of the respondents relating to presence of the petitioner at Tandhar where 115 batallion was then stationed.
This court while passing the said judgment took into consideration the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case.
The alleged contemners have argued which have not been controverted that the petitioners had not been attached to 115 batallion but has merely been asked to report to the said batallion for the purpose of recording additional evidence.
8.
Under what circumstances such a step has been taken by the alleged contemner is not known to this court and thus, if the petitioner is aggrieved by the said subsequent event he may take recourse to such remedies which are available to him in law as in this proceeding the legality or justification or otherwise of the said action on the part of the alleged contemner cannot be adjudicated upon.
According to the respondents all the records are lying with the said 115 batallion which is now stationed at Gurdaspur and thus according to them it was considered necessary to attach the petitioner with another batallion stationed at Jammu, so that he can take assistance of a Lawyer and defend himself in the trial to be held against him effectively.
9.
A bare perusal of the direction issued in this court's judgment would show that no direction in positive terms had been issued to the effect that the petitioner must be attached with a batallion situated in an around the State of West Bengal.
He could be attached with a batallion posted in the State of Jammu and Kashmir on some cogent reason if the same was not possible.
Such cogent reason was not required to be communicated to the petitioner.
Such reasons have been assigned in the affidavit-in-opposition.
The said reasons may not be held to the sufficient by this court but for that reason the court cannot punish the contemner for alleged violation of this Court's order.
10.
In JS Parihar v. Ganpat Duggar and Ors., reported in 1996(6) SCC 191, the Apex Court held :-  "The question is whether seniority list is open to review in the contempt proceedings to find out whether it is in conformity with the directions issued by the earlier Benches.
It is seen that once there is an order passed by the Government on the basis of the directions issued by the court, there arises a fresh cause of action to seek redressal in an appropriate forum.
The preparation of the seniority list may be wrong or may be right or may or may not be in conformity with the directions.
But that would be a fresh cause of action for the aggrieved party to avail of the opportunity of judicial review.
But that cannot be considered to be the wilful violation of the order.
After re-exercising the judicial review in contempt proceedings, a fresh direction by the learned Single Judge cannot be given to redraw the seniority list.
In other words, the learned Judge was exercising the jurisdiction to consider the matter on merits in the contempt proceedings.
It would not be permissible under Section 12 of the Act."
11.
The said decision has been followed by this court in Janak Deo Tewari and Ors. v. Sri Ashim Burman (CMC), 1997(2) CHN 103 and Mahananda Banerjee v. Hon'ble Hasim Abdul Halim reported in 1998(1) CLT 3939, wherein it was held :-  "It is now well settled that the High Court while exercising its contempt jurisdiction cannot decide a question as to whether a fraud was practised upon the Division Bench or not.
It is also not within the province of this court to consider as whether the petitioner questioned only a part of the order of the alleged contemner.
This court is bound by the statement made in the judgments.
If any wrong statement of fact has been made in the judgment, in view of the settled position in law, the only remedy of the contemner would have been to file a review application but the statement of fact made in a judgment cannot be questioned in a collateral proceedings far less in a contempt proceedings."
12.
There cannot be however doubt that keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has been relying on the findings of this court, it was expected of the alleged contemners to inform him about the correct position and further inform him as to from which battalion he will have to report for duty and would get salary.
He has not been allowed to perform his job and he has not been paid salary.
13.
Although keeping in view the fact that this court is not a position to hold that the respondents have wilfully violated the order of this court and thus rendered themselves liable for punishment under the Contempt of Courts Act, it is directed that in the event the petitioner without prejudice to his rights and contentions and subject to any action that he may take in the light of the subsequent event joins his duties at BSF, Kashmir, he shall be paid all his legal dues at an early date and not later than one week from the date of such joining.
14.
This application is disposed of by the aforementioned observations and directions and the rule issued discharged.
Order accordingly.