Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 11.9.1998 passed by a learned single Judge of this Court in WP 9160(W) of 1998 whereby and whereunder the writ petition of the 1st respondent herein was allowed with the following directions :-  "The respondents are directed to promote the petitioner to Grade `E-2' with effect from 2nd June, 1993 and to give the petitioner the seniority on the basis thereof.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to promotion to higher grade than Grade `E-2' in accordance with the Rules of the respondents in the event such promotion is on the basis of tenure and not on selection.
In the event such promotion is on selection basis, for the reason of depriving the petitioner to offer himself as a candidate for such selection, the petitioner shall be entitled to apply for appropriate compensation in accordance with law in appropriate forum.
The petitioner shall be paid all his entitlement as a consequence of the promotions directed to be given hereby.
All such payments should be made within a month from the date of service of a copy of this order upon the Chairman, Bharat Coking Coal Limited.
It is made clear that the agreement dated 25th April, 1995 regarding non- applicability of financial benefit for promotion to Grade `A' shall be limited only upto the period the petitioner is deemed to have remained in Grade `A', that is, until 1st of June, 1993 and the same will have no application whatsoever from 2nd of June, 1993.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to cost of this application assessed at Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees twenty-five thousand)."
2.
Bereft of all unnecessary details the fact of the matter is as follows :-  The petitioner was appointed in technical Grade-C of appellant-Company.
Although the petitioner allegedly was promoted to Technical Grade-B on 1st January, 1982.
However, it stands admitted that the writ petitioner was not promoted in technical Grade-A 3.
The writ petitioner contends that Sri RP Singh, Sri Murali Prasad, Sri Ganga Sagar Rai and Sri DK Singh joined as Oversers (Civil) on 21.12.1979, 1891980, 2291980 and 10.4.1981 respectively and they were promoted to Technical and Selection Grade-B on 1121983, 3121983, 3121983, and 1.4.1984 respectively.
4.
Coal Mines Diploma Engineers' Association filed a writ petition before this Court which was marked as C.O.
No. 10240 (W) of 1987 wherein by an order dated 24th November, 1987 an interim order was passed which is to the following effect :-  "As a special case respondents shall allow the members of the Coal Mines Diploma Engineers having 7 years post qualification and experience to appear in the written examination to be held on November 29, 1987 and or any other date fixed by BCCL for selection to the post of E-2 and if they are successful in written test, they will also to be called for interview but their results will not be published until further order of this Court.
It is made clear that the passing at the written test or at the interview will not create any favour if ultimately this application is not allws No promotion from Grade `A' to E-2 shall be made until 24th December, 1987.
This order is applicable to BCCL".
5.
The said writ application was ultimately dismissed by an order dated 18th April, 1990.
The said Association feeling aggrieved thereby preferred an appeal therefrom which was marked as FMAT 1197/90.
By a judgment and order dated 23rd February, 1993 a Division Bench of this court without referring to the relevant provisions of the Common Coal Cadre admittedly governing the terms and conditions of service of the Officers of Coal India Ltd in executive cadre directed as follow :-  "The members of Coal Mines Diploma Engineers' Association who have passed in the selection test dated May 15, 1988 for E-2 post (Civil) and have completed 3 years in Technical and Supervising Grade-`E' but not promoted to E-2 Post (Civil), will be given promotion with effect from July 1, 1991."
However, the said order was modified by an order dated 24th March, 1993 which is to the following effect :-  "Mr. Samar Banerjee appearing for the respondents No. 1 to 3 prays for some time more to comply with the order of this Hon'ble Court dated 23rd February, 1993.
After hearing the learned advocate for the parties, we allow this prayer.
Accordingly, we extend one month's time from date to comply with the order dated 23rd February, 1993.
Mr. Banerjee has also submitted that it should be made clear as to on which date the concerned members will be required to have completed three years.
It is no doubt that we meant the date of this order being February 23, 1993.
Be that as it may, we make it clear that members who have completed 3 years in Technical and Supervising Grade-`A' on the date of the order i.e., February 23, 1993 shall be eligible for promotion in accordance with the order as stated above.
Save as aforesaid, the order dated February 23, 1993 shall stand and continue to operate as it is."
6.
Admittedly pursuant to the aforementioned interim order granted by this court the petitioner and the aforementioned RP Singh and 3 others appeared at an examination held in the year 1988 for the purpose of grant of promotion to the Executive Cadre E-2.
The writ petitioner as also RP Singh and three others were not promoted to E-2 Grade as admittedly they did not come within the purview of the aforementioned judgment.
The said RP Singh and three others, however, filed a writ petition before this court and Sushanta Chatterjee, J by an order dated 2581993 disposed of the said writ application directing the Chairman of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd to consider grievances of the petitioners therein within the period mentioned therein upon grant of a personal hearing to them by passing a speaking order.
It was observed that if the petitioners therein were equally circumstanced the ratio of the judgment of the trial Court and the appeal court, copies whereof were annexed to the said writ application would be applicable and the petitioners would be entitled to similar relief.
7.
The appellants in their affidavit-in-opposition contend that the said RP Singh and 3 others although were not entitled to be promoted pursuant to the said order, keeping in view the fact that they had not completed 3 years of service in Technical and Selection Grade-A as on 23rd February, 1993, the Chairman of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd by mistake passed an order for promotion in their favour.
8.
It appears that the petitioner had not been promoted even to Grade-A In view of the injustice made to the petitioner, a tripartite agreement dated 2251995 was entered into wherein keeping in view the fact that regularisation of the petitioner had not been done in Grade-A, it was agreed :-  "It appears that Sri GD Sarkar was transferred from one Area to another and in the process, his case was over-looked.
It is only when he was posted in Kustore Area that his case for promotion was considered based on the Cadre Scheme and not based on the circular referred to herein above.
It is further seen that the persons were appointed on or about the same time Sri Sarkar was appointed, the have been promoted in T&S Gr.-`A' from 161990.
The case of Sri RP Singh may be cited, as he had been appointed and joined duty on 21.12.1979 about 10 days later than Sri Sarkar.
He was, however, promoted in T&S Gr.`A' notionally w.e.f.
161990.
9.
Taking into account the aforesaid facts, it is agreed to resolve the pending Industrial dispute before Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal No. 2, Dhanbad on the following terms and conditions.
Terms and Conditions of the agreement  (1) It is agreed that Sri Guru Das Sarkar, overseer (Civil) will be deemed to have been regularised in T&S Gr.`B' w.e.f.
111982.
(2) It is further agreed that Sri Sarkar will be promoted in T&S Gr.`A' w.e.f.
161990 notionally, the date from which Sri RP Singh was promoted i.e. 161990.
(3) It is also agreed that pay fixation will be done in respect of the aforesaid promotion, but no financial benefit will accrue.
The financial benefit will, however, accrue from ....(sic) (4) It is further agreed that the parties will jointly file compromise petition indicating therein the terms of agreement and also intimating the Hon'ble Tribunal to give an award in terms of the agreement holding that the agreement is fair and reasonable."
10.
The petitioner filed a writ application before this court and by a judgment and order dated 511998 SK Tewari, J also directed the Chairman of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd to consider his grievance within 8 weeks from the date of communication of the said order.
However, by reason of the order dated 21.3.1998 the Chairman of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd rejected the contention of the petitioner on the ground that the aforementioned judgment and order passed in FMAT 1197/90 does not apply to the petitioner.
11.
The petitioner filed the writ application which was marked as WP 9160(W)/98.
In paragraph 4 of the writ application, the petitioner inter alia contended:-  "That under the Common Cadre Rules a qualified employee in BCCL and other subsidiaries of Coal India Ltd is entitled to be promoted in the Technical Grade `A' after completion of his 7 years service, and also will be entitled to sit for the selection test to be organised by the Coal India Ltd for promotion to the Executive Cadre in the E-2 Grade.
Your petitioner actually sat for such selection test organised by CIL on 13051988 along with other and was successful in the said test.
But though your petitioner completed his work in the TS Grade `A' for three years there on 161993 he was not granted his promotion to E-2 grade, and he has not yet been so promoted even now."
12.
The further contention raised before the learned trial Court, as it appears from the judgment and order passed by the learned trial Judge which is impugned in this appeal, was that whereas the aforementioned RP Singh and 3 others who are junior to the petitioner had been promoted, the petitioner had been discriminated against.
The petitioner contended that in view of the said fact he was entitled to be promoted to Technical Grade `A' upon completion of 3 years of service in Technical Grade-B  13.
The learned trial Judge by reason of his impugned judgment allowed the writ application with cost with the direction as referred to hereinbefore.
14.
Mr. Alok Banerjee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant inter alia, submitted that keeping in view the fact that the petitioner in terms of the aforementioned agreement dated 2261995 was promoted to Grade-A with effect from 161990 notionally, he would be deemed to have completed a period of 3 years from the said date on 161993 in the said post and as thereafter no selection test and/or interview has been held for the purpose of promoting the employees of Technical Grade-A to the Executive Cadre E-2, the impugned directions could not have been issued.
15.
Mr. Bajpayee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner 1st respondent, on the other hand, submitted that as admittedly the aforementioned RP Singh and 3 others had been promoted to the executive cadre of E-2 by Coal India Ltd, there is absolutely no reason as to why the petitioner should also not be granted promotion with effect from 161993.
The learned Counsel contends that as promotion to Technical Grade-A was to be granted automatically and the petitioner having passed the written test and interview held in the year 1988 it was not necessary for him to appear at any other written test or interview for the aforementioned purpose.
According to Mr. Bajpayee, although holding of a written test or interview is to be held each year, no examination has been held allegedly in view of an interim order dated 22121997 passed by Alamas Kabir, J in C.O.
No. 10622(W)/96.
The learned Counsel submits that only condition precedent for consideration of the case of the petitioner was that he should complete only 3 years of service in Grade-A  16.
Before adverting to the rival contentions raised before us, it is relevant to notice that Coal India Ltd is the holding company having subsidiary companies viz. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Eastern Coalfield Ltd and others.
Admittedly, the appointment and/or promotion in the executive cadre is granted by the holding company.
With a view to administering the Common Coal Cadre, in terms of the Central Government directives, detailed rules and procedures were evolved for the administration of the Executives and their integration to a common and uniform set of rules, and the Board of Directors of Coal India Ltd framed Common Coal Cadre.
17.
It stands admitted that the matters relating to appointment directly to executive cadre as also promotion thereto are governed by the Common Coal Cadre.
Paragraph 47 of the said Common Coal Cadre lays down the following eligibility norms of promotion :-  (a) The promotion of departmental executives will be step-by-step according to the channel of promotion indicated in the cadre schemes placed at Appendix IV(2).
(b) The eligibility of executives for consideration for promotion shall be determined on the basis of minimum qualification and minimum period of service in a particular grade as indicated in the respective cadre scheme placed at Appendix IV(2).
(c) Unless otherwise stipulated in the relevant cadre schemes, an executive has to put up a minimum of three years service in a particular grade before he becomes eligible for consideration for promotion to the next higher grade.
(d) The Personnel Division of Coal India headquarters will determine datum lines and block of officers to be considered for promotion from one grade to the other each year, which shall be strictly followed.
(e) Any relaxation, either in the minimum length of service or minimum qualification, shall be only with the specific written approval of the cadre controlling authority."
18.
In terms of paragraph 4101, 1/3rd of the vacancy is required to be filled up by way of promotion.
Clause (b) of paragraph 4101 stipulates that all promotions from the senior-most non-executive grade to the executive grade to fill in the departmental quota as indicated in paragraph 1 will be on the basis of selection test and interview on the basis of merit.
The syllabi and the methodology for conducting the test will be as laid down by the Apex Training Board and Coal India headquarters.
19.
Paragraph 3 of the Appendix IV(2-2) provides for the minimum criteria as laid down in Clause (b) of paragraph 47 aforementioned to the effect that minimum qualification is "recognised relevant diploma of 3 years duration; and the minimum experience is 7 years post qualification experience out of which minimum of 3 years must be in the Technical and Supervisory Grade-A" The terminologies used under the column "minimum experience" to the effect that `3 years out of 7 years of post qualification experience must be in Technical and Supervisory Grade-A' leaves no manner of doubt that the same is mandatory in character.
20.
In the instant case the petitioner does not base his case in terms of the judgment dated 23rd February, 1993 as modified by an order dated 24th March, 1993 rendered by the Division Bench in the aforementioned FMAT No. 1197 of 1990.
21.
Mr. Bajpayee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the 1st respondent, when questioned, categorically stated before us that the petitioner was not a member of Coal Mine Diploma Engineers Association and, thus, does not base his case on the basis of the said judgment.
22.
It is, however, not in dispute that the examination was held on 1551988 pursuant to the interim order dated 24th November, 1987 passed in CO 10240(W)/87.
It is, therefore, not a case as has been contended by Mr. Bajpayee that the petitioner had appeared at the examination in his own right.
23.
Clause (b) of paragraph 47 of Common Coal Cadre read with Appendix IV(2- 2) leaves no manner of doubt that an eligible candidate can appear at the examination only upon possession of the minimum qualification laid down therefor.
A person does not have a right to be promoted.
He has merely a right to be considered therefor.
For the purpose of consideration of his case for promotion the concerned employee must come within the zone of consideration that is only upon acquisition of minimum qualification as also minimum experience.
It is axiomatic that prior to acquisition of minimum qualification as also minimum experience the employee concerned cannot have any right to sit at a written test or appear at the interview.
Such a proposition as has been sought to be pronounced by Mr. Bajpayee is preposterous.
The petitioner, thus, was permitted to appear at the written test only pursuant to the order of this court and not on his own right.
24.
It is further idle to contend that the petitioner had a right to be promoted automatically to Grade-A In any event, whether such a right exists or not is not and cannot be the subject-matter of the writ application in view of the fact that admittedly the petitioner with his eyes wide open and without any demur whatsoever entered into the aforementioned agreement dated 2261995 in terms whereof he was given promotion to the cadre of Technical Grade-A with retrospective effect from 161990.
25.
Item No. 3 of Appendix IV which deals with promotion of engineer in the Civil/Electrical and Mechanical/Excavation discipline as contained in Appendix IV-(2-2) of Common Coal Cadre clearly stipulates that the candidate concerned must have a minimum experience of 3 years in Technical and Supervisory Grade- A On his own showing, the petitioner was not promoted to the said post prior to 161990.
He was, therefore, entitled to be considered for promotion only upon acquisition of minimum experience of 3 years in the said Grade i.e. on the expiry of 1st June, 1993.
It stands admitted that after 1st June, 1993 no examination has been held.
26.
It is true that Sri.
RP Singh and 3 others who are junior to the petitioner had been promoted with effect from 1st June, 1993.
It is also admitted that they have now been given further promotion to Executive Grade E-3 but such promotion, as noticed hereinbefore, was granted to the said persons by way of mistake and in utter disregard of the order of the Division Bench passed in FMAT No. 1197/90.
27.
The appellant in its affidavit-in-opposition has categorically admitted that mistake had been committed by its Chairman.
Although such a mistake is unfortunate but on the basis thereof, this court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot direct that the petitioner should also be promoted with effect from 161993 inasmuch as thereby mistake will be directed to be perpetuated.
28.
If on its own showing the Chairman of the appellant-Company has committed a mistake, the petitioner cannot claim any right pursuant thereto or on the basis thereof.
Even if any concession has been shown by the employer in favour of an employee, the same does not confer any right on any other employee so as to enable him to obtain writ of or in the nature of mandamus.
A writ of mandamus can be issued only when the petitioner shows existence of a legal right in himself and a corresponding legal duty on the respondents.
Reference in this connection may be made to KV Rajalakshmiah Setty and another v. State of Mysore and another, AIR 1967 SC 993.
Furthermore, it is well settled that illegality is incurable.
See K. Ramadas Shenoy v. The Chief Officers, Town Municipal Council, Udipi and others, AIR 1974 SC 2177.
29.
In Chandigarh Administration and another v. Jagjit Singh and another, AIR 1995 SC 705 : 1995(2) R.R.R.
291, the Apex Court has held :-  "General speaking, the mere fact that the respondent-authority has passed a particular order in the case of another person similarly situated can never be the ground for issuing a writ in favour of the petitioner on the plea of discrimination.
The order in favour of other person might be legal and valid or it might not be.
That has to be investigated first before it can be directed to be followed in the case of the petitioner.
If the order in favour of the other person is found to be contrary to law or not warranted in the facts and circumstances of his case, it is obvious that such illegal or unwarranted order cannot be made the basis of issuing a writ compelling the respondent-authority to repeat the illegality or to pass another unwarranted order.
The extraordinary and discretionary power of the High Court cannot be exercised for such a purpose.
Merely because the respondent-authority has passed one illegal/unwarranted order, it does not entitle the High Court to compel the authority to repeat that illegality over again and again.
The illegal/unwarranted action must be corrected, if it can be done according to law - indeed, wherever it is possible, the court should direct the appropriate authority to correct such wrong orders in accordance with law - but even if it cannot be corrected, it is difficult to see how it can be made a basis for its repetition.
By refusing to direct the respondent-authority to repeat the illegality, the court is not condoning the earlier illegal act/order nor can such illegal order constitute the basis for a legitimate complaint of discrimination."
30.
It is also well settled that the courts do not pass an order whereby an illegality shall be perpetuated.
See ICAR v. TK Suryanarayan, AIR 1997 SC 3108 : 1997(4) SCT 156 (SC).
31.
This aspect of the matter has also been considered by the Division Benches of this court in Dr. Sachidananda Banerjee and others v. State of West Bengal and others,1998 Lab.
I.C.
1805 and State of West Bengal and others v. Ranjit Kumar Paul and another, 1998 Lab.
I.C.
1796  32.
In view of the foregoing discussions we are of the view that the petitioner had utterly failed to show existence of any legal right in himself and, thus, no writ of mandamus could be issued by the learned trial Judge in his favour.
33.
However, there cannot be any doubt that the 1st respondent has suffered for no fault of his.
The written test and the interview ought to have been held each year but owing to orders of injunction passed by this court, such examination could not be held.
It is stated at the Bar that a written test is going to be held on 17th January.
We would, therefore, direct that in the event the petitioner appears at the said examination and passes the same, his case should be considered for promotion.
Furthermore, the appellant shall keep in mind the fact that the petitioner had in fact passed the said written test and interview as far back as in the year 1988.
34.
It is further desirable that the petitioner's case for promotion with retrospective effect may be considered keeping in view the fact that his juniors have already been promoted, albeit by mistake as also in view of the fact that no step has yet been taken by the appellant to rectify its own mistake so as to do complete justice to the parties.
The appellant as also the Coal India Ltd are States within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It is, therefore, expected that its action shall be fair, equitable and just.
It has constitutional responsibility to treat all its employees who are similarly situated alike.
It is, therefore, desirable that the petitioner be given promotion with retrospective effect if he is found to be eligible therefor.
35.
However, in view of our findings aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained.
This appeal is, therefore, allowed.
The impugned judgment and order is set aside with the aforementioned directions and observations.
In the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.