Satyabrata Sinha, J - Whether the writ petitioner/first respondent holds the requisite academic qualification for appointment in the post of Lecturer is the principal question involved in this appeal.
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.
The appellant herein has been constituted by the State in terms of the provision of the West Bengal College Service Commission Act, 1978.
Sections 7 and 8 of the said Act read thus :  "7.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, custom or usage to the contrary, it shall be the duty of the Commission to select persons for appointment to the posts of Teachers of a College: Provided that - (i) for selection of persons for appointment to the posts of Teachers other than Principal, the Commission shall be aided by two persons having special knowledge on the subject for which such selection is to be made, of whom one shall be a nominee of the University to which such college is affiliated and the other shall be a nominee of the Chancellor of the University, (Sections 8-16)  (ii) for selection of person for appointment to the post of Principal, the Commission shall be aided by the Vice-Chancellor of the University to which such college is affiliated or his nominee and a nominee of the Chancellor of such University.
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Commission to advise the Chancellor or the State Government on such matter as may be referred to it by either of them.
8(1) The manner of selection of persons for appointment to the posts of Teachers of a college shall be such as may be provided for by regulations.
(2) The procedure for the conduct of business of the Commission shall be such as may be provided for by regulations."
2.
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said functions, the appellant herein issued a Notification in various Newspapers including the Statesman inviting application for preparation of merit panel of eligible candidates in the subject noted in the advertisement for recommendation for appointments in the basic grade post of Lecturer in the vacancies as may be reported by the College authorities from time to time in the Non-Government Degree Colleges including Training Colleges affiliated to the State Universities of West Bengal viz. Burdwan University, Calcutta University, Kalyani University, North Bengal University and Vidyasagar University.
The writ petitioner/first respondent pursuant to or in furtherance of the said advertisement filed an application.
Her academic qualifications as stated in the writ petition are as follows :  "The petitioner states that she is a doctorate in mathematics and also secured 572% marks in MSc.
She also obtained 56% marks in B.Sc.
Examination.
In view of such academic qualifications the petitioner is eligible for being appointed as a Lecturer in any non-Government Degree Colleges affiliated to State Universities of West Bengal."
3.
In the said Notification, the Academic qualifications of the candidates required have been stated in the following terms:  (i) For colleges other than B.Ed.
and B.Ed.
Departments of General Degree Colleges.
- The candidates should possess a consistently good academic record with at least 55% marks or an equivalent grade at the Master's degree level and at least a second class 3 years Honours degree in the relevant subject.
(ii) For B.Ed.
College and B.Ed.
Departments of General Degree Colleges.
-  Qualifications as in (i) plus B.Ed.
degree/PG Diploma in Basic Education or equivalent Qualification.
(iii) A candidate should have good power in expression of Bengali or Nepali spoken and written.
(iv) Besides, the candidate should have qualified in the relevant discipline either the State Level Eligibility Test (SLTET) conducted by the West Bengal College Service Commission, OR National Eligibility Test (NET), conducted by UGC/CSIR for Lecturership.
However, the candidates who obtained PhD or submitted PhD thesis upto 31.12.92 or obtained M Phil.
degree by 31.12.92 or passed UGC/CSIR JRF examination are also eligible.
(v) Lecturers who are in service prior to revision of pay scales (i.e. 1186) will not come under the purview of revised qualifications as mentioned above and are eligible for change to any other College by way of fresh appointment through selection by the Commission.
(vi) College Teachers who are in service on or after 1186 and are possessing the qualifications mentioned at (i), (ii) & (iii) above may change College by way of fresh appointment through selection by the Commission upto a maximum age of 50 years on the 3rd January, 1995".
4.
Admittedly a call letter was sent to the writ petitioner which was on a provisional basis as would appear from Annexure "E" to the writ application wherein it has been stated:  "Your call letter is provisional.
If any material error/discrepancy/wrong information submitted by you is detected at any time even after interview/empanelment for lecturership, your candidature will be outright rejected".
5.
The writ petitioner/first respondent appeared before the Selection Committee and was empanelled at serial No. 52 of the panel.
However no appointment letter was given to her.
The petitioner therefore filed a writ application, inter alia, for the following relief:  "(a) A Writ of and/or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to recommend the name of the petitioner in any non-Government degree colleges or training colleges affiliated to the State Universities of West Bengal for appointment to the post of Lecturer in Mathematics on the basis of petitioner's merit standing in the panel, within a period of two weeks from the date of passing of the order.
(b) A writ of and/or in the nature of prohibition prohibiting the respondent authorities from further recommending any names standing in the merit panel for any appointment to the post of Lecturer prepared on the basis of interview held on 25th February, 1997 without first recommending the name of the petitioner".
6.
A bare perusal of the writ application would show that the petitioner, inter alia, contended that although she had secured 566% marks and was placed at serial No. 52 in the said panel, her name had not been recommended for the reason best known to the authorities.
7.
The petitioner contended that the appellant is merely a recommended body and on the ground of ineligibility or otherwise her candidature could not have been withdrawn keeping in view the fact that she was an empanelled candidate.
8.
Before the learned trial Judge an affidavit-in-opposition had been filed by the appellant herein.
It was contended that the writ petitioner did not fulfil the requisite qualification, inasmuch as, she did not possess the Second Class 3 years Honours Degree in the relevant subject.
It was further stated:  "With reference to the allegations made in paragraph 6 of the said petition I deny each and all of them save what are matters of admitted records.
The petitioner herself admitted that she secured 572% marks in MSc.
and 56% in B.Sc.
examination without any Honours.
The petitioner has no Honours Degree at all and she passed B.Sc.
with distinction as she has admitted in paragraph 2 of the petition.
As the petitioner has no 3 years Honours Degree she is not eligible for the post of lecturer in West Bengal.
I deny that in view of the such academic qualifications, the petitioner is eligible for being appointed as lecturer in any non-Government Degree College affiliated to State Universities of West Bengal as alleged or at all."
9.
The learned trial Judge however without going into the aforementioned controversy held :  "This court cannot go into post-mortem analysis about the eligibility criteria after preparation and publication of panel where the petitioner is placed at serial No. 52.
If her name is to be struck off then the entire panel is to be given a go-bye, which is not possible.
In that view of the matter, this court feels that the panel sent by the West Bengal College Service Commission in terms of Section 7 of the West Bengal College Service Commission Act, 1978 is to be disposed of.
Such panel should be deemed to be the panel duly prepared by the College Service Commission and there is no impediment to approve the said panel.
Accordingly, the West Bengal College Service Commission is directed to accord approval of the said panel within the reasonable period of time from the communication of the order".
10.
The only question which was raised before us as to whether the petitioner holds the requisite academic qualification or not.
11.
Clause (i) of the said advertisement provides for the academic qualifications which are essential in nature.
The words "at least a second class 3 years Honours degree in the relevant subject" used after the words "the candidate should possess a consistently good academic record with at least 55% marks or an equivalent grade at the Master's degree level" clearly go to show that possession of second class 3 years Honours degree in the relevant subject was an essential academic qualification.
Besides the said academic qualification the candidate should have good power of expression in Bengali or Nepali spoken and written.
12.
It was submitted by Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent herein that from a perusal of the affidavit-in- opposition filed by the Secretary of the appellant it would appear that the aforementioned qualification was allegedly required at the instance of the State although such qualification was not necessary in terms of the Regulation framed by the University Grants Commission.
13.
Referring to the decisions of the Apex Court in the case of University of Delhi v. Raj Singh & Ors. reported in AIR 1995 SC 336 : 1995(1) SCT 1 (SC), University Grants Commissions v. Sadhana Chaudhary reported in 1996(10) SCC 536 : 1997(1) SCT 364 (SC) and P Anuradha Reddy v. P Kalpana reported in 1998 Lab.
I.C.
3169 : 1998(4) SCT 229 (Andhra)(DB), the learned counsel submitted that the qualification prescribed by the University Grants Commission would prevail over the qualification prescribed by the University or others.
According to the learned counsel once it is found that a candidate has fulfilled the criteria laid down by the University Grants Commission it is beyond the jurisdiction of the College Service Commission to reject the candidature of a candidate on the ground that she did not fulfil the minimum academic qualification prescribed by the State of West Bengal.
It was further submitted that in any event as the petitioner was selected by the Selection Committee which is an Expert Body, her candidature could not have been rejected by the appellant, West Bengal College Service Commission and its Secretary.
Strong reliance has been placed on the decision in the case of Dr. Kumar Bar Das v. Utkal University & Ors. reported in 1999(1) SCC 453 : 1999(1) SCT 289 (SC).
It is now a well settled principle of law that with a view to interpret a document, the same has to be read as a whole.
14.
The West Bangal College Service Commission which has been created under a statute was entitled to issue the aforementioned advertisement laying down the academic and other qualifications required for consideration by it for the purpose of appointment of lecturers in different Colleges.
15.
The writ petitioner in the writ application has not questioned the authority or jurisdiction of the State of West Bengal to lay down the aforementioned academic qualification.
It is not stated nor it could be contended on behalf of the respondent that if the petitioner had fulfilled the qualification as laid down in clause (iv) of the aforementioned advertisement, she was not required to fulfil the other qualifications, as for example clauses (i) and (iii) thereof.
16.
Clause (iv) upon which reliance has been placed by Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned counsel, as indicated hereinbefore, supports our finding in view of the dictionary meaning of the word "besides".
The said word clearly means that the said qualification is an additional qualification and not in lieu of or in place of the other qualification.
The word "besides" means in addition, as well and moreover - see Shorter Oxford English Dictionary page 218.
17.
It is not, therefore, correct to contend that clause (iv) would be given effect to independently.
18.
It is well settled principle of law that requirement to have basic academic qualification cannot be relaxed.
In any event, such a power of relaxation did not exist in the West Bengal College Service Commission or any other authority.
In absence of such power of relaxation, the question of a person for being appointed without having such qualification does not arise.
There cannot be any doubt that the regulations framed by the University Grants Commission in terms of the provisions of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 will have a binding nature.
Such regulations do not entrench upon the autonomy of the University.
As the said Regulations are made applicable to the said University, the Apex Court in Raj Singh (supra) held :  "The said Regulations are thus intended to have the widest possible application, as indeed they must have if they are to serve the purpose intended namely, to ensure that all applicants for the post of lecturer, from whichever University they may have procured the minimum qualificatory degree, must establish that they possess the proficiency required for lecturers in all Universities in the country."
19.
It was, thus with a view to lay down the minimum qualificatory degree, clause 2 of the Regulation was made.
The Apex Court in the aforementioned case does not lay down a law that an University or the State cannot lay down a higher qualification.
The decision of Raj Singh's case was rendered only because by reason of the aforementioned Regulations a Test was prescribed which, according to the Apex Court was mandatory in nature.
20.
In the case of University Grants Commission v. Sadhana Chaudhary reported in 1996(10) SCC 536 the Apex Court itself referred to the scheme framed by the Central Government in the year 1988, which required that only those candidates who, besides fulfilling the minimum academic qualifications prescribed for the post of lecturer, qualified in a comprehensive test, to be specially conducted for the purpose, will be eligible for appointment as Lecturers.
21.
A Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of P Anuradha Reddy v. P Kalpana reported in 1998 Lab.
I.C.
3169 while considering the requirements of such test and/or examination prescribed therefor followed the said decision of Raj Singh's case (supra).
A bare perusal of paragraph 2 of the said judgment would show that therein apart from the requirement of eligibility test the candidate was required to possess first or second class PG Degree in the concerned subject or subjects as also high second class in M.Ed.
with 55% and abvoe.
22.
It is for the concerned University to lay down the minimum academic qualification and in addition thereto, in terms of Regulations framed by the University Grants Commission the candidate has to pass the examination known as NET and SLET.
It is not a case that two interpretations of the aforementioned advertisement are possible.
If no two interpretations are possible, the question of giving any weight to an opinion of an Expert Body by the appellant herein did not and could not arise.
The question before the Commission was as to whether the writ petitioner/respondent No. 1 possessed the requisite qualification in terms of the advertisement or not.
It is admitted case that the writ petitioner did not possess the requisite qualification of second class 3 years Honours Degree in the relevant subject.
23.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that for the purpose of becoming eligible for consideration for appointment in the said post the petitioner was not only required to have a good academic record with at least minimum 55% marks in Master Degree level but also at least a second class 3 years Honours Degree in the relevant subject.
Both the said aforementioned qualifications must be read conjunctively.
24.
In the case of Dr. Kumar Bar Das v. Utkal University & Ors. reported in 1999(1) SCC 453 the Apex Court was concerned absolutely with different situation.
In that case the appellant before the Apex Court admittedly had 7 years 7 months and 14 days of teaching experience and 1 year 5 months and 14 days of research experience, that is, in all 9 years and 28 days.
25.
The question which fell for decision before the Apex Court was the meaning of the word "about".
It was clearly held :  "On the facts of the case, it was for the Selelction Committee to consider whether the appellant's case fell on the right side of "about 10 years".
After all, they were considering the total length of experience both in teaching and research and in conjunction with his other qualifications to find out whether he can occupy the post of Professor, a post which was merely one concerned with research in Economics."
26.
Reference in this connection may also be made to the case reported in AIR 1994 SC 737.
It may be true that the fact as to whether the petitioner holds the requisite qualification or not went un-noticed.
It may further be true that he petitioner was not guilty of suppression of fact but that does not mean that the appellant shall recommend the name of a person to the concerned University for her appointment although she did not fulfill the essential academic qualification.
A mistake as is well-known can always be rectified.
In the instant case the question of observance of the principle of natural justice does not arise in view of the fact that admittedly the petitioner does not hold the requisite qualifications which according the West Bengal College Service Commission were essential qualifications.
27.
For the reason aforementioned, we are of the opinion that the learned trial Judge fell in error in passing the impugned order which is accordingly set aside.
28.
The appeal is allowed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.