Prabha Shanker Mishra, CJ.
- Writ Petitioner-respondent No. 1 has moved this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and questioned the validity of the order of dismissal from service.
Learned single Judge has allowed the prayer.
Hence the appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
2.
Petitioner-respondent herein is an employee of a co-operative society, namely, Bansberia Mill Mutual Benefit Co-operative Relief Society Limited registered under the West Bengal Co-operative Societies Act.
He was first appointed as an Accountant and when the Managing Committee of the Society was superseded for certain reasons, was appointed as the Chief Executive Officer by the Assistant Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Hoogly under Section 26 of the said Act by letter dated 15th March, 1983.
He functioned in the said capacity until he was reverted to the post of Accountant on 15th May 1987 and was asked in performance of his duties to prepare accounts for the period from 1st July 1986 to 30th June, 1987.
3.
According to the petitioner-respondent, he was bedridden from 23rd May 1987 to 31st May 1987.
On 1st June 1987 he joined his post, but on account of again falling ill, remained bedridden from 2nd June 1987 till 26th July 1988.
He joined, however, his post only on 27th July 1988.
While he was lying ill, he was arrested by Police on the basis of an allegation made by the Secretary of the Society of certain commissions and omissions by him as an officer of the society, main allegation being that he had misappropriated an amount of Rs. 1,65,68414.
He was subjected to an enquiry and after completion of the enquiry, dismissed from service.
4.
Learned single Judge has taken notice of all relevant facts and contentions and the stand of the society in its affidavits before the Court to record his finding as follows :  "........... where the conditions of service are controlled by statutory Rules and obligations, for breach of such Rules and Regulations appropriate writ may be issued.
The Ld.
advocate has also referred to another single Bench of this Court in Guaranga Bhar v. State of WB, 1909 CWN 1078.
That case was also decided relying upon the principles laid down in Arjed Ali's case (supra).
Nothing has been advanced from the side of the respondent No. 1 to controvert the submissions made by the Ld.
Advocate for the writ petitioner.
Thus considering the submissions made by the Ld.
Advocates, it appears that the writ petition is maintainable as the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Arjed Ali's case (supra) is binding on this Court.
The Ld.
Advocate appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner has submitted that as per Rule 48(f) of the WB C.S. Rules, 1987 no employee of a co-operative society shall be dismissed or removed from service except after an enquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him unless he is given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation on the penalty proposed.
According to the Ld.
advocate of this case, there is nothing to show that the respondent No. 1 gave an opportunity to the delinquent officer of making a representation on the proposed penalty.
It has also been submitted by the ld.
Advocate for the petitioner that the delinquent officer is entitled to get a copy of the report of the enquiry officer to make a representation to the Disciplinary Authority against it.
The Ld.
Advocate has referred to the decision of our Apex Court in Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) LLJ 162 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC).
In Karunakar's case, it was held that the law whether after the 42nd Constitution Amendment, the delinquent Officer was entitled to get a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer was in an unsettled condition till 20th November 1990, on which date, Md Ramzan's case AIR 1991 SC 471 was decided by the Supreme Court holding that the delinquent is entitled to get a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer to make a representation to the Disciplinary Authority.
The Ld.
Advocate for the writ petitioner has in this connection also referred to a Single Bench decision of this court in Subimal Das v. State of WB, 1993(97) CWN 168.
In that case, His Lordship was pleased to hold that the Enquiry Officer and the Disciplinary Authority did not proceed observing the requirements of Rule 48(f) of the WBC.S.
Rules 1987 and in accordance with the Rules of natural justice and fair play and hence, the order of termination of service would not be sustained.
The Ld.
Advocate for the respondent No. 1 has submitted that there is no substance in the contention of the Ld.
Advocate for the writ petitioner and that the impugned order of dismissal suffers from no infirmity and that all the principles of natural justice have been followed before passing of the order.
But no argument has been advanced on the points of law raised by the Ld.
Advocate for the writ petitioner.
From the submissions of the lawyers of both sides, it appears that paragraph 13 of the affidavit-in-opposition is the relevant paragraph dealing with the factual frame upon which the Ld.
Advocate for the petitioner has advanced his arguments.
There is no mention within the four corners of the said paragraph of AO that a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer was furnished to the delinquent officer or that the compliance with Rule 49(f) of the WBC.S.
Rules, 1987, he said officer got an opportunity to make a show cause against the proposed punishment.
As such, there is a clear violation of the Rule as laid down in Managing Director, ECIL v. K Karunakar's case (supra) and further that there was non-compliance with the statutory Rule being No. 48(f) of WBCS Rules, 1987 by the respondent authority.
In this view of the matter, the order of dismissal dated 1st August 1992, dismissing the service of the writ petitioner is not sustainable in law.
But this does not mean that the entire disciplinary proceeding against the writ petitioner is quashed.
The respondent authority will be at liberty to proceed with the said disciplinary proceedings, according to law, from that stage where it has gone wrong.
This is without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties to that proceeding.
Regarding the demand for arrear salary etc. of the writ petitioner, it is sufficient to point out that the writ petitioner was for a long period on leave on medical grounds.
He was not suspended during the enquiry proceeding.
In the normal course, he was, therefore, entitled to get salary under the Rules including leave Rules applicable in this case.
Generally, an employee is entitled to get for some period medical leave on full pay, then on half pay and thereafter, for a certain period, medical leave without any pay.
It is not known what was the leave admissible, to the writ petitioner at the material time under the Leave Rules.
This is a pure question of fact.
On the materials available before this Court, it is not possible for this Court to decide the question for the purpose of disposal of this point.
Therefore, this Court is not inclined to go into the question of arrear salary and other salary as demanded by the writ petitioner.
The petitioner will seek his relief before the appropriate Authority.
.............." 5.
Even though the finding as to the maintainability of the writ petition as recorded by the learned single Judge on the facts and in the circumstances of the case is not free from doubt and one can have reservations as to whether an employee of a co-operative society which is not a State as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution of India or an authority as contemplated under Article 226 of the Constitution, can invoke this Court's jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, we are of the view that since the enquiry is allegedly held to be vitiated mainly on the ground a copy of the enquiry report was not served upon the petitioner-respondent which is a right flowing from the principles of natural justice as held by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, AIR 1991 SC 471 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC), the instant appeal can be disposed of by making the law as stated by the Supreme Court in the said case applicable.
6.
In Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan (supra) Supreme Court has pointed out -  `..... the inquiries which are directly handled by the disciplinary authority and those which are allowed to be handled by the Inquiry Officer can easily be classified into two separate groups - one, where there is no inquiry report on account of the fact that the disciplinary authority is the Inquiry Officer and inquiries where there is a report on account of the fact that an officer other than the disciplinary authority has been constituted as the Inquiry Officer....' 7.
It has further been pointed in the said case -  `We make it clear that wherever there has been an Inquiry Officer and he has furnished a report to the disciplinary authority at the conclusion of the inquiry holding the delinquent guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any particular punishment or not, the delinquent is entitled to a copy of such report and will also be entitled to make a representation against it, if he so desires, and non-furnishing of the report would amount to violation of rules of natural justice and make the final order liable to challenge hereafter.'
`There have been several decisions in different High Courts which, following the Forty Second Amendment have taken the view that it is no longer necessary to furnish a copy of the inquiry report to delinquent officers.
Even on some occasions this Court has taken that view.
Since we have reached a different conclusion the judgment in the different High Courts taking the contrary view must be taken to be no longer laying down good law.
We have not been shown any decision of a coordinate or a larger Bench of this Court taking this view.
Therefore, the conclusion to the contrary reached by any two Judge Bench in this Court will also no longer be taken to be laying down good law, but this shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground.'
8.
In Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, AIR 1994 SC 1074, the majority Judges of the Constitution Bench of five Judges have adverted to this aspect of the law as laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) in some details and laid down as follows :  `........
In Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra), the question squarely fell for consideration before a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court, viz. that although on account of the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, it was no longer necessary to issue a notice to the delinquent employee to show cause against the punishment proposed and, therefore, to furnish a copy of the Inquiry Officer's report along with the notice to make representation against the penalty, whether it was still necessary to furnish a copy of the report to him to enable him to make representation against the findings recorded against him in the report before the disciplinary authority took its own decision with regard to the guilt or otherwise of the employee by taking into consideration the said report.
The Court held that whenever the Inquiry Officer is other than the disciplinary authority and the report of the Inquiry Officer holds the employee guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any punishment or not, the delinquent employee is entitled to a copy of the report to enable him to make a representation to the disciplinary authority against it and the non-furnishing of the report amounts to a violation of the rules of natural justice.
However, after taking this view, the Court directed that the law laid down there shall have prospective application and the punishment which is already imposed shall not be open to challenge on that ground.
Unfortunately, the Court by mistake allowed all the appeals which were before it and thus set aside the disciplinary action in every case, by failing to notice that the actions in those cases were prior to the said decision.
This anomaly was noticed at a later stage but before the final order could be reviewed and rectified, the present reference was already made, as stated above, by a Bench of three learned Judges.
The anomaly has thus lent another dimension to the question to be resolved in the present case.'
9.
After stating as above, majority judgment has proceeded to trace the origin of the law, as stated in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case, to the principles of natural justice and held as follows :  `........
Hence it has to be held that when the Inquiry Officer is not the disciplinary authority, the delinquent employee has right to receive a copy of the Inquiry Officer's report before the disciplinary authority arrives at its conclusions with regard to the guilt or innocence of the employee with regard to the charges levelled against him.
That right is a part of the employee's right to defend himself against the charges levelled against him.
A denial of the Inquiry Officer's report before the disciplinary authority takes its decision on the charges is a denial of reasonable opportunity to the employee to prove his innocence and is a breach of the principles of natural justice.
Hence the incidental questions raised above may be answered as follows :  (i) Since the denial of the report of the Inquiry Officer is a denial of reasonable opportunity and a breach of the principles of natural justice, it follows that the statutory rules, if any, which deny the report to the employee are against the principles of natural justice and, therefore, invalid.
The delinquent employee will, therefore, be entitled to a copy of the report even if the statutory rules do not permit the furnishing of the report or are silent on the subject.
(ii) The relevant portion of Article 311(2) of the Constitution is as follows : "(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an enquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges."
Thus the Article makes it obligatory to hold an inquiry before the employee is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank.
The Article, however, cannot be construed to mean that it prevents or prohibits the inquiry when punishment other than that of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank is awarded.
The procedure to be followed in awarding other punishments is laid down in the service rules governing the employee.
What is further, Article 311(2) applies only to members of the Civil Services of the Union or an all India service or a civil service of a State or to the holders of the civil posts under the Union or a State.
In the matter of all punishments both Government servants and others are governed by their service rules.
Whenever, therefore, the service rules contemplate an enquiry before a punishment is awarded, and when the Inquiry Officer is not the disciplinary authority the delinquent employee will have the right to receive the Inquiry Officer's report notwithstanding the nature of the punishment.
(iii) Since it is the right of the employee to have the report to defend himself effectively, and he would not know in advance whether the report is in his favour or against him, it will not be proper to construe his failure to ask for the report, as the waiver of his right.
Whether, therefore, the employee asks for the report or not, the report has to be furnished to him.
(iv) In the view that we have taken, viz. that the right to make representation to the disciplinary authority against the findings recorded in the inquiry report is an integral part of the opportunity of defence against the charges and is a breach of principles of natural justice to deny the said right, it is only appropriate that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) should apply to employees in all establishments whether Government or non-Government, Public or Private.
This will be the case whether there are rules governing the disciplinary proceedings or not and whether they expressly prohibit the furnishing of the copy of the report or be silent on the subject.
Whatever the nature of punishment, further, whenever the rules require an inquiry to be held, for inflicting the punishment in question, the delinquent employee should have the benefit of the report of the Inquiry Officer before the disciplinary authority records its findings on the charges levelled against him.
Hence question (iv) is answered accordingly.
(v) The next question to be answered is what is the effect on the order of punishment when the report of the Inquiry Officer is not furnished to the employee and what relief should be granted to him in such cases.
When the employee is dismissed or removed from service and the inquiry is set aside because the report is not furnished to him, in some cases the non-furnishing of the report may have prejudiced him gravely while in other cases it may have made no difference to the ultimate punishment awarded to him.
Hence to direct reinstatement of the employee with back wages in all cases is to reduce the rules of justice to mechanical ritual.
The theory of reasonable opportunity and the principles of natural justice have been evolved to uphold the rule of law and to assist the individual to vindicate his just rights.
They are not incantations to be invoked nor rites to be performed on all and sundry occasions.
Whether in fact, prejudice has been caused to the employee or not on account of the denial to him of the report, has to be considered on the facts and circumstances of each case, where, therefore, even after the furnishing of the report, no different consequence would have followed, it would be a perversion of justice to permit the employee to resume duty and to get all the consequential benefits.
It amounts to rewarding the dishonest and the guilty and thus to stretching the concept of justice to illogical and exasperating limits.
It amounts to an "unnatural expansion of natural justice" which in itself is antithetical to justice.
Hence, in all cases where the Inquiry Officer's report is not furnished to the delinquent employee in the disciplinary proceedings, the Courts and Tribunals should cause the copy of the report to be furnished to the aggrieved employee if he has not already secured it before coming to the Court/Tribunal, and give the employee an opportunity to show how his or her case was prejudiced because of the non-supply of the report.
If after hearing the parties, the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the non-supply of the report would have made no difference to the ultimate findings and the punishment given, the Court/Tribunal should not interfere with the order of punishment.
The Court/Tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is regrettably being done at present.
The Courts should avoid resorting to short-cuts.
Since it is the Courts/Tribunals which will apply their judicial mind to the question and give their reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment (and not any internal appellate or revisional authority), there would be neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of the reasonable opportunity.
It is only if the Courts/Tribunals find that furnishing of the report would have made a difference to the result in the case that it should set aside the order of punishment.
Whether after following the above procedure, the Courts/Tribunals set aside the order of punishment, the proper relief that should be granted is to direct reinstatement of the employee with liberty to the authority/management to proceed with the enquiry, by placing the employee under suspension and continuing the inquiry from the stage of furnishing him with the report.
The question whether the employee would be entitled to the back wages and other benefits from the date of his dismissal to the date of his reinstatement if ultimately ordered should invariably be left to be decided by the authority concerned according to law, after the culmination of the proceedings and depending on the final outcome.
If the employee succeeds in the fresh inquiry and is directed to be reinstated, the authority should be at liberty to decide according to law how it will treat the period from the date of dismissal till the reinstatement and to what benefits, if any and the extent of the benefits, he will be entitled.
The reinstatement made as a result of the setting aside of the enquiry for failure to furnish the report should be treated as a reinstatement for the purpose of holding the fresh inquiry from the stage of furnishing the report and no more, where such fresh inquiry is held.
That will also be the correct position in law."
10.
After stating as above, in Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar's (supra) case the Supreme Court has stated that although furnishing of the Inquiry Officer's report to the delinquent employee is a part of the reasonable opportunity available to him to defend himself against the charges.
`The need to make the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) prospective in operation requires no emphasis.
As pointed out above, in view of the unsettled position of the law on the subject, the authorities/managements all over the country had proceeded on the basis that there was no need to furnish a copy of the report of the Inquiry Officer to the delinquent employee, and innumerable employees have been punished without giving them the copies of the reports.
In some of the cases, the orders of punishment have long since become final while other cases are pending in Courts at different stages.
In many of the cases, the misconduct has been grave and in others the denial on the part of the management to furnish the report would ultimately prove to be no more than a technical mistake.
To reopen all the disciplinary proceedings now would result in grave prejudice to administration which will far outweigh the benefit to the employees concerned.
Both administrative reality and public interests do not, therefore, require that the orders of punishment passed prior to the decision in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) without furnishing the report of the Inquiry Officer should be disturbed and the disciplinary proceedings which gave rise to the said orders should be reopened on that account, hence we hold as above.
In the view we have taken, we direct that all the appeals and special leave petitions be now placed before an appropriate Bench of this Court for decision according to the law laid down here.'
11.
We have referred to B Karunakar's case (supra) in some details only to alert ourselves that a mechanical application of the rule in all cases in which it is found that a copy of the inquiry report was not served upon the delinquent employee, that the inquiry is vitiated, will result in miscarriage of justice.
The Supreme Court in the above case has stated in no uncertain terms that in some of the cases, the orders of punishment have long since become final while other cases are pending at different stages.
In many of the cases the misconduct has been great and while in the others the denial on the part of the management to furnish the report would ultimately prove to be no more than a technical mistake.
To reopen all the disciplinary proceedings now would result in grave prejudice to administration which will far outweigh the benefit of the employees concerned.
12.
In the instant case, the enquiry culminated in the punishment by way of order of dismissal vide order dated 1st August 1992.
Technically, the prospective rule as laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra) will be attracted.
Whether non-furnishing of the enquiry report, however to the petitioner-respondent caused such injustice to him that the Court should order its reopening on the ground that one of the facts (facets ?)
of the principles of natural justice is violated.
Facts of the case reveal that the petitioner- respondent did not participate in the enquiry.
Grave charges of misappropriation of public money were levelled against him.
He avoided, however, to place any defence in the disciplinary proceedings.
Notices in course of the enquiry which were given to the petitioner-respondent proved futile.
True, entitlement of a copy of the report and the notice of proposed punishment, as contemplated under Rule 48(f) of the WBC.S.
Rules, 1987 ordinarily shall not be ignored.
On the facts of the instant case, however, it will be inequitable to grant to the petitioner-respondent premium on his recalcitrance that he chose to avoid the enquiry and by his non-cooperation created the situation that the employer society had to issue the order of dismissal from service.
13.
One who seeks equity and interference on the grounds of violation of principle of natural justice must show that he has acted equitably and fairly and that he has not contributed in the violations aforementioned.
Petitioner-respondent in our view, is one such delinquent, who cannot justify in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution interference with the order of dismissal from service for reasons aforementioned.
The view that we have taken takes us to the conclusion that the writ petition must fail and the impugned judgment is fit to be set aside.
14.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The impugned judgment is set aside.
The writ petition is dismissed, but on the facts and in the circumstances of the case without any order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.