Harjit Singh, J (Oral) - This judgment shall dispose of CWP Nos. 13132 of 1998 and 454 of 1999.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 13132 of 1998.
2.
The Government of Punjab issued a Notification dated 27th March, 1998, which was published in the form of a Prospectus by the Punjabi University, Patiala, calling for applications from candidates for taking the Entrance Test for admission to the MBBS/BDS Courses in the Government Medical Colleges as also Daya Nand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, for the Session 1998- 99.
The Prospectus also notified the various reserved categories eligible to apply for the entrance test.
The petitioners, who belong to the reserved category of Border Area residents applied under the reserved category against the 2% reserved seats, which when tabulated mathematically corresponded to 6 seats in all.
The entrance test was held on 6th June, 1998 and on the declaration of the result on 12th June, 1998, the petitioners were shown to have qualified and their position in the merit list was displayed as under :  Name Merit under Border Area Merit under General Category Chetan Pangotra 17 323 Monica 18 329 Amita Garg 19 330 Amardeep Kaur Sandhu 20 343 Harman Grewal 210 357 As per the Prospectus, the first round of admissions were to be made after counselling on 14th and 15th July, 1998 and on that day the merit in the general category (free seats) went down to 187 and, as some candidates who had applied under the Border Area category were high up in merit in the general category as well, they were accommodated as general category candidates as per instructions, whereas the petitioners continued to remain on the waiting list.
The second round of counselling was scheduled for 17th August, 1998 and on that day too the petitioners appeared before the counselling Committee and candidates upto merit No. 254 in the general category were admitted against the free seats, and in this list too, six candidates with merit position Nos. 8 to 13 in the reserved category of Border Area who were also at merit position Nos. 196 to 229 in the general category, were inducted as general category candidates.
It is the petitioners' grievance that had these six candidates being taken in the general category in view of the instructions issued in the Prospectus, they being at merit position No. 15 onwards, would have got admission against their reserved category.
Primary reliance has been placed by the petitioners for this argument on Clauses 54 and 8-D of the Prospectus dealing with the eligibility for admission and the Mode of Selection and Admission respectively.
Reliance has also been placed on the judgment of this Court in CWP No. 10053 of 1994 Jaskaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others : 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H) now reported as 1995(1) RSJ 510.
3.
On notice of motion a comprehensive reply has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 5 and the broad facts pleaded by the petitioners have not been denied.
It has been pointed out that the final selection list of candidates granted admission at the time of the first counselling which had been displayed on the notice board on 24th July, 1998 also stipulated that the candidates were to deposit their fees on 28/29th July, 1998 and it was on account of the fact that some candidates did not make the deposit that some seats had remained unfilled and were thus filled up at the time of the second counselling on 17th August, 1998.
It has not been denied that six candidates who were between merit Nos. 8 to 13 in the reserved category of Border Area and 196 to 229 in the general list had been granted admission in the latter category at the time of the second counselling.
It has been explained that this exercise had been carried out in the light of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP No. 211 of 1998 (Miss Navreet Kaur Sandhu v. Punjabi University, Patiala and others) decided on 19th March, 1998, which in turn had relied upon a judgment to the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajiv Mittal v. Maharshi Dayanand University and others, AIR 1998 SC 680 : 1998(1) SCT 269 (SC).
4.
It will be seen that the matter would have to be decided in the light of Clause 54 and 8-D of the prospectus as also the case law cited at the Bar.
Both these clauses are reproduced below :  54.
No change of category(ies) will be entertained/permitted at the later stage.
Admission against reserved categories shall be made strictly in accordance with the orders of the Honourable High Court of Punjab and Haryana in CWP No. 10053 of 1994.
"Accordingly, candidates in Reserved Category(ies) are to be considered first in general category along with general category candidates depending upon their merit and then the seats in reserved category(ies) shall be filled from amongst the candidates in those categories according to their merit.
This will also apply for admission from waiting list".
8-D.
There shall be two (2) rounds of allotment by personal appearance."
Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has laid special emphasis on the underlined portion of Clause 54 and Clause 8(D) and has urged that as the Prospectus itself visualised two rounds of counselling and candidates from the waiting list were to be inducted in the same manner as those from the main list, inasmuch as that even the reserved category candidates on the marking list who were meritorious enough to qualify for admission in the general category were to be taken in that category as held by this Court in Jaskaran Singh's case (supra).
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 6, Daya Nand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, has however, placed primary reliance on the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Miss Navreet Kaur Sandhu as also on Rajiv Mittal's cases (supra).
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the matter in issue is fully covered by the two judgments aforecited.
Jaskaran Singh's case came up for consideration in Miss Navreet Kaur's case with special reference to clause 54 ibid.
In this case the petitioner, Navreet Kaur Sandhu who also belonged to a reserved category was considered first in the general category along with other such candidates but, being low in merit, was not granted admission in that category.
She was, however, granted admission as a reserved category candidate in the Government Medical College, Patiala as per the judgment in Jaskaran Singh's case and also started attending classes thereafter.
She, however, received a notice on 29th December, 1997, from the Principal of the College that she was to be shifted to the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot as she had now been put in the general category under the open merit.
She then filed the aforesaid writ petition in this Court challenging the order dated 29th December, 1997.
In the reply filed by the respondent-State of Punjab, it was pleaded that the last candidate admitted to the MBBS Course in the open merit was at merit No. 285 and as two seats had become available at the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, in the meanwhile and as the last date for admission to the Course had been extended up to 31st January, 1998, the petitioner who was at merit No. 287 under the general category, was, therefore, required to be inducted against one of those seats in the light of Jaskaran Singh's case.
The Division Bench accordingly examined the matter in this background and observed as under :  "Even the law laid down in Jaskaran Singh's case (supra) is that while granting admission against the reserved and unreserved category seats the common merit list of all the reserved and unreserved candidates should be prepared and the open seats filled up as per the merit list and if any candidate from the reserved category falls in that list he will be treated to have been admitted in the general category.
After this is done the reserved category candidates should be granted admission in order of merits against the reserved seats.
It is not ruled in this judgment that once a reserved category candidate is considered in the common merit list and he or she could not be selected in the common merit list due to his or her lower merit and later on admitted in a reserved category could be again shifted to an open category if some seats later on fell vacant in the open category."
....xx ....xx ....xx .....xx  xx ....xx ....xx .....xx  xx ....xx ....xx .....xx  To infer from this judgment that once a candidate is unable to get admission under the open category and is admitted thereafter in the reserved category he or she could again be shifted to the general category whenever an open category seat was available at any time is against the judgment in CWP No. 10053 of 1994, referred to above, and is incorrect.
According to us, it has neither been so held nor even is the intention of the Hon'ble Judges in that case.
If the judgment is interpreted in any other manner as has been interpreted by the official-respondents in the case in hand that even if a reserved category candidate has been considered at the first instance for the open merit also and she does not get admission in the open merit and gets admission in the reserved category, the candidate can again be disturbed and from one college to another on the basis that the candidate could be shifted from the reserved category under which she has already been admitted, to the open category seats; though we say with emphasis that neither the import nor the direction in that judgment, it would cause unnecessary and undue hardships to the students who had pursued their studies in a particular college for a sufficiently long period of time.
This interpretation of the official respondents shall be directly against the judgment of the Supreme Court in 1998(1) SLR 87, Rajiv Mittal v. Maharshi Dayanand University and others."
7.
Mr. Sibal has, however, urged that the Division Bench was deeply influenced by the fact that Miss Navreet Kaur Sandhu had attended classes at Patiala for a fairly long time and that shifting her to the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, would cause her unnecessary hardship.
He has pointed out that in the case in hand the petitioners had come to this Court with the utmost promptitude and, as a matter of fact, the interim orders made in the case had directed that no seats which fell vacant subsequently were to be filled in without the permission of the Court.
He has accordingly urged that the judgments cited by Mr. Patwalia would not apply in the present case.
Mr. Sibal's argument, however, lacks merit.
It will be seen from the portion quoted from Navreet Kaur Sandhu's case that the Division Bench had decided two primary points - firstly the legal aspect dealing with the applicability of the judgment in Jaskaran Singh's case and, secondly, the evident fact of extreme hardship in case she was to be shifted from Patiala to Faridkot after attending classes in Patiala for some time.
Mr. Patwalia has pointed out that the final list for the Session 1998-99 had been displayed on the notice Board on 24th July, 1998 and that classes had also commenced on 17th August, 1998.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the Division Bench relying on Rajiv Mittal's case had decided the matter entirely in favour of the petitioner.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the present writ petition, being de-void of merit, is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.