VS Aggarwal, J - Respondent Ram Phal was enrolled in the Haryana Police on 161963.
With the passage of time, he earned different promotions and was promoted to the rank of Inspector w.e.f.
941962.
In June, 1992, he was posted as Officer-in-Charge, Police Station City, Kaithal.
The facts conjoled from the petition reveal that on 22.6.1992 while the respondent was Officer-in-charge of the above Police Station, one Ashok Kumar s/o Prem Chand had filed application before the police that he had been beaten and threatened with death by one Chaman Lal Saraf, an Ex.
Member of the Legislative Assembly and his own sons.
ASI Dharam Bir had summoned both the parties.
In the evening, it was decided that the parties would come to a compromise and the said question shall be considered on the following day in the morning.
It is further the case that compromise was not arrived.
But on 23.6.1992 in the police station itself, both the parties indulged in free fight.
They were locked up and produced before the Executive Magistrate in proceedings under section 107/151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Subsequently, they were allowed to go.
2.
On 2561992, Indresh Kumar came to the police station at 600 pm along with his driver and three armed persons.
It is alleged that he misbehaved with the respondent and other police officials.
On the same evening at 900 pm while the respondent was patrolling, both the parties were again prepared for another fight.
The respondent told them not to do so.
Thereupon, Anil Kumar and Indresh Kumar were arrested at about 1000 pm under section 107/151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
At about 1100 pm, Chaman Lal led a mob and surrounded the police station.
Slogans were raised against the police.
The respondent left the police station and returned after the mob had gone away.
Anil Kumar and Indresh Kumar were medically examined through ASI Gurbachan Singh.
There were some injuries on their persons.
They were produced before the Executive Magistrate.
Indersh Kumar did not furnish the bail bonds and was taken in custody.
It is alleged that Chaman Lal used his connections and got an order for Magisterial enquiry.
Sub Divisional Officer (C) reported that the police officials including respondent were not at fault.
Chhaman Lal persisted with the matter and used his political influence.
Another enquiry took place.
It was conducted by Shri OP Gupta, the then District and Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra.
The report was that the respondent had tortured and beaten Chaman Lal and his sons.
A departmental enquiry had been proposed against the respondent and he had been suspended.
Superintendent of Police, Kaithal, sought the concurrence of the District Magistrate, Kaithal, for the purpose of holding a departmental enquiry against the respondent as envisaged under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The District Magistrate had accorded the concurrence.
Departmental enquiry was conducted.
Superintendent of Police, Bahadurgarh, recommended action against the respondent.
An order of penalty reducing the respondent in rank was passed.
The respondent was reverted to the rank of Sub Inspector.
However, the Deputy General of Police, Haryana issued a show cause notice proposing that, in view of serious and grave acts of misconduct, the quantum of punishment awarded was inadequate.
Reply was filed by the respondent.
Ultimately, the respondent was dismissed.
3.
The respondent filed a writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order passed by the Director General of Police, Haryana, dismissing him from service and the earlier order reverting him to the post of Sub Inspector.
Needless to state, that petition as such was contested.
4.
Learned Single Judge of this Court on 8.12.1997 took up only one contention of the respondent.
It was held that the concurrence of the District Magistrate was without application of mind and, therefore, the consent for departmental action was not valid.
Accordingly, the order dated 29.3.1996 reverting the respondent to the post of Sub Inspector and order dated 27.4.1996 dismissing the respondent from service was quashed.
Aggrieved by the same, present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed.
5.
On behalf of the appellants, it had been urged that the learned Single Judge inadvertently fell into an error because the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to the State of Haryana, were different.
To appreciate the said contention, at the outset reference as well be made to certain precedents that have been relied upon by the learned Single Judge in coming to the above conclusion.
Strong reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Administration v. Chanan Singh, 1969 Services Law Reporter 217; Union of India v. Ram Kishan, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 1403; and State of Punjab v. Raj Kumar, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 805.
6.
In Delhi Administration's case (supra), as against Chanan Singh the accusation was that while investigating a case he had taken one Rama Shah to the Lahori Gate police station without formally arresting him and received illegal gratification from him.
A complaint was filed.
Superintendent of Police censured him.
The matter was reviewed.
The departmental enquiry was entrusted to Shri DC Sharma, Superintendent of Police.
It was followed by a formal charge-sheet after that the delinquent was dismissed.
While referring to Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Delhi, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "The provisions of sub-rules (1) and (2) of R 38 are attracted in cases of complaint received by the Superintendent of Police indicating the commission by a police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public.
In such a case, the Superintendent of Police is required to bring the complaint to the notice of the District Magistrate who is to decide whether the investigation of the complaint should be made by a selected Magistrate having first class powers or should be left to a police officer.
If the investigation discloses a prima facie case, a judicial prosecution should normally follow unless for reasons to be recorded in writing the District Magistrate directs that the matter should be disposed of departmentally."
Thereupon, it was further concluded as under :-  ".....
The complaint fell within rule 1638 and it was for the District Magistrate to decide who should investigate the case.
No investigation of any kind was made under his directions.
Without obtaining his directions, the Superintendent of Police held an inquiry, and passed an order of censure.
The order was set aside by the Deputy Inspector General.
Thereafter by DO letter No. 2165C, the Superintendent of Police asked for sanction of the District Magistrate to proceed departmentally.
Even at this stage, the District magistrate was not informed that the Superintendent of Police held an inquiry and passed an order of censure and that, his order was set aside by the Deputy Inspector General.
The inquiry held by the Superintendent of Police was not authorised by the District Magistrate nor did it receive his approval.
The District Magistrate gave his sanction without recording any reasons and without applying his mind to the requirement of Rule 1638."
7.
The position in Ram Kishan's case (supra) was much different.
Herein, Ram Kishan was a Head Constable.
He was dismissed without informing District Magistrate about the complaint.
There was no evidence that the District Magistrate has decided that the investigation should be taken by the police officer and accordingly the decision of the authorities had been quashed.
8.
Same view had prevailed with the Supreme Court in the decision rendered in the case of State of Punjab v. Raj Kumar, AIR 1988 SC 805.
It was held by the Supreme Court that in cases of investigation pertaining to departmental enquiries, requirement of sanction of the District Magistrate is mandatory.
But as is to be noticed hereinafter, all these decisions pertain to Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Punjab or Delhi.
In Delhi, Punjab Police Rule 1638 has not materially been amended.
In the facts of the present case, the said Rules have no application.
In Punjab, Sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules read as under :-  "1638 Criminal offences by police officers and strictures by Courts - Procedure regarding - (1) Immediate information shall be given to the District Magistrate of any complaint received by the Superintendent of Police, which indicates the commission by a police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public.
The District Magistrate will decide whether the investigation of the complaint shall be conducted by a police officer, or made over to a selected [Executive Magistrate].
(2) When investigation of such a complaint establishes a prima facie case, a judicial prosecution shall normally follow; the matter shall be disposed of departmentally only if the District Magistrate so orders for reasons to be recorded.
When it is decided to proceed departmentally the procedure prescribed in rule 1624 shall be followed.
An officer found guilty on a charge of the nature referred to in this rule shall ordinarily be dismissed."
9.
In the State of Haryana this Rule has substantially been amended w.e.f.
2281978.
The relevant portion reads as under :-  "1638.
Criminal offences by police officers and strictures by courts - Procedure regarding - (1) Where a preliminary enquiry or investigation into a complaint alleging the commission by an enrolled police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public, establishes a prima facie case, a judicial prosecution shall normally follow.
Where, however, the Superintendent of Police proposes to proceed in the case departmentally, the concurrence of the District Magistrate shall be obtained.
(2) Orders have been issued by the Hon'ble Judges of the High Court making it obligatory on all civil and criminal courts, whenever they make structures on the personal character or professional conduct of a police officer, to send a copy of the judgment to the executive authorities.
In the case of the High Court itself the copies will be forwarded to the State Government.
In the case of all other courts (including Courts of Sessions), the copies will be sent by the Judges and Magistrates concerned to the District magistrate."
10.
It is abundantly clear from bare perusal of both the relevant Rules that if the matter is to be disposed of departmentally, in Punjab then the District Magistrate has to order for reasons to be so recorded.
In Haryana, the position, on the contrary, is different.
Herein, where Superintendent of Police proposes to proceeding the case departmentally, he has to take the concurrence of the District Magistrate.
It is obvious that while in Punjab the District magistrate has to record his reasons and take a decision which must show that he has applied his mind.
In Haryana, it is the Superintendent of Police who is to take a decision but sine qua non is that he must have the concurrence of the District Magistrate.
When such is the position, the above said precedents, indeed, in cases arising from Haryana Police will not have much bearing.
11.
The letter written by the District Magistrate, Kaithal, to the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal, reads as under :-  "From  The District Magistrate,  Kaithal.
To  The Superintendent of Police,  Kaithal.
No. 1542/Peshi dated 241993  Sub : Concurrence under PPR 1638(1).
Memo :  Reference your office No. 8836 dated 1231996, on the above mentioned subject.
2.
Necessary concurrence as envisaged under PPR 1638(1) for taking departmental action against Inspector Ram Phal is hereby accorded.
The original papers received with letter under reference are returned herewith in original.
Sd/- District Magistrate, Kaithal."
It is shown beyond any pale of controversy from the said letter that the District Magistrate had accorded his concurrence contemplated under the Punjab Police Rule 1638, as applicable to Haryana.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent, however, urged that it does not show any application of mind or judicial appraisal of the controversy.
He referred to a large number of precedents in this regard under the Prisons Act, 1984, namely Sant Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1991(1) Recent Criminal Reports, 182; Kashmir Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) Recent Criminal Reports 548, Joginder Singh v. The Inspector General Prisons Haryana and another, 1992(2) Recent Criminal Reports 36 (P&H); Tej Ram v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(1) Recent Criminal Reports 412 (P&H); and decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1579.
But the cited precedents have no application.
Under the Prisons Act, 1894 when a jail offence is committed, a punishment can be awarded by the Superintendent of Jail after examining the witnesses and giving opportunity to the delinquent to cross-examine them.
It provides for judicial appraisal of the punishment.
It had been held repeatedly that judicial appraisal necessarily means a proper opportunity that should be given to the delinquent and not merely an administrative order.
But this principle cannot be made applicable in the case of rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Haryana.
It is true that a decision does not merely mean the conclusion in judicial pronouncements.
It embraces within its fold the reasons which formed the basis in arriving at the conclusion.
13.
Can it be said that reasons must be recorded while only concurrence to the proposal has to be given ?
The answer in the peculiar facts must be in the negative.
The expression "concurrence" occurring in Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Haryana, certainly is an expression of art.
It is not defined.
When a word is not defined, then it is permissible to refer to dictionary to find out in the general sense the word is understood in common parlance.
But regard must be had to the context in which it has been used.
when the context makes the meaning of the word clear, then it becomes unnecessary to search and select a particular meaning out of the diverse meanings a word is capable according to the Lexicographer.
In the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition, at page 363, word "concurrence" has been explained to be, "a running together in time or place; meeting, combination; co-operation of agents or causes; agreement; assent, consent, competition, joint right or authority."
Even in Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Volume I, at page 472, expression "concurrence" has been explained to, "agreement or union in action; combination of power or influence; Co-operation; a meeting of minds; agreement in opinion; union in design; consent competition or rivalry; the act of concurring; a meeting or coming together; a coincidence of equal powers; the concurring of Christian festivals."
In Black's Law Dictionary, Fourth Edition, at page 363, word "concur" has been explained succinctly to be, "to agree; accord; act together; consent".
In the practice of appellate courts, a "concurring opinion" is one filed by one of the judges or justice, in which he agrees with the conclusions or the result of another opinion filed in the case (which may be either the opinion of the court or a dissenting opinion) though he states separately his views of the case or his reasons for so concurring.
State v. Pierce, 175 Wash. 461, 27 P.2d 1083.
In Louisiana Law.
To join with other claimants in presenting a demand against an insolvent estate."
14.
It is abundantly clear from the aforesaid that "to concur" means to give consent or agree to the proposal.
As has been noticed above, in the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Punjab, it is the District Magistrate who is to take the decision and record his reasons.
At the risk of repetition, it can be mentioned that in Haryana, Rule already reproduced above, the proposal and the examination is to be by the Superintendent of Police.
It is he who has to apply his mind.
Thereupon, the District Magistrate has to accord the concurrence or refuse it.
He is to apply his mind but it is not necessary that he must record his reasons.
When the concurrence has been accorded, as already reproduced above, then merely because reasons have not been recorded does not imply that there is no application of mind.
Concurrence had been accorded with respect to the proposal, then, as rules are applicable to Haryana, it cannot be insisted that it should be with reasons.
To this extent, the judgment of the learned Single Judge cannot be sustained.
15.
For these reasons, the Letter Patent Appeal is accepted and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
16.
As already pointed above, learned Single Judge had decided the writ petition on a single question that was agitated.
Since the respondent has other submissions, he may urge the same before the learned Single Judge.
The writ petition be listed before the learned Single Judge accordingly.
Appeal allowed.