Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioners in all numbering 16 have challenged selection of teachers of the District Budgam, pursuant to advertisement notice 5 of 1998 dated 661998 (Anx-PA), on the ground that the petitioners who applied for the posts and were interviewed, were not selected inspite of their superior qualification and merit.
They fared well and are ahead of the selected candidates.
The petitioners despite possessing all the prescribed essential qualifications and being proficient in teaching their respective subjects in Urdu, were not picked up and on the other hand candidates with lesser qualification and merit and many even lacking essential qualifications, have been selected.
Dropping of the petitioners and selection of the Respondents 4 to 19 is discriminatory and violates the fundamental rights guaranteed to the citizens under the Constitution.
The select list has been prepared quite capriciously without following the prescribed criteria and without adhering to the essential qualification as prescribed in Annexure PA.
In fact, the selection is colourable exercise of power and suffers from non- application of mind.
2.
On these grounds, writ of Certiorari to quash this selection list prepared pursuant to advertisement notice Annexure PA for district Budgam and mandamus for commanding the respondents to include petitioners in the selection list and appoint them as teachers, is prayed for.
3.
The Writ petition had been admitted to hearing on 2141997.
Respondents other than 1 to 3, have been set ex-parte vide Bench Order dated 3061997.
Respondents 1 to 3 State, Secretary Subordinate Service Selection Board and District Education Officer Budgam have been given number of opportunities to file reply, but no reply has been filed till date and the case is being listed for hearing pursuant to the Bench order dated 10101997.
4.
In the Bench order dated 1091997, there is a reference to the judgments of this Court in SWPs No. 500/97, 851/88 and 718/89, for the petitioners counsel claims that this case is also covered by the aforesaid judgments of the Service Writ Petitions.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties on all aspects of the matter.
The copies of the judgments as also the record has been made available.
6.
The counsel for the petitioners Mr. ZA Qureshi, submits that petitioners 2, 7 and 8 alone are interested in the prosecution of this Writ petition as all other petitioners' grievances have been redressed and they have been given relief as sought in the petition.
Accordingly, this writ petition shall govern the cases of the petitioners 2, 7 and 8 namely Ghulam Ahmad Kuka, Ghulam Nabi Shah and Ghulam Hassan Kumar, and in case of other petitioners the writ shall be deemed to have been dismissed.
7.
In absence of reply the allegations and the averments of the writ petition shall be deemed to have been legally admitted.
In absence of the counter the writ allegation and the relief which is sought for, has to be taken as uncontroverted.
The challenge to the selection list and dropping of petitioners 2, 7 and 8 has to be taken as legally bad, and vitiated by arbitrariness, mala fide and colourable exercise of powers.
8.
Perusal of the judgments of this Court in SWP No. 500/87, 851/88 and 718/89 reveals that the petitioners in those cases have been ruled on adjudication as appointed to the posts of teachers in the District of Budgam and Baramulla.
Though the court found the selection legally bad, yet refrained from quashing and terminating the selection and appointments as the same was not found necessary and just in order to give relief to the petitioners.
9.
Mr. Qadri, Sr. AAG, contends that in absence of declaration of appointment of teachers already made as illegal, petitioners cannot be given any relief.
In support of his argument he has cited State of Orissa v. Dr. Shiva Shankar Lal Bajoria & Ors., AIR 1955 SC 334.
The argument merits to be noted only to be rejected.
In the above case, the Apex Court while considering in appeal the appointment of petitioner before the Hon'ble Court by promotion to the post of Assistant Professor of Cardiology in SAB Medical College Hospital at Cuttak, the court found that the High Court having declining to go in the question and refrained from declaring the appointment of the respondent occupant of the post of Assistant Professor of Cardiology in the Medical College as illegal and at the same direction by the High Court to authorities in the facts and circumstances of that case, to consider the claim of the petitioner to the post of Assistant Professor was not permissible and that too when no vacant post in the discipline of cardiology was available in the College.
The facts and circumstances appearing in this petition have no parallel to those of AIR 1995 SC 334 (Supra).
The State has not even filed reply in this case and there is nothing on record to negate the availability of posts or to suggest non-availability of posts.
Besides this court has gone into the question of illegality of the select list of teachers and found it bad, though has stopped short of terminating the select list and the advertisements.
10.
It may be noted that in SWP 718/89, the selection of teachers for District Budgam, selected pursuant to advertisement notice 5 of 1988 dated 661988, subject of the instant writ petition was under challenge.
The Single Bench of this Court following the judgments of SWP No. 500/87 and 851/88, confirmed in LPA No. 1128/89 on 11.5.1992 and against which SLP was dismissed by the Supreme Court, allowed the writ petition and the cases of writ petitioners (of SWP 718 of 89) were ruled as covered by the said decision under which Writ Petitioners of these two writs (SWP No. 500/87 and SWP No. 851 of 88) appointed as Teachers for District Budgam.
Thus the petitioners' cases is fully covered by the aforementioned judgments.
11.
For the aforesaid reasons, the Writ petition of petitioners No. 2, 7 and 8, Ghulam Ahmd Kuka, Ghulam Nabi Shah and Ghulam Hassan Kumar, is allowed and the respondents are issued a Writ of Mandamus commanding the respondents to appoint these three petitioners as teachers against the available vacancies without disturbing the selection and appointment of the respondents/teachers in the grade of Rs. 900-1830 referred to in Annexure PA.
Petition allowed.