GS Singhvi, J - After almost six years of the termination of his services, the petitioner has invoked writ jurisdiction of the High Court for directing the respondents to reinstate him in service as a Special Police Officer.
2.
Perusal of the record shows that the petitioner had filed civil writ petition No. 1967 of 1995 for invalidation of the termination of his service.
The same was dismissed on 10.10.1995 on the ground of non-impleadment of the State of Punjab as party respondent.
After waiting for another two years he has filed this petition for grant of identical relief.
3.
After hearing Shri Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner, we are convinced that in the absence of any cogent explanation for the long time gap of six years between the date of termination of services and the date of institution of this petition no relief can be given to the petitioner.
If the petitioner was to file a civil suit in the year 1998 for setting aside the order of termination of his services passed in July, 1992, the same was bound to be dismissed as barred by limitation.
If that would have been the fate of the civil suit it is not permissible for this Court to use its extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India ignoring the statutory period of limitation prescribed for filing of civil suit for grant of similar relief.
4.
In State of M.P. v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1994 Supreme Court 1006, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held that while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 the High Court cannot overlook the delay and if the petition is filed after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed for filing of suit then ordinarily the Court should presume that the delay is unreasonable.
In M/s Tilokchand Motichand and others v. HB Munshi, Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bombay and another, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 898, another Constitution Bench held that even though no statutory period of limitation has been prescribed for filing writ petition under Article 226, unexplained delay in filing of writ petition is a good ground for declining relief to the petitioner.
This view has been reiterated by a seven Judges Bench in Mafatlal Industries etc. etc. v Union of India etc. etc., JT 1996(1) SC 283.
5.
Shri Arora tried to offer some explanation for the delay of six years by inviting our attention to the representations made by the petitioner and his father either themselves or through some persons who could influence the discretion of the departmental authorities but we are not persuaded to agree with him that mere making of representation would be sufficient for this Court to overlook the delay of six years in the filing of the writ petition.
For the reason mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.