DP Kundu, J - Initially, the petitioners No. 2 to 7 (hereinafter referred to as the petitioners) were the employees of Government of West Bengal and they were working as Class-IV employees.
As Class-IV, under the service condition, the retirement age for the petitioners and the similarly situated employees was 60 years.
While the petitioners and the similarly situated employees were working as Class-IV staff of the Government of West Bengal, the Food Corporation of India came into existence and the petitioners and similarly situated employees were sent to Food Corporation of India on deputation.
Subsequently as consequence of exercising option by the petitioners and the similarly situated employees, the petitioners and the similarly situated employees ceased to be the servants of Government of West Bengal and they were absorbed in the service of Food Corporation of India as direct recruits.
Under the relevant service condition the retirement age of the employees of Food Corporation of India except those covered by Section 12A of Food Corporation of India Act was 58 years.
In this writ proceeding the petitioners claimed that Food Corporation of India should enhance the retirement age of the petitioners and the similarly situated employees from 58 to 60 years.
While this writ proceeding is pending by Circular No. 24 of 1998 dated May 29, 1998 issued by Food Corporation of India, Regulation 22(1) of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 has been amended and the retirement age of the employees of Food Corporation of India has been enhanced from 58 (fifty eight) to 60 (sixty) years and the said amendment has come into force with effect from 29.5.1998.
The question which falls for determination in this writ proceeding is whether in the case of writ petitioners and similarly situated employees who were not covered by Section 12A of the Food Corporation of India Act and retired before 29.5.1998 the retirement age should be enhanced from 58 (fifty eight) to 60 (sixty) years.
2.
Food Corporation of India (for short FCI) was created by and established under The Food Corporation of India Act, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act).
FCI is a statutory authority.
Section 45 of the said Act laid down that the FCI after observing the formalities mentioned in said Section 45 can make regulations for the purpose of the duties, conduct and conditions of service of the employees.
Such power to frame regulations is a legislative power and regulations so framed are subordinate legislation under powers conferred by the statute.
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 45 of the said Act and all other enabling powers and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, the FCI framed the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as Staff Regulations 1971).
These Staff Regulations 1971 are subordinate legislation framed in exercise of legislative power conferred by Section 45 of the said Act.
The Staff Regulations 1971 impose obligations on the FCI, the Statutory authority.
FCI cannot deviate from the conditions of service and any deviation will be enforced by legal sanction of declaration by courts to invalidate actions in violation of Staff Regulations 1971.
This view is supported by the majority view of Supreme Court expressed in Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram, AIR 1975 SC 1331.
Paragraph 33 of Reported decision being relevant is quoted hereinbelow :-  "There is no substantial difference between a rule and a regulation inamuch as both are subordinate legislation under powers conferred by the statute.
A regulation framed under a statute applies uniform treatment to every one or to all members of same group or class.
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission, the Life Insurance Corporation and Industrial Finance Corporation are all required by the statute to frame regulations inter alia for the purpose of the duties and conduct and conditions of service of officers and other employees.
These regulations impose obligation on the statutory authorities.
The statutory authorities cannot deviate from the conditions of service.
Any deviation will be enforced by legal sanction of declaration by courts to invalidate actions in violation of rules and regulations.
The existence of rules and regulations under statute is to ensure regular conduct with a distinctive attitude to that conduct as a standard.
The statutory regulations in the case under consideration give the employees a statutory status and impose restriction on the employer and the employee with no option to vary the conditions.
An ordinary individual in a case of master and servant contractual relationship enforces breach of contractual terms.
The remedy in such contractual relationship of master and servant is damages because personal service is not capable of enforcement.
In case of statutory bodies there is no personal element whatsoever because of the impersonal character of statutory bodies.
In the case of statutory bodies it has been said that the element of public employment or service and the support of statute require observance of rules and regulations.
Failure to observe requirements by statutory bodies is enforced by courts by declaring dismissal in violation of rules and regulations to be void.
This Court has repeatedly observed that whenever a man's rights are affected by decision taken under statutory powers, the Court would presume the existence of a duty to observe the rules of natural justice and compliance with rules and regulations imposed by statute."
3.
Staff Regulations 1971 being subordinate legislation have statutory force of law.
Regulation 22(1) of the Staff Regulations 1971 laid down that an employee of FCI shall retire on the last date of the month in which he attains the age of 58 (fifty eight) years.
Regulations 22(1) of the Staff Regulations 1971 is quoted hereinbelow :-  "(1) Every employee appointed to the service of the Corporation shall retire on the last date of the month he attains the age of 58 years : Provided that a category IV employee who has been transferred to the Corporation under Section 12A of the Act and who has opted to be governed by leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Central Government in accordance with the rules and orders of the Central Government as amended from time to time in terms of sub-section (4) of Section 12A of the Act, shall retire on the last date of the month, on which he attains the age of 60 years."
Admittedly the petitioners and similarly situated employees are not covered by the proviso of Regulation 22(1).
Employees of the Central Government who had been absorbed in the service of FCI have been treated as a class separate from the employees of the State Government who subsequently had been taken in service of FCI as direct recruits.
For those employees of Central Government Section 12A was inserted in the said Act by way of amendment.
But no such provision had/has been made in the said Act in relation to the employees of State Government who subsequently had been in the service of FCI as direct recruit.
The classification so made is not under challenge.
Since the employees of the State Government who had subsequently been taken in the service of FCI as direct recruits on the basis of option exercised by those employees electing to be direct recruits in the service of FCI and governed by Staff Regulations 1971 cannot claim to be equal to the employees covered by Section 12A of the said Act they should also be permitted to retire at the age of 60 (sixty) years.
So long the classification made by Section 12A of the said Act remains the petitioners and similarly situated employees cannot claim that like employees covered by Section 12A of the said Act, they should also be allowed to retire at the age 60 (sixty) years.
4.
While the petitioners and the similarly situated employees were working under FCI as deputationists FCI issued a circular No. 21 of 1984 dated March, 1984.
The contents of the said Circular is quoted hereinbelow :-  "SUB : Absorption of West Bengal State Government deputationists in the regular service of the Food Corporation of India.
The question regarding absorption of West Bengal Government deputationists in the FCI is engaging the attention of the Management.
In order to ascertain the number of employees who are interested for absorption in the FCI, they are required to give their option in the option form enclosed as Annexure-I 2.
The absorption of the employees will be subject to the following conditions :- (i) The State Government employees who opt for permanent absorption in the service of the Corporation will be treated as direct recruits and will be subject to the terms and conditions as prescribed in FCI (Staff) Regulations, 1971.
(ii) They will count their seniority in the post/grade in which they are absorbed from the date of absorption in the Corporation.
(iii) Details indicating the post and the scale of pay held by the State Govt. deputationists as also the corresponding post in FCI and the scale of pay attached to the post in FCI is indicated in Annexure-II.
The employees who opt for absorption in the Corporation will be initially appointed to the corresponding post indicated therein.
(iv) West Bengal State Govt. employees who have been on deputation in FCI for a period of at least five years as on 30th April, 1984 will only be eligible for absorption in the service of the Corporation.
3.
For the service rendered prior to the date of absorption in FCI, the employees concerned will draw pro-rata pension, death-cum- retirement Gratuity and other terminal benefits, if any, as admissible from and in accordance with Rules and Regulations of the West Bengal Government.
The FCI will not bear any liability in respect of the service rendered prior to the date of permanent absorption in the service of the Corporation.
4.
The persons who are interested for permanent absorption in the service of the Food Corporation of India are required to give their options in the prescribed form in duplicate to the Senior Regional Manager, West Bengal, Calcutta, duly countersigned by the Controlling Officer under whom they are working at present before 30th April, 1984."
By the said Circular 21 of 1984 it was made clear that the said employees who would opt for permanent absorption in the service of FCI would be treated as direct recruit and would be subject to the terms and conditions as prescribed by Staff Regulations, 1971.
It was made clear in the said circular that the employees who were interested for absorption in FCI may submit their option in the Option Form enclosed to the said circular.
It was also made clear that only those West Bengal State Government Employees who had been on deputation in FCI for a period of at least five years as on 30th April, 1984 would be eligible for absorption in the service of the FCI The petitioners and the similarly situated employees submitted their options opting for permanent absorption in the service of FCI as direct recruits and to be governed by the terms and conditions prescribed by Staff Regulations, 1971.
5.
What is the meaning of the word "option" ?
In the context of the present case it means right of election to exercise a privilege.
The State Government employees who were working in FCI as deputationists were given by FCI a right of election to elect between the two namely (1) whether they want to be employees of FCI as direct recruits and governed by the Staff Regulations 1971 or (2) whether they want to remain as State Government employees.
The petitioners including some other deputationists elected to be employees of FCI as direct recruit and governed by Staff Regulations 1971.
What is the effect of such election ?
Election is a choice of alternative.
The internal (intentional ?
), free and spontaneous separation of one thing from another without compulsion, consisting in intention and will.
There is no dispute that while functioning as State Government employees their retirement age, under the rules of State Government, was 60 (sixty) years but as direct recruits under FCI their retirement age had become 58 (fifty eight) years.
Thus so far the retirement age is concerned the provisions of service rules of State Government and those of Staff Regulations, 1971 are repugnant and inconsistent with each other.
When an employee elects one out of two repugnant and inconsistent service rules then he will be bound by his exercise of choice.
In such circumstances election once made by the employee cannot be retracted by him.
Electio semal facta, et placitum testatum non patitur regressum - Election once made, and plea witnessed (or interest shown), suffers not a recall.
When once the employees elected to be employees of FCI as direct recruits and governed by Staff Regulations 1971 being aware of the fact that it lays down that the employees of FCI shall retire at the age of 58 years then the employees afterward cannot rescind such election or turn round and claim their retirement age should be made 60 years as had been when they were employees of the State Government.
Quod semel placerit in electionibus amplius displicere non potest - What a party has once determined, in a case where he has an election, cannot afterwards be disavowed.
A man shall not be allowed to blow hot and cold - to affirm at one time and deny at another with reference to the same transaction.
Being fully aware that under Regulation 22(1) of the Staff Regulations 1971 they have to retire at the age of 58 years, the petitioners and the similarly situated deputationists from the service of State Government elected to be employees of FCI as direct recruits and governed by Staff Regulations 1971.
Thus they elected to retire at the age of 58 (fifty eight) years as employees of FCI They elected not remain as State Government employees and retire at the age of 60 (sixty) years.
There was no compulsion to elect to be an employee of FCI They by their own choice elected to be employees of FCI and governed by Staff Regulations 1971.
Having acted in the manner as stated hereinabove they cannot now claim that they should be allowed to retire at the age of 60 (sixty) years which was their service condition when they were in the service of State Government which had been terminated as a consequence of their exercise of election.
6.
In Narinder Chand Hem Raj v Lt.
Governor, Administrator, Union Territory, Himachal Pradesh, AIR 1971 SC 2399, Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "No Court can issue a mandate to a legislature to enact a particular law.
Similarly no Court can direct a subordinate legislative body to enact or not to enact a law which it may be competent to enact....... No Court can give a direction to a Government to refrain from enforcing a provision of law."
7.
The above view had been reaffirmed by Supreme Court in IE Newspapers (Bombay) P Ltd v. Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 515.
8.
Supreme Court in Mallikarjuna Rao v. State of AP, AIR 1990 SC 1251 observed :  "The High Courts or the Administrative Tribunals cannot issue a mandate to the State Government to legislate under Article 309 of the Constitution The Courts cannot usurp the functions assigned to the executive under the Constitution and cannot even indirectly require the executive to exercise rule making power in any manner.
The Courts cannot assume to itself a supervisory role over the rule making power of the executive under Article 309 of the Constitution" 9.
In Mallikarjuna's case, AIR 1990 SC 1251 Supreme Court also observed :  "While exercising power of judicial review of administrative action, the Court is not an appellate authority.
The Constitution does not permit the Court to direct or advise the executive in matters of policy or to sermonize qua any matter which under the Constitution lies within the sphere of legislature or executive."
10.
It is now well settled law as laid down in the above referred cases that no court can direct a legislature or subordinate legislative body to enact or not to enact a law.
No Court can give direction to enforcing authority to refrain from enforcing a provision of law.
The Court cannot usurp the functions assigned to the legislative body.
The Court also cannot even in an indirect manner require a legislative body to exercise rule making power in any manner.
The Court cannot assume to itself a supervisory role over the rule making power of the legislative body.
Under Constitution Court is not permitted to direct, advise or sermonize in any matter which lies within the sphere of legislative authority.
11.
Claim of the petitioners wholly rested on Annexure `A' of the writ petition which contains clause 9 of the agreement between Government of West Bengal and FCI regarding service conditions of the government employees who would be absorbed in the service of FCI This document is dated 26.11.1966.
Clause 9(c) being relevant is quoted hereinbelow :  "In respect of officers and staff that will be eventually absorbed by the Corporation in its service the Corporation shall make regulations under the Food Corporation Act in such manner as to conform to as far as possible to the conditions of service that governed such officers and staff at present under the Government.
The Corporation shall also relax if necessary its rules of recruitment in order to enable it to absorb the officers and staff that will be eventually absorbed in its service."
In 1966 Staff Regulations 1971 were not in existence therefore it cannot be said that above quoted clause 9(c) was contrary to law.
The learned advocate for the writ petitioners argued that above quoted clause 9(c) amounts to promise not contrary to any provision of law and therefore FCI is bound by the principle of promissory estoppel.
The learned advocate for the petitioners argued that while the petitioners and similarly situated employees were working as employees of State Government in the grade of Class-IV their retirement age was 60 (sixty) years and therefore after their absorption in the service of FCI, appropriate regulation ought to have been made in the Staff Regulations 1971 fixing their age of retirement at 60 (sixty) years.
I have already held hereinabove that Staff Regulations 1971 are subordinate legislation framed in exercise of legislative power and have statutory force of law.
It is now well settled that there can be no promissory estoppel against the legislature in the exercise of its legislative functions nor can the government or public authority be debarred by promissory estoppel from enforcing a statutory prohibition.
In this context reference may be made to Supreme Court's decision in Union of India v. Godrej (Godfrey ?)
Philips India Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 806.
In paragraph 14 of the Reported decision Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "Of course we must make it clear, and that is also laid down in Motilal Sugar Mills case, AIR 1978 SC 621 (supra), that there can be no promissory estoppel against the legislature in the exercise of its legislative functions nor can the Government or public authority be debarred by promissory estoppel from enforcing a statutory prohibition.
It is equally true that promissory estoppel cannot be used to compel the Government or a public authority to carry out a representation or promise which is contrary to law or which was outside the authority or power of the officer of the Government or of the public authority to make.
We may also point out that the doctrine of promissory estoppel being an equitable doctrine, it must yield when the equity so required, if it can be shown by the Government or public authority that having regard to the facts as they have transpired, it could be inequitable to hold the Government of public authority to the promise or representation made by it, the court would not raise an equity in favour of the person to whom the promise or representation is made and enforce the promise or representation against the Government or public authority.
The doctrine of promissory estoppel would be displaced in such a case, because on the facts, equity would not require that the Government or public authority should be held bound by the promise or representation made by it.
This aspect has been dealt with fully in Motilal Sugar Mills case (supra) and we find ourselves wholly in agreement with what has been said in that decision on this point."
I am of the opinion that there can be no promissory estoppel against subordinate legislation also.
There can be no promissory estoppel so far exercise of legislative power and contents of legislation are concerned.
Therefore, clause 9(c) of Annexure `A' of the writ petition cannot be treated as promissory estoppel compelling FCI to exercise its legislative power under Section 45 of the Act and legislate a provision in respect of Staff Regulations 1971 making the petitioners and similarly situated employees entitled to retire at the age of 60 (sixty) years.
That apart in view of options exercised by the petitioners and similarly situated employees the doctrine of promissory estoppel would be displaced because on the facts and circumstances of this case equity would not require application of doctrine of promissory estoppel.
12.
Annexure `A' of the writ petition shows that there was an agreement by and between the Government of West Bengal and Food Corporation of India.
Clause 9(c) laid down that in respect of officers and staff that will be eventually absorbed by the Corporation in its service the Corporation shall make regulations under the Act in such a manner as to conform to as far as possible to the conditions of service that governed such officers and staff at present under the Government.
This agreement was entered into on 26.11.1966.
The Staff Regulations 1971 were framed in the year 1971 ie after about five years from the date of agreement appears from Annexure `A' of the writ petition.
In the said Staff Regulations 1971 no provision has been made for retirement at the age of 60 (sixty) years except for those who are governed by section 12A of the Act.
It has been stated earlier in this judgment that Staff Regulations 1971 are subordinate legislation and have statutory force of law.
The petitioners and the similarly situated employees were aware of this position.
From Circular 21 of 1984 referred to earlier in this judgment it appears that the employees who were interested for absorption in FCI, they were required to give their option in the option form enclosed as Annexure `A' of the said circular.
It appears from Annexure `B' of the writ application which contains the copy of the Board Resolution 13/149 that the Board of Directors of FCI in its 149th Meeting held on 2751983 agreed to the absorption of the West Bengal State Government Deputationists in FCI, in principle, subject to certain terms and conditions.
From the Board's Resolution No. 13/149 it appears that it was resolved, inter alia, that individual options should be obtained from those willing to be absorbed and the remaining should be repatriated to the State Government.
Therefore, the petitioners and the similarly situated employees knowing fully well that if they elect to be absorbed in the service of FCI then according to Regulation 22(1) of the Staff Regulations 1971 they have to retire at the age of 58 (fifty eight) years elected to be employees of FCI Had they not exercised their option in favour of their absorption in the service of FCI then they would have been repatriated to the State Government and in that event they would have retired at the age of 60 (sixty) years.
Under these circumstances Annexure `A' of the writ petition cannot be used as a source of legitimate expectation.
The petitioners and the similarly situated employees having themselves elected to be absorbed in the service of FCI and governed by the Staff Regulations 1971 had no legitimate expectation to retire at the age of 60 (sixty) years.
They elected to retire at the age of 58 (fifty eight) years in accordance with the provisions contained in Staff Regulations 1971.
13.
There was an industrial dispute between British Paints and Its Workmen, the litigation ended at Supreme Court.
Supreme Court in British Paints India Ltd v. Its Workmen reported in AIR 1966 Supreme Court 732, in paragraphs 3 and 5 held as follows :-  "3.
Now this is a case where there was no age of retirement before the reference was made and the workmen whether at the head office or at the factory were all entitled to work so long as they were physically or mentally fit.
So far as the existing workmen are concerned, we think that the tribunal should have fixed the age of retirement at 60 years both for the factory- workmen as well as head office workmen.
It is enough in this connection to refer to the decision of this Court in Guest Keen Williams (Private) Ltd. v. PJ Sterling, 1960(1) SCR 348 : AIR 1959 SC 1279, where in a similar situation this Court fixed the age of retirement at 60 years in the case of existing workmen."
"5.
Considering that there has been a general improvement in the standard of health in this country and also considering that longevity has increased, fixation of age of retirement at 60 years appears to us to be quite reasonable in the present circumstances.
Age of retirement at 55 years was fixed in the last century in Government service and had become the pattern for fixing the age of retirement everywhere.
But time, in our opinion, has now come considering the improvement in the standard of health and increase in longevity in this country during the last fifty years that the age of retirement should be fixed at a higher level, and we consider that generally speaking in the present circumstances fixing the age of retirement at 60 years would be fair and proper, unless there are special circumstances justifying fixation of a lower age of retirement."
That was an industrial dispute where the Industrial Tribunal had jurisdiction under provisions of industrial dispute to determine the retirement age of the workmen.
No such power has been conferred upon the High Court while exercising judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The Constitution does not permit the Court to direct or advise the executive or the statutory authority in matters of policy or to sermonize qua any matter which under the Constitution or under the relevant statute lies within the sphere of legislative or executive function of the government or the statutory authority.
Under these, circumstances this court cannot, while exercising power of judicial review under Article 226, direct the respondents to fix the retirement age of the petitioners and the similarly situated employees at the age of 60 (sixty) years either by framing regulation in exercise of legislative power or by administrative instruction in exercise of executive power.
Since Regulation 22(1) of the Staff Regulations 1971 laid down that the employees of FCI, except those covered by Section 12A of the Act shall retire at the age of 58 years any alteration in the said Regulation shall amount to amendment of the said Regulation 22(1) which has statutory force of law.
Therefore, by administrative instruction Regulation 22(1) cannot be amended.
14.
In course of hearing the ld.
Advocate for the respondents has produced Circular 24 of 1998 issued by FCI The relevant portion of the said Circular 24 of 1998 is quoted hereinbelow :  "Sub : Enhancement of retirement age from 58 to 60 years in respect of the employees of the FCI - The Amendment to FCI (Staff) Regulation, 1971 - Regarding.
The Government of India have approved the amendment of Regulation 22(1) of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 for the enhancement of the retirement age from 58 to 60 years in respect of the employees of the Food Corporation of India and the same is being notified in the official Gazette to-day by the Secretary, FCI 2.
The aforesaid amendment will come into force with immediate effect i.e. from 29.5.1998."
Thus it appears that in exercise of the legislative power FCI has amended Regulation 22(1) of the Staff Regulations 1971 and the said Amendment has come into force with effect from 29.5.1998.
Therefore, the employees of FCI who were in employment of FCI on 29.5.1998 would get the benefit of the said amendment but the employees who have already retired from service prior to 29.5.1998 cannot get the benefit of the amendment introduced by Circular 24 of 1998.
15.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove the Court cannot -  (1) direct he FCI to frame a regulation specially meant for the petitioners and similarly situated employees who have retired from the service of FCI before 29.5.1998 enhancing their age of retirement from 58 (fifty eight) years to 60 (sixty) years; (2) direct the FCI to issue administrative instruction enhancing the retirement age of the petitioners and similarly situated employees who have retired from the service of FCI before 29.5.1998, from 58 (fifty eight) years to 60 (sixty) years.
Therefore, the claim of the petitioners and similarly situated employees who have retired from the service of the FCI before 29.5.1998 for enhancement of their retirement age from 58 (fifty eight) years to 60 (sixty) years cannot be allowed and the same is rejected.
16.
Now a second question has to be decided.
In view of the interim order passed by the Court in the instant writ proceeding some employees who are similarly situated with the petitioners instead or retiring at the age of 58 (fifty eight) years worked up to the age of 60 (sixty) years and then retired from the service of FCI Question to be decided is whether those employees who worked upto the age of sixty years in view of interim order passed by the Court and retired from the service of FCI before 29.5.1998 should be directed to refund the money they received as salary from FCI between 58 (fifty eight) years of age and 60 (sixty) years of age.
17.
Actus curia neminem gravabit - An act of the Court shall prejudice no man.
Where a delay in an action is the act of the Court, neither party shall suffer for it.
Business of the Court did not permit early disposal of the case.
But in view of the interim order passed by the Court the concerned employees of FCI worked upto the age of 60 (sixty) years and then retired from the service whereas under the provisions of Staff Regulations 1971 they were bound to retire at the age of 58 (fifty eight) years.
Therefore, the concerned employees had worked extra two years and received salary for the same period.
Now if those concerned employees are directed to refund the salary for the said two years it means that, whatever might be the reason, the service rendered by them would be without remuneration.
FCI did not take proper steps to get the interim order vacated.
FCI could have preferred an appeal including special leave petition to Supreme Court against the interim order.
FCI did not do that.
FCI was satisfied with the interim order and obtained service from the concerned employees beyond 58 (fifty eight) years of age upto 60 (sixty) years of age.
Service rendered by the concerned employees beyond 58 (fifty eight) years of age upto 60 (sixty) years of age was not free service.
They rendered their services, under the compulsion of economic circumstances, to earn salaries for the said period of two years.
Whenever a person provides labour or service to another for remuneration but when no remuneration is paid for the service rendered, it clearly falls within the scope and ambit of the words "forced labour" under Article 23 of the Constitution Such a person would be entitled to come to the Court for enforcement of his fundamental right under Article 23 by asking the Court to direct payment, of the salary so that labour or service provided by him ceases to be "forced labour" and breach of Article 23 is remedied.
(People's Union for Democratic Rights v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 1472).
Therefore, under the facts and circumstances of the case as discussed hereinabove, if the concerned employees are directed to refund the salaries for the said period of two years then the services rendered by them for the said period of two years would amount to "forced labour" which has been prohibited by Article 23 of the Constitution By directing the concerned employees to refund salaries for the said period of two years though they rendered services for the said period, Court cannot act contrary to the mandate given by Article 23 of the Constitution Therefore, court cannot direct the concerned employees to refund the salaries for the said period of two years when in fact they rendered services for remuneration and FCI accepted their services.
18.
The ld.
Advocate for the respondents referred to Radha Kishun v. Union of India and others reported in 1997(9) SCC 239 : 1997(2) SCT 502 (SC) and argued that continuation in service beyond the date of superannuation without being re-employed in public interest does not entitle a employee to claim salary.
In the case of Radha Kishun the petitioner admittedly was to retire on 3151991 but it was not so done due to an obvious case of absolute irresponsibilities on the part of the officer concerned in the establishment in the section concerned for not taking any action to have the petitioner retired from service on his attaining superannuation.
Supreme Court could not accept the contention of the petitioner and give legitimacy to the illegal action taken by the authorities.
Under these circumstances Supreme Court observed :  "It is then contended that the petitioner would have conveniently secured gainful employment elsewhere and having worked, he cannot be denied of the legitimate salary to which he is entitled.
Though the argument is alluring, we cannot accept the contention and give legitimacy to the illegal action taken by the authorities.
If the contention is given acceptance, it would be field day for manipulation with impunity and one would get away on the plea of equity and misplaced sympathy.
It cannot and should not be given countenance."
The facts and circumstances involved Radha Kishun's case (supra) are absolutely different from the facts and circumstances of the present case and, therefore, Radha Kishun's case (supra) is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
19.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove I am of the view that court cannot :  (1) direct the FCI to frame a regulation specially meant for the petitioners and similarly situated employees who have retired from the service of FCI before 29.5.1998 enhancing their age of retirement from 58 (fifty eight) years to 60 (sixty) years, (2) direct the FCI to issue administrative instruction enhancing the retirement age of the petitioners and similarly situated employees who have retired from the service of FCI before 29.5.1998, from 58 (fifty eight) years to 60 (sixty) years, (3) direct the concerned employees to refund the salaries for the said period of two years (58 to 60 years) when they worked as employees of FCI before 29.5.1998 and rendered services for remuneration and FCI accepted their services.
20.
In these terms the writ application is disposed of and all interim orders are vacated.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.