HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 7281, 7345, 7403, 7493, 7886, 7972, 7974, 8064, 8210, 8430, 8461, 10166, 11920, 11950, 11951, 12397, 12639 and 14121 of 1998; the facts relevant for the disposal of these petitions being taken from C.W.P.
No. 7345 of 1998.
2.
The Punjab Government framed a policy in substitution of the (sic) providing training to teachers, called the Elementary Teachers Training Course (in short the `ETT') of two years' duration.
It was also provided that the minimum educational qualifications for entry to the course would be 10+2 with Giani and Parbhakar.
The State Government also created an Apex body called the State Council of Education Research and Training, Punjab and under its auspices 12 Institutions called District Institutes of Education and Training (called DIET's) for the session 1997-99 were set up in the various districts in the State.
The State Government issued a Prospectus on 18th August, 1997 inviting applications, district-wise for the Joint Entrance Test for admission to the said course to be received by 5th September, 1997.
The prospectus made a provision for 100 seats to be divided equally amongst male/female candidates and also laid down the extent of reservation for the various reserved categories.
The petitioners took the test on 22nd November, 1997 and on the declaration of the result on 2nd April, 1998 vide Annexure P-2, they were found to have qualified.
The State Government in the meantime, issued fresh instructions Annexure R-1 dated 19th March, 1998, filed with the written statement, which changed the procedure for admission.
The petitioners have now come to this Court raising a number of pleas; first that the instructions dated 19th March, 1998, Annexure R-1 had the effect of amending the prospectus issued on 18th August, 1998, and this was not permissible in the light of a large number of decisions of this Court; secondly that the aforesaid instruction Annexure R-1 was bad for the additional reason that it had specifically provided that the reserved category seats were to be filled in first to be followed by the seats in the general category and that this procedure was contrary to the ratio of the Division Bench judgment in Jaskaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(1) S.L.R.
641 : 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H) and finally that the purpose behind the issuance of the instruction Annexure R-1 was to do away with the effect of the Full Bench Judgment of this Court in Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1997-3 117 P.L.R.
691 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H) in which it had been held that the boy-girl ratio of 50 seats each had to be adhered to and for this reason too, this instruction was bad in law.
On facts it has been pleaded that there had been large scale irregularities in the process of admission and in district Gurdaspur an inquiry conducted by the Deputy Secretary, Department of Education, soon after the admission test had been held, had found that the papers of the candidates had been tampered with outside the test venue by the candidates themselves and wholesale changes had been made in their answer- sheets.
In this connection, it has been also pleaded and urged that the State Government had not acted in a transparent manner and in the result declared in the Tribune on 2nd April, 1998, and displayed on the Notice Board, no indication had been given as to who amongst the successful candidates were boys or girls, the marks obtained by them and whether they belonged to the general or reserved categories.
3.
A reply has been filed on behalf of the respondent-State and it has been urged first and foremost that the petitioners have not impleaded any of the selected candidates who had as of now joined the course, as respondents and as such the petition was not maintainable.
It has also been pointed out that the instructions Annexure R-1 dated 19th March, 1998, did not, in fact, amend the prospectus that had been issued on 18th August, 1997 as they had covered up a grey area with regard to the filling up of the odd 25 seats as the ratio had been fixed 50 seats for the girls and 50 seats for the boys.
It has also been pointed out by Mr. Hemant Gupta, the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, that there had been no deviation from the prospectus for the additional reason that the instructions before the Full Bench pertained to the admissions earlier made and were substantially in different terms whereas the instructions now impugned had been re-cast to take care of a particular situation.
It has also been pointed out that though it did appear that there had been large scale tampering with the answer-sheets in district Gurdaspur, but on the report of the Deputy Secretary Education a fresh test had been held on 31st January, 1998 and the result for district Gurdaspur had been re- computed.
It has also been urged that in the result published in The Tribune on 2nd April, 1998, it had been specifically mentioned that the same pertained to all the categories district-wise, though there was no individual category- wise/ sex-wise break up.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel of the parties and have gone through the record carefully.
The first objection raised by the respondent with regard to the non-joinder of necessary parties must now be dealt with.
It is true that the ETT course is presently in progress and a large number of candidates have been given admission and none of them have been made party-respondents in the present petition.
The question arises as to whether the non-joinder of all affected parties in the facts given would be fatal to the prosecution of the writ petition.
In this connection, Mr. Chatrath has relied on General Manager, South Central Railway, Secunderabad and another v. A.V.R.
Siddhanti and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 1755 to contend that where a policy was under challenge and no specific challenge has been made to an individual appointment, it would suffice if only the initiators of the policy were impleaded as party-respondents.
In this case, the objection was taken before the Hon'ble Supreme Court that as a large number of employees who were likely to be affected by the decision in the case had not been impleaded as respondents, the non-joinder was fatal to its prosecution.
This argument was repelled on the ground that the petitioners were impeaching the validity of a policy decision which was analogous to a case in which the constitutionality of a statutory rule was assailed.
The Court accordingly observed as under:  In such proceedings the necessary parties to be impleaded are those against whom the relief is sought, and in whose absence no effective decision can be rendered by the Court.
In the present case, the relief is claimed only against the Railway which has been impleaded through its representative.
No list or order fixing seniority of the petitioners vis-a-vis particular individuals, pursuant to the impugned decisions, is being challenged.
In the light of the above it is apparent that the petitioner's success in the present case is only qua the policy with regard to filling up of the seats in the general and reserved categorics.
The first objection raised by the respondents, therefore, does not merit acceptance.
5.
Mr. Chatrath's argument that the prospectus issued on 18th August, 1997 having the force of law could not be subsequently amended by the instructions dated 19th March, 1998 lacks merit.
Annexure R-1 is reproduced in its entirety :  "The Tribune, Thursday, March 19, 1998.
Government of Punjab  Department of Education  (Education-4 branch)  Important Notice  The Examinees of Elementary Teachers Training (ETT) Entrance Examination, 1997, may please note :-  (1) For ETT Examination, the number of seats allocated for each district of the Punjab State is 100 i.e. 50 for boys and 50 for girls.
(2) Out of these seats, some seats have been kept reserved for different categories.
In some categories, the number of seats reserved is in even number i.e. 2,4,6 whereas in some cases the number of reserved seats is in odd number i.e. 1,3,5.
(3) The distribution of reserved seats countable on even numbers in each district between boys and girls will be in the equal ratio of 50:50.
It will be difficult to maintain this ratio in respect of reserved seats bearing odd number because last one seat does not make a pair and cannot be divided equally.
(4) Therefore, in respect of allocation of reserved seats bearing odd numbers, it is clarified that after equal distribution of these seats among boys and girls the last residual one seat will be allocated to that reserved or general category candidate who will have higher marks in merit, whether male or female.
It is also clarified that by filling reserved seats in this manner, the ratio of seats between male/female in some districts may exceed or decrease from ratio of 50:50, but the total number of seats in each District/Institution shall remain 100.
This provision has been provided to give preference in admission to a candidate having higher position according to merit.
(5) After filling the reserved seats, the names of remaining examinees of these categories will be considered in general category according to merit so that a candidate obtaining high marks in entrance test could not be deprived of admission and an examinee obtaining lesser marks may be admitted.
Sd/- Dated, Chandigarh (K.R.
Lakhanpal)  17th March, 1998  Secy.
Education (Schools) Punjab."
It will be evident that the first four paragraphs deal with the situation wherein some difficulty in the application of the 50% rule qua boys and girls on account of the reservation of seats on odd numbers, such as 1, 3, 5 etc and it was in this situation that it was clarified that in case 25 seats were reserved for a particular reserved category, 12 each would be filled up from amongst the boys and girls and the residual 25th seat would be offered to the candidate who had higher marks in order of merit whether male or female.
In the Item `Distribution of Seats' given in the admission brochure dated 18th August, 1997 it had been stated as under:  "Allotment of seats in each district will be 100 i.e. 50 for male candidates and 50 for female candidates.
Out of 25 seats reserved for the Scheduled Caste candidates, 12 seats shall go to male and 12 to the female.
The 13th seat shall be allotted to the candidate (male or female) whosoever gets more marks.
In case of marks being equal, determination for allocation of seats will be on the basis of date of birth.
The seat will be allotted to a candidate who is older in age."
It will be seen that in the Information Brochure it had been provided that for filling up of the odd seat in the scheduled caste category the number of marks of the candidate would be the determining factor and that this would be filled up by a candidate having higher marks irrespective of the sex of the candidate.
It appears that this principle was made applicable to all the other categories as well by the impugned amendment.
To my mind, no fault can be found with this change for two reasons - firstly that it would have a very marginal effect and secondly because the principle laid down was not only fair and equitable but also found its genesis in the prospectus itself.
No fault can therefore be found with paragraphs 1 to 4 of Annexure R-I Swaranjit Singh's case thus has no applicability.
6.
Mr. Chatrath has, however, laid a serious challenge to paragraph 5 of Annexure R-I This is reproduced below :  After filling the reserved seats, the names of remaining examinees of these categories will be considered in general category according to merit so that a candidate obtaining high marks in entrance test could not be deprived of admission and an examinee obtaining lesser marks may not be admitted."
He has pointed out that this was contrary to the ratio of the judgment in Jaskaran Singh's case (supra).
In this case the court was called upon to construe the government instructions dated 19101983 which inter alia, provided that "admissions shall first be made against reserved category seats and thereafter against reserved category seats."
The Court considered the instructions in the light of the law already laid down and held that "for the reasons recorded above, the Government Instructions dated 19101983 are hereby quashed.
It is directed that while granting admission against the reserved and unreserved seats, a common merit list of all the reserved and unreserved candidates should be prepared and the open seats filled up as per the merit list and if any candidate from the reserved category falls in that list he will be treated to have been admitted in the general Category.
After this is done, the reserved candidates should be granted admission in the order of their merit against the reserved seats."
Mr. Gupta hs not been able to controvert this legal submission.
Paragraph 5 of Annexure R-1, therefore, being contrary to the ratio in Jaskiran Singh's case obviously cannot stand scrutiny.
It is accordingly quashed.
7.
Mr. Chatrath's final argument must now be examined.
He has urged that there was a total lack of transparency leading to serious irregularities in the conduct of the test and in the declaration of the result.
He has referred to the results appended as Annexures R-II to RII/10 with the written statement and has pointed out that despite this declaration it was still not clear as to how many boy or girl candidates had got admission to which categories.
Mr. Gupta has however argued that as the result of all the candidates had been despatched to their residences by post and the result had been published in The Tribune also, no fault could be found in the action taken.
He has also pointed out that any candidate who remained dissatisfied was welcome to visit the office of the examining authority to find out more about his/her or anybody else's result.
To my mind, Mr. Gupta's argument cannot stand scrutiny.
It is the admitted position that about 45000 candidates had taken the test in question out of whom 1200 candidates had been selected, 100 form each district, 50 of them female and 50 of them male.
I can see no reason as to why the category-wise break up of the selected candidates had not been given in the notice published in The Tribune.
It also appears that no detailed list had been put up on the notice board and only a general list had been put up for scrutiny.
Moreover, it is evident that in the list published on 2nd April, 1998, there was no break up for male and female candidates and a consolidated list of all categories jumbled together had been published.
It is well settled now that in matters such as these it is essential to satisfy the conscience of the Court as also to provide some satisfaction to the candidates.
Though allegations of malpractices do not appear to be universally correct, as already mentioned above, the State Government had itself taken cognizance of some irregularities and had conducted and enquiry and on the basis of the report submitted by the Deputy Secretary Education, a fresh test had been conducted on 31st January, 1998 for district Gurdaspur alone.
Mr. Chatrath has however pointed out that though a complaint had been made with regard to the tests held in Mansa, Bathinda and Muktsar as well and though some enquiry had been ordered in this behalf, no final decision has been taken on the plea that there was no written complaint made in respect of those districts.
It will be seen from the pleadings as they are that vague allegations of irregularities in these districts have been made and the State Government had apparently found that there was insufficient material on record to proceed with the inquiry but in respect of district Gurdaspur, remedial steps had been taken by the State Government itself.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, these petitions are allowed, the select lists Annexures R-II to R-II/10 are quashed and the following directions are issued:  (i) The list will be re-cast under the supervision of the Secretary, Department of Education, Punjab, within a period of one month from the date that a certified copy of this judgment is supplied to him; (ii) The aforesaid list will be prepared in terms of paragraphs 1 to 4 of instructions Annexure R-1 but will ignore paragraph 5 thereof, meaning thereby that the general category seats would be filled in first (as per their merit) to be followed by reserved category candidates; and iii) Till the re-casting of the result, the candidates, who stand admitted and are undergoing isntructions will be allowed to continue with the same.
Copy of this order be supplied to the counsel for the parties dasti.
Petition allowed.