TS Doabia, J - "Compassion" signifies a deep feeling of pity for the suffering of another and an inclination to give aid or support or to show mercy.
"Compassionate appointment" as the term suggests is made by bye-passing normal rules applicable to entry into public service.
The word compassionate has been defined in Concise Oxford Dictionary as "sympathetic; pitying".
The term compassion has been defined as "pity including one to help or be merciful".
These appointments are made when a bread winner is not available to look after the family on account of his untimely demise.
This exercise is adopted to see to it that the members of family of the deceased employee are out of financial crisis.
If it is found that the family members are under the crisis then power to be exercised by the competent authority to make appointment on compassionate grounds.
The above logic behind making compassionate appointments was sought to be curtailed and conditioned by rules.
The rules made from time to time be noticed in brief :  J&K Employees (Death in Harness) Dependents Rules, 1989 came to be enforced on 18th of May 1989.
(SRO 194 was issued).
Family consisting of son, daughter, adopted son, adopted daughter, wife sister, brother dependent upon the deceased, were eligible to seek compassionate appointment.
Basic factor which was to guide in these matters was to see that such appointment should mitigate the extreme hardship of the immediate family members of the deceased.
The person to be appointed was supposed to give an undertaking that he would look after the family.
This was also provided in Rule 2 of the above rules.
Income criteria was also prescribed.
There was, however, no stipulation as to time limit within which the appointment was to be made.
On 24th of September 1989 Jammu and Kashmir Compassionate Appointment Rules, 1991 came into existence.
(This was vide SRO 283).
Fresh criteria was indicated.
If the income of the family was more than Rs. 2,000/- then appointment was not to be offered.
There was no time limit within which this appointment was to be made.
Still later on 22nd of February 1994, Jammu and Kashmir Compassionate Appointment Rules of 1994 came into existence.
(This was vide SRO 43).
Under Rule 3 it was provided that appointment was to be made to the lowest rank of non-gazetted service or to class IV post if the candidate had read upto Matric.
Rule 3 is relevant and is reproduced below :  "3.
Appointment under these rules : (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any rule or order for the time being in force regulating the procedure for recruitment in any service or posts under the Government an eligible family member of a person specified in rule 2 may be appointed against a vacancy in the lowest rank of a non-gazetted service having qualification above Matriculation or to a class IV, post if the candidate has read upto Matric : Provided that the applicant is eligible and qualified or acquires eligibility and qualification within a period of six months from the death of the deceased person specified in rule 2.
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall derogate from the powers of the Government in General Administration Department to appoint at its discretion a candidate to a higher post in the non-gazetted service."
Income criteria was indicated.
This was fixed at Rs. 3,500/-.
There was power reserved with the Government in terms of rule 7.
Government could relax the rules to some extent in the case of deserving candidates and lower down educational or technical qualifications as the case may be.
It be seen that the stipulation of six months period mentioned in Rule 3 is being pressed into service by the respondent-authorities in declining the compassionate appointment.
Basic question which has been raised in this petition is as to whether fixation of limitation in the Rules of 1994 can be made a ground for non-grant of relief of appointment on compassionate grounds in case of person who had applied much earlier to coming into force of the above Rules.
The object of compassionate appointment of a dependent of deceased employee who dies in harness is to relieve the family of immediate financial hardship arising on account of sudden demise of their sole bread earner.
It is an exception to the normal rule for getting into public service through open invitation and contest.
Some judicial precedents be noticed :  In Gurdip Singh v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, 1997(4) SCT 833 (P&H), the concerned employee suffered permanent disability.
The instructions contemplated giving of compassionate appointment.
Instructions were modified.
The case of the petitioner was pending before the change occurred in the policy.
It was observed that the case for giving appointment should be considered under the instructions which were applicable at the relevant time.
Since the case had already been recommended under the earlier instructions subsequent instructions could not be made applicable.
The widow of the deceased employee was asked to opt for additional monetary benefit in lieu of the compassionate appointment.
The widow approached the authorities for compassionate appointment within one month from the date of death of her husband.
It was observed that she cannot be denied appointment on the ground that six years have elapsed from the date of death of the employee.
The reasoning that after six years she does not require a job was held to be a reasoning without any basis.
Smt. M Reddamma v Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corpn., 1997(3) SCT 86.
The question as to whether the scheme for giving appointment on compassionate grounds can be altered with retrospective effect was considered in the case reported as A Ksheera Sagar v. AP Dairy Development Coop.
Fed Ltd, 1997(3) SCT 515.
The dependent of the deceased employee made an application seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
There was alteration in the scheme.
This was with retrospective effect.
This provided for monetary package to the dependents of deceased in lieu of compassionate appointment.
It was observed that the appointment would be governed by the Rules or Scheme as in existence on the date of applying and these could not be altered retrospectively.
The dependent sought appointment on compassionate grounds.
The approval was granted after almost ten years of the death of employee and even after three years of sanction accorded by the Government.
Actual appointment order was not issued.
It was observed that the object of granting such relief is to mitigate immediate hardship to the grieved family.
The respondents were directed to appoint the petitioner forthwith.
This view was expressed in Nisar Ahmad Abdulmiya v. State of Gujarat, 1997(1) SCT 812.
The view expressed by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Smt. Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1989 SC 1976 was taken note of.
The widow of a deceased ad hoc employee was seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
This was denied on the ground that the compassionate appointment can be granted only in the case of death of an employee who is working on regular basis.
The argument raised that as the deceased had worked for more than two years and was entitled to regularisation was taken note of.
The directions were given to consider the case of the petitioner on compassionate grounds.
Saroj v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(1) SCT 229.
The petitioner was three years of age at the time of his father died.
His mother re-married.
He was left at the mercy of his relations.
Applications were made for compassionate appointments.
There was no denial of the fact that an application was filed.
Merely because respondent-authorities did not take notice of the application, it cannot be made a ground to deny appointment.
See Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana State Electricity Board, 1996(2) SCT 300.
Limitation in the case of minors for compassionate appointment would start from the date of attaining majority by the dependent.
The father of the claimant died when he was 6/7 years of age.
He was held entitled to file application on attaining majority.
Daya Kaur v. Haryana State Electricity Board, 1996(2) SCT 447.
What was said in paragraphs 4 to 7 is being noticed.
This reads as under :  "In her rejoinder, the petitioner has pleaded that at the time of death of her husband, she was unable to make any application for employment because her son was only 6/7 years old and she had in fact submitted letter dated 15.10.1982 for registration of the name of her son for appointment on compassionate ground.
Reliance has been placed by the petitioner on the decision of this Court in Chandro Devi v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(1) SCT 9 (P&H) : 1994(1) RSJ 229.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on the decision in Ratni Devi v. Secretary HSEB, 1987(2) PLR 374.
By placing reliance on various other decisions of this Court, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the failure of the widow to submit an application for appointment on compassionate ground within a period of three years cannot be made a ground for denial of employment on compassionate ground to one dependent of the deceased.
According to Sh. Dua in a case where the children of the deceased are minor, the limitation of filing of the application should be three years from the date of attaining the majority of the child and as petitioner's son attained majority only in the year 1992-93, the petitioner and her son were right in making an application to the Board for employment on compassionate ground.
Learned Counsel appearing for the Board, on the other hand, submitted that although this Court has given, in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : JT 1994(3) SC 525, the application filed by the petitioner at a belated stage cannot be made the basis for giving employment to the son of Late Mohinder Singh."
"5.
In Ratni Devi's case (supra) a Division Bench of this Court was interpreting the instructions issued by the respondent-Board on 22101871 on the subject of employment on compassionate grounds and observed that one of the dependents of the deceased cannot be denied employment simply because another member of the family was already employed on some other post."
"6.
In Chandro Devi's case (supra) this Court considered the plea of limitation of three years and rejected the same by making the following observations:  "In so far as the plea of limitation is concerned, the same in the facts of the case has necessarily to be rejected.
There may be cases where an employee would die leaving infants behind him.
In such cases, there cannot be any occasion for making any application on compassionate grounds within three years.
It is natural that such people would acquire qualification and age for employment after doing some education which will obviously take long years, from the time when their bread winner died.
The limitation of three years is to be construed in that light and cannot be made applicable in every case.
In other words, such a policy can be made applicable only where in the family of the deceased there are persons who can be employed.
In so far as the policy decision of the government to give employment to one dependent of the deceased is concerned, the same has not been denied."
In Balkar Singh v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 3585 of 1993 decided on 481994 : 1995(1) SCT 199 (P&H) (DB); a Division Bench of this Court referred to another decision of this Court rendered in CWP No. 2463 of 1991, Santosh Kumar v. HSEB, 1993(1) SCT 158 (P&H) decided on 2271992, wherein it was held that in the case of minor the period of limitation cannot be operated from the date of death but should be invoked from the date of attaining majority.
The Division Bench held that principles of law laid down in the case of Santosh Kumar v. HSEB (supra) reflected the correct position.
7.
In CWP No. 4350 of 1994 decided on 441995 a Division Bench of this Court referred to earlier decisions and then observed as under :  "In addition to what has been held by this Court in the two cases referred to above, we wish to add that though the object of giving employment to a dependent of the deceased employee is achieved if one of the family members of the deceased employee is given employment immediately after his death, but at the same time it has to be taken into consideration that appointment can be given to one member of the family of the deceased employee in accordance with the provisions of the relevant rules or executive instructions governing recruitment.
Neither in the service of the Haryana Government nor in the service of the respondent-Board a person below the age of 18 years can be given employment.
Therefore, if a deceased employee is survived by minors, it is impossible to give effect to the condition incorporated in the circulars of the Board dated 2691985 and 1.10.1986 which requires submission of the application within three years of the death of the employee.
A condition which is impossible to be performed is ordinarily liable to be treated as arbitrary and unconstitutional but if such condition can be given a reasonable meaning so as to avoid the charge of unconstitutionality that interpretation has to be preferred.
Therefore, the instructions contained in the circulars dated 2691985 and 1.10.1986 will have to be interpreted to mean that in case of a minor child the period of three years would be applicable from the date he becomes major.
This is the only possible way of giving effect to the policy of giving employment to the dependent of a deceased employee where his dependent happens to be minor children."
Then in Hakim Singh v. HSEB and another, 1995(4) SCT 746 (P&H), once again a similar question was considered by me and it was held that in view of the consistent judgment this Court holding that a minor dependent cannot be deprived of employment on compassionate ground only because he could not submit the application within three years of the death, the Board was not justified in denying employment to the petitioner and a mandamus was issued to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground with a further direction that his case shall not be rejected on the ground of non-submission of application by his mother after the death of his father.
In Vishal Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1995(4) SCT 801 another Division Bench of this court again reiterated the same principle.
The Division Bench considered the decision of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra) and held that on the basis of that judgment, the relief cannot be denied to the petitioner."
The dependent of the deceased employee was entitled to compassionate appointment on the date of death.
The policy of compassionate appointment was changed later on.
The dependent has a legal right to get appointment as per the policy existing at the time of death.
Tarun Chakraborty v. State of West Bengal and others, 1996(2) SCT 799.
See paragraphs 7 to 11.
"There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that an executive instruction unless issued for the benefit of the employees cannot be given retrospective effect and retrospective operation.
8.
In Pradyut Kumar Chakraborty's case (supra) the division bench of which I was a member held :  "By reason of the impugned order dated 20th January 1994 the Secretary, Board of Revenue rejected the prayer of the petitioner on the ground that the State of West Bengal has issued a memorandum bearing No. 200(6))/EMP/2E-31/93 dated 381993.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the said letter should not have been given retrospective effect.
The contention appears to be correct.
Keeping in view the fact that the father of the petitioner was permitted to retire with effect from 16th February 1990, in terms of Annexure `E' aforementioned which was the Rules and the circular letter issued by the State at the relevant time.
It is now well known that an executive direction cannot be given retrospective effect.
Only a rule framed under the proviso of Article 309 of the Constitution of India can be given retrospective effect.
9.
In Smt. Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others (supra) the Apex Court held :  "She had then a right to have her case considered for appointment on compassionate ground under the aforemaid Government Memorandum.
In 1983 she passed the trade test and the interview conducted by the DGBR.
10.
In Phoolwati v. Union of India reported in AIR 1991 SC 469, the Supreme Court following its earlier decision in Sushma Gosain's case directed Union of India to provide employment to the second son of the appellant.
11.
In Asif Hameed and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir reported in AIR 1989 SC 1899, the Apex Court observed :  "When the Constitution gives power to the executive Government to lay down policy and procedure for admission to medical colleges in the State then the High Court has no authority to divest the executive of that power.
The State Government in its executive power, in the absence of any law on the subject, is the competent authority to prescribe method and procedure for admission to the medical colleges by executive instructions."
Ultimately in para 22 it was said :  "Had the petitioner applied for appointment on compassionate grounds prior to 30th April 1992, his application would have been considered on the basis of the scheme as then existing.
Only because the petitioner filed the application after the new scheme came into force, his right under the old scheme, in my opinion, cannot be taken away.
For the reasons aforementioned, this application is allowed."
Application for seeking compassionate appointment was made as per the prevalent Govt. instructions in the month of May 1994.
Later on in the month of May 1995, the instructions were issued afresh.
These were to the effect that the married dependents of the deceased employee will not be entitled to compassionate appointment.
It was observed that these instructions cannot be given retrospective effect.
The fact that a post was in existence before instructions came, was taken into consideration.
It was accordingly held that the case of the petitioner should be dealt with as per the existing instructions.
This view was expressed by the Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Surinder Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(1) SCT 767.
In this case it was observed that the criteria based on the status of married or unmarried is without any basis.
This has no nexus with the object.
The object is of providing a relief to the member of the deceased family.
The only criteria which should guide the authorities is the economic and financial condition of the family.
The person seeking appointment was a minor.
He was held entitled to compassionate appointment on attaining majority.
Jagdeep Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 731.
An employee of Haryana Electricity Board died in harness.
He left a widow and minor child.
The widow also died.
It was observed that if there is no period of limitation prescribed under the rules, then appointment has to be given to the minor.
Vishal Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board (supra).
Above judicial pronouncements are clear, categoric and consistent.
The subject of compassionate appointment is to be considered as per the rules when an employees dies or when an application is made.
Scope of Rule 3 of 1994 be now examined.
It be seen that Rule 3 of the 1994 Rules reproduced above does prescribe a period of limitation of six months.
This period is for acquiring eligibility.
This period of six months which talks of acquiring eligibility would apply only to acquiring educational, technical and other qualifications.
This rule uses the word "acquire".
When some one acquires something he makes a conscious effort.
"Death" is never acquired.
Nobody would like to acquire eligibility for compassionate appointment voluntarily by wishing the bread winner of the family to die.
The eligibility to which reference is made in Rule 3 is to be acquired only after the death.
The eligibility which a dependent happens to possess on account of death comes in his way without effort.
When the proviso to Rule 3 is so read, it would mean that eligibility referred to in rule 3 is vis-a-vis educational and technical qualification.
So far as the basic rule is concerned a dependent can seek appointment on compassionate grounds and this right is not dependent on the limitation.
Thus I am of the view:  (i) in the matter of making compassionate appointment the paramount consideration is to see that the members of the deceased family are provided with relief which would mitigate the financial crisis.
(ii) The word "acquire" devotes (denotes ?)
a conscious act.
An effort is made to obtain something.
Eligibility on account of death is an event which can never be acquired.
(iii) The period of six months limitation prescribed in the Rule 3 would apply only to acquisition of eligibility qua educational technical and other qualifications.
(iv) That the rules of 1994 are not retrospective.
This would govern only those cases where death has taken place after 2221994.
The old cases would be continued to be governed by the old Rules.
(v) That the Government is within its rights to relax any of the Rules and if the Government comes to the conclusion that financial crisis is still being faced by the family and as that is the basic factor which guides the authorities in making compassionate appointment, the Government can still make appointment notwithstanding the prescription of the period of limitation.
(vi) That in all cases what is required to be seen is that the hardship which the family is suffering is required to be mitigated.
If the family is not suffering any hardship then notwithstanding the presence of all other criterias, the appointment can be denied.
If the family is suffering from hardship then compassion has to be shown.
Rules can be relaxed.
State has to show benevolence.
In view of the above, the stand taken by the respondent-State is not correct.
The respondent-State through its functionaries would now take steps to process the case of the petitioner and consider him for giving appointment on compassionate grounds.
Let this be done within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date a copy of order passed by this court along with writ petition and annexures thereof are made available to the respondent-State by the petitioner.
If for any practical reasons it is not possible to take a decision within stipulated period, then respondent- State would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
But in that eventuality they would have to explain each and every day's delay.
Petition which was admitted and taken up for final disposal with the consent of the parties is disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.