J Kanakaraj, J - The appellant management was the second respondent in Writ Petition No. 6501 of 1987 filed by the first respondent workman.
We will refer to the parties by their nomenclature in the Writ Appeal.
The first respondent was employed as a Store Attender in the appellant/management and he had put in nearly twenty years of service.
It is stated that in the Stores Receiving Section, the Store Attender occupies the lower most post and there are four clerks and one supervisor, who are in charge of the stores.
The first respondent was suspend from service with effect from 2091983 and a charge memo was issued on 1991983.
It is worthwhile to notice the actual charge memo for a proper understanding of the facts of the case.
The charge was as follows :-  "It is reported to us as follows :-  (1) that on 14th September, 1983, when you were in the General shift, you have certified as correct the truck load of 8 KL Light Diesel Oil delivered by Lorry No. MSV 5998, but after unloading the entire quantity, it was found that there was a shortage of 869 Ltrs.
of light diesel oil; (2) that while inspecting the Truck No. MSV 5998, it was found that the Dip Pipe (perforated) was inserted with a MS pipe (non-perforated) and soldered at the bottom with a tin sheet; (3) that even on 6th August, 1983, when you were in the General shift, the same Lorry MSV 5998 was involved for a shortage of 1600 Ltrs, which was not detected at the Receiving stage by you; (4) that though your Supervisor has instructed you to check simultaneously both the Dip rod pipe and the loading point covered with a lid, you have failed to do so; and (5) that due to your gross negligence and connivance, the company has incurred monetary loss."
The first respondent submitted his explanation.
His answer to the charges was that he did to certify as correct the load of 8 kilo litres of Light Diesel Oil.
He also explained that he was not responsible for the defective fabrication of the lorry tank.
So far as the incident on 681983, he stated that one P Srinivasan had checked the lorry.
He also explained that he had in the past, brought to the notice of the management the shortages in the receipts of LDO, HSD, Coke, Aluminium, Pig Iron etc., and helped the management in recovering the shortages.
In the meanwhile, the Investigation Report of the second respondent was received.
The report suggested that there was a false fitting inserted with the dip pipe and soldered at the bottom.
Such false fittings were discovered only after the officials of the Indian Oil Corporation arrived at the scene.
In other words, the Investigation Report proved that the shortage of 869 litres of oil was due to the false fitting and the shortage was caused even before the tank arrived at the premises of the appellant management.
According to the first respondent, the false fitting could not have been noticed without opening the manhole cover and the first respondent cannot be held responsible for the charges.
What is more, the shortage had been accepted by the Indian Oil Corporation and made good by the Corporation itself.
Therefore, there was no loss at all to the second respondent and the allegation in the charge to this extent is incorrect.
It is only after the incident, certain further instructions were given by the appellant/management that the man hole point on dip rod pipe as well as the loading point should be checked.
2.
An enquiry was conducted and the appellant/management purported to accept the findings had dismissed the first respondent from service with effect from 23.7.1984 with retrospective effect from the date of suspension, 1991983.
The dispute was referred for adjudication in ID No. 435 of 1985 and the Award was passed on 231987.
The Labour Court found that the non-employment was justified, but awarded an ex gratia compensation of Rs. 15,000/-.
On the first respondent challenging the award in Writ petition No. 6501 of 1987, the learned single Judge of this Court set aside the award on the ground that there was no cogent or compelling evidence on record to prove the charges of connivance and collusion.
The learned Judge also found that the past good record of the first respondent had not been taken into account in awarding the punishment.
Consequently, the learned Judge directed reinstatement of the first respondent with full back wages and other attendant benefits.
3.
In the Appeal before us, Mr. Sanjay Mohan, learned counsel for the management puts forward the following arguments:  1.
The findings of fact arrived at by the Labour Court cannot be interfered with in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution of India; and 2.
In any event, the punishment awarded cannot be interfered with because the management had lost confidence in the first respondent, especially because he was in charge of the stores.
4.
Mr. NGR Prasad, learned counsel for the worker argues that it is a case of `no evidence' and the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the perverse findings of the Labour Court.
So far as the punishment is concerned, he has referred to a number of decisions to suggest that the normal rule is reinstatement and no grounds had been made out for denying reinstatement in this case.
5.
We have been taken through the relevant portions of the evidence and it is now made clear that when the lorry tank came to the premises of the appellant/management, it was in fact short of 8000 litres by a margin of 869 litres.
Therefore whatever was brought in the tanker viz., 7131 litres were discharged in the appellant tank.
It is not as if that the lorry tanker discharged only a portion of the oil brought in the tanker and ran away with still some oil left in the tanker.
In such case, the first respondent could be taken to task for not verifying the discharge of the entire oil from the oil tanker.
The modus operandi adopted by the contractor is to have a M 5 pipe (non-perforated) inserted within the Dip pipe (perforated) and have the same soldered at the bottom with a tin sheet.
This arrangement would prevent the employee of the Company who takes reading by inserting the Dip rod for finding out the correct quantity of oil inside the tank.
During investigation, the false fitting had been photographed and exhibited for reference.
6.
In fact, the Investigation Report also discloses that the particular tanker was loaded on 13.9.1983 at Korukkupet, Chennai, whereas it reported for discharge at the appellant-factory only on 1491983.
It was also found that the contractor had employed false fitting in the front compartment of the tanker.
It was also found that the Dip pipe was found to be inserted with a M 5 Pipe (non-perforated) and soldered at the bottom with a tin sheet.
The contractor had accepted the short delivery of 0869 kilo litres.
While so, it was on the report of one V Anand, who was examined as M.W.
1 and who happens to be in charge of the materials division, that the appellant thought of preceding against the first respondent worker.
The said report indicted the first respondent for not checking both the dip rod pipe as well as the loading point covered with a lid simultaneously, as a lapse on the part of the first respondent.
It is on the above report that the charge, referred to above was framed against the first respondent.
On behalf of the management four witnesses were examined.
Learned counsel for the appellant sought to prove the case against the first respondent by referring to the evidence of M.W.
4.
According to the learned counsel, the first respondent was asked to check the dip rod in the oil tanker and the first respondent reported that he had checked both the points and found them to be all right.
After unloading M.W.
4 again asked the first respondent to check the lorry tanker whether it was empty.
After checking the dip rod, the first respondent reported that the tank was empty.
The question is whether on the above evidence, the first respondent could be found guilty of the charges.
Another important piece of evidence that is relied on by the management is M6, the first explanation given by the first respondent on 2091983.
In this explanation, he has stated that it is a lapse on his part not to have checked both the dip rod pipe and the loading point covered with a lid.
He promised that he would be more careful in future.
But immediately on the very some day, he had given another explanation, wherein he had denied any lapse on his part.
The findings of the Labour Court were tainted because of its conclusion that the first respondent was involved in a shortage on an earlier occasion in respect of the very same lorry.
Inasmuch as it is conceded that the first respondent was not at all involved in the earlier incident and the charges to that extent are not pressed into service, the findings of the Labour Court automatically fall to the ground.
The learned Judge has also found that the involvement of the first respondent in respect of the incident on 681983 is not at all proved and this is accepted by the appellant/management.
We are unable to see as to how the Labour Court came to the conclusion that there was any lapse on the part of the first respondent on 1491983.
We will illustrate our doubt about the findings of the Labour Court by quoting a passage in the award of the Labour Court.
It is as follows:  ".....The evidence let in before the enquiry officer clearly show that the contention of the petitioner that he could not have found out the defect if he had followed the instructions could not be true.
In fact, the petitioner was involved in such an incident on 6th August, 1983 with the same lorry.
One would expect him to be more careful at least thereafter.
On the other hand, on 14th September, 1983 he again certified that everything is alright in the lorry when there was a shortage of not a small quantity, but 869 litres of light diesel oil.
As the petitioner was involved in such kind of action twice within two months, the respondent points out that they have no option but to dismiss him from service."
The argument of Mr. Sanjay Mohan that the finding of fact cannot be interfered with by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot be accepted.
It is well known that where the Labour Court has acted on no evidence or its findings are perverse, then, the High Court has a right to interfere.
This is precisely what the learned single Judge has done by pointing out that the Labour Court had been misled by its reliance on the incident on 681983.
The learned Judge also points out that the Enquiry Officer had proceeded on a pure assumption, when he observed that the first respondent must have struck upon the false bottom with the dip rod pipe on the pretext of his checking up the oil, after unloading was completed.
The learned Judge rightly points out that there is no warrant for the assumption that the first respondent was aware of the false fitting in the tanker.
The learned Judge has also found that there was no instruction prior to the incident regarding the checking of the dip rod.
The only instruction, which had some substance is the instruction given on 2991983 under Ex. M7 and it is sub- sequent to the date 1491983.
The evidence of MW 1 also discloses that the first respondent was not aware of the false fitting.
Ultimately, the management did not suffer any pecuniary loss.
The sum and substance of the above discussion leads to the only conclusion that the first respondent had been made the scapegoat for the illegal activities of the contractor in having a false bottom and an M5 pipe (non-perforated) inserted in the perforated dip pipe.
In other words, the learned single Judge was right in interfering with the award of the Labour Court which was not based on any evidence to indict the first respondent.
7.
Mr. Sanjay Mohan, learned counsel for the appellant took pains to explain to us how the respondent could have helped the contractor in achieving the object of successfully using the contrivance to cheat the appellant company.
According to him, oil will be filled in the non-perforated pipe with the false tin bottom.
Before unloading the oil, the measurement will show full tank level.
After unloading when the respondent again went on top of the tanker, he in the guise of inserting the dip rod knocked off the false bottom enabling the oil in non-perforated pipe to empty itself.
Thereafter the measurement in the dip rod should be zero and he accordingly said that the tank was empty.
Such a case was never put forward, nor did any witness speak in the above manner.
Even M.W.
4 does not make such an allegation against the respondent.
We are not inclined to accept this new case of the appellant and find the respondent guilty.
8.
Once the above conclusion is reached the only other question which remains to be considered is whether the relief of reinstatement could be awarded or only compensation could be paid to the worker.
The learned Judge found that the management had not taken the past record of service especially because the Standing Order 25(6) imposes a duty on the management to take notice of the past record, before inflicting a punishment.
In this view of the matter, the learned Judge directed reinstatement with full backwages.
No doubt, the learned Judge did not consider the question whether the management had lost confidence and on that account only compensation be deemed as the proper remedy.
Both the parties have cited before us several decisions on this aspect of the case.
9.
In Chandulal v. The Management of M/s Pan American World Airways, (1985) 11 LLJ 181, the Supreme Court observed:  "........Without examining the tenability of the stand on the loss of confidence as a defence to reinstatement and accepting the allegations advanced by the respondent that there has been loss of confidence, we are of the view that while the termination of service of the appellant is held to be bad, he may not be reinstated in service.
On the other hand, he should be adequately compensated...." 10.
In Francis Kleth and Co. (P) Ltd. v. Their Workmen, 1971(2) LLJ 615, when an employee refused to assist the Assistant Collector in apprehending a thief, it was found that the employer had lost confidence and therefore, reinstatement was not the proper remedy.
11.
In Air India Corporation Bombay v. VA Rebellow, 1972(1) LLJ 501, it was held that where the management bona fide loses confidence in the employee the same was immune from challenge.
12.
On the other hand, Mr. NGR Prasad, learned counsel for the first respondent has cited a case in Management of Panttoie Tea Estate v. Workmen, 1971(1) LLJ 233, wherein an employee who was in charge of Stores was dismissed from service.
Finding that the employee had no connection with the theft, the Apex Court confirmed the grant of relief by way of reinstatement.
13.
In L Michael v M/s. Johnson Pumps India Ltd, 1975(1) LLJ 262, it was held that the question of loss of confidence cannot be left to the subjective satisfaction of the employer.
The Court has to objectively test the reasons given by the employer before confirming or revising the finding of the employer.
But, in our opinion, all the above decisions are based on particular facts of each case.
However, in Hindustan Steels Ltd v. A K Roy, 1970(2) SCJ 77, the principles have been laid down for the guidance of the other Courts.
The principles laid down by the Supreme Court are as follows:  (1) the right of an employer to discharge or dismiss an employee, is no longer absolute and it is subject to severe restrictions;  (2) if the exercise of the power was mala fide or colourable, amounting to victimisation or unfair labour practice or in violation of the principles of natural justice, the Labour Court can direct reinstatement;  (3) normally, the rule in such cases should be reinstatement and only in exceptional cases, compensation can be granted in lieu of the reinstatement;  (4) the Apex Court also gave instances of such exceptions;  (i) strained relations between the employer and employee; (ii) the post held by the employee was one of trust of confidence; and  (iii) the employee acted subversive or prejudicial to the interests of the industry.
14.
In this particular case, no plea was made by the management that they had lost confidence in the first respondent for any particular reason.
In other words, no reasons were given as to how the management had lost confidence in the worker.
Merely because he was employed in the Stores Receiving Section, it cannot be said that the employer had lost confidence in the worker only on account of suspicion.
The past conduct of the worker has got to be taken into account.
With regard to the short delivery of oil, the management has always got an alternative method of verifying the quantum of delivery by taking measurements in their own tank.
In fact in this case, such alternative measurements were taken in their own tank which helped them in finding out the shortage.
The presumptions and assumptions made by the management against the first respondent also disclose that their action was not bona fide in making the first respondent as a scapegoat for the illegal act of the contractor.
In our view, the management will do well to inspire confidence in their workers, if they do not start doubting the worker for anything and everything.
Unless the management has clinching evidence about the illegal activity of a worker, they should not indulge in taking frivolous action against their own workers.
On the facts of the present case, we are convinced that the normal rule of reinstatement should be accepted.
There are absolutely no materials to suggest that on the facts of the case, the appellant-management could say that they had lost confidence in the first respondent-worker.
15.
For all the above reasons, the judgment of the learned single Judge in WP No. 6501 of 1987, dated 18121992 is affirmed and the Writ Appeal is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.