SB Sinha, J - As all these appeals being related to the same school and keeping in view the nature of controversy were heard together are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
These appeals depict a sordid state of affairs as to how the officers of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Administration and ad hoc committee appointed by it superseding the Managing Committee and the teaching staff can take recourse to litigations with a view to project their personal egoes ultimately reflecting upon their performance in the matter of administration of school and consequent sufferance of the pupils thereof.
3.
The basic fact of the matter is as follows :-  11 teachers of the school allegedly formed a group and started making allegations against the Managing Committee.
The said group filed a writ application being CO No. 10391(W)/94 (Supriya Bhaduri and others v. State of West Bengal and others) for appointment of an Administrator by superseding the Managing Committee whereupon Tarun Chartterjee, J by an order dated 1101995 directed the Director of School Education to consider their grievances.
4.
The appellant Pranabesh Chandra Ray thereafter was appointed as an Administrator on 26101995.
Allegedly further problems were created by some of the teachers continuing to their trouble-making activities.
Another writ application was filed by Supriya Bhaduri being CO No. 18220(W)/95 praying inter alia therein that appropriate direction be issued for payment of arrears of salaries which was disposed of by SR Mishra, J, with a direction upon the D.I.
of Schools (S.E.)
to consider their cases in accordance with law, if he is approached therefor.
5.
Again certain allegations were made against the Administrator and the same were published in the Daily Newspaper `Bartaman' pursuant whereto a High Power Team was asked to visit the school by the District Inspector of Schools.
It is stated that chaotic situation was created by a section of teachers while the said High Power Team inspected the school pursuant whereto a First Information Report was lodged.
The District Inspector of Schools had asked the then Headmistress to hand over all documents to the Administrator.
She filed a writ application in this court which was marked as CO No. 22607(W)/95 for removal of the Administrator and by an order dated 29.3.1996 NK Mitra, J, disposed of the said writ application by directing the Administrator to hold election for reconstitution of the Managing Committee within 4 months.
The Headmistress was also directed to hand over records which were lying in her custody.
It appears that there exists a dispute as to whether the Headmistress had handed over all the papers or not.
She filed an application for modification of the said order which was rejected.
The Headmistress was thereafter placed under suspension by the said Administrator on 19th July, 1996 which was approved by the Board on 20th August, 1996 to which a political colour was given and the room of the Headmistress was locked.
As the election could not be completed within the stipulated period, an extension was sought for.
In the meantime another writ application was filed being CO No. 8167(W)/96 and NK Batabyal, J by an order dated 13.8.1996 directed the Administrator to pay the due salaries with the undertaking to repay the excess amount after final calculation.
By an order dated 291996 the said Ld.
Judge directed opening of the room.
In terms of the order of the Ld.
Judge dated 291996 the padlock was opened but the said room allegedly was occupied by the Headmistress.
The cheques sent to the teachers had also been refused on the ground that the same had been signed by the teacher in-charge.
However, the said teachers were evicted from the room however, allegedly the keys of the almirahs are still lying with the suspended Headmistress.
It is alleged that on 2911996 when a fresh padlock was put, the suspended Headmistress with her group broke the said padlock and removed a number of documents which were brought to the notice of the Administrator by Class-IV staff.
6.
In the meantime Smt. Lata Pal, Headmistress moved a writ application which was marked as CO No. 10670(W)/96 questioning her order of suspension.
No interim order has been passed therein.
Allegedly the suspended Headmistress continued to function although one Kalpana Bera was appointed as Teacher In- Charge by an order dated 2071996 which was approved by the District Inspector of Schools by an order dated 28.11.1996.
It is further stated that even the fees from the students are being collected by the suspended Headmistress without any consent of the Administrator.
One Gopal Chandra, a suspended Clerk also filed a writ application and on the said application DK Basu, J, directed that all the matters connected with the School would be treated as heard in part by his Lordship although according to the appellants one matter (CO No. 8167(W)/96) was appearing in the list of SR Mishra, J, one matter (CO No. 17591(W)/96) was appearing in the list of SK Sen, J, and one matter (CO No. 22607(W)/95) was appearing in the list of NK Mitra, J For alleged non-payment of the dues a contempt application was filed and on 1711997 cheques were handed over to those teachers by the Administrator before SR Mishra, J Allegedly the said teachers despite receipt of the said cheques are not joining their duties.
7.
Mr. DK Samanta, a Ld.
Lawyer of this court was appointed as Special Officer by SR Mishra, J It is stated that the suspended Headmistress had also been charge-sheeted.
However, the disciplinary proceeding was stayed by DK Basu, J by an order dated 621997.
8.
An account was furnished before the said Ld.
Judge by the petitioner which was accepted.
An appeal was preferred thereagainst and by an order dated 1821997 a division bench of this court directed stay of the operation of the judgment.
CO No. 7721(W)/94, Supriya Bhaduri and others v. State of West Bengal and others was disposed of by DK Basu, J by appointing one Mr. M Sen, as Special Auditor.
His Lordship, however, fixed 2421997 for hearing other matters.
Another writ petition being CO 8167(W)/96 was also disposed of by the said Ld.
Judge on 2121997 upon mentioning by the Ld.
Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner Ms. Sanghamitra Nandy although no opportunity was given to the respondent.
The operation of the said order was also stayed in Appeal No. 763/97 by a division bench of this court.
9.
On 2821997 in the first hour a suo moto contempt rule was issued by Basu, J and in the afternoon it was directed in CO No. 17591(W)/96 (Smt. Ila Mondal and others v. State of West Bengal and others) asking the petitioners thereof to attend the school at 1030 am in accordance with the routine prepared by the Teacher in-charge.
Mrs. Sharmila Dutta (Das) was appointed as Special Officer.
Another appeal was preferred by the Administrator against the said order dated 2821997 in CO No. 10670(W)/96 which was registered as MAT No. 606/97 and by an order dated 6.3.1997 the operation of the said order was stayed by a division bench of this court.
Allegedly some teachers had not been accepting salary on the ground that the cheques are being signed by the Teacher In-charge and they filed three writ applications which are :- (1) WP 9024(W)/97, (2) WP No. 9025(W)/97, and (3) WP No. 9026(W)/97 and NK Mitra, J, by an order dated 2151997 passed an order of status quo regarding appointment of any teaching and non-teaching staff.
10.
On the prayer of the Administrator-appellant, the Board appointed an ad hoc committee on 30th July, 1997.
Again a Writ Petition was filed questioning the said appointment and by an order dated 27.11.1997 R Bhattacharjee, J, directed the ad hoc Committee to take steps for re-constitution of the Managing Committee.
MAT No. 4282/97 has been preferred by the writ petitioners against the said order.
11.
The allegations made in various writ applications have been denied and disputed by the respondents but in view of the orders proposed to be passed it is not necessary to deal with the same in great details particularly in view of the fact that this court cannot go into all such disputed questions of fact in these appeals.
12.
In view of the factual matrix as stated hereinbefore, apart from the cases involved in these appeals, various other writ petitions had been filed, some of which are still pending.
The list of cases and the subject matter and the grievances made by the petitioners thereof are as under :-  Cause Title, Subject matter & Grievances  1.
CO No. 7721(W) of 1994 : Allegations against the then Supriya Bhaduri and others Managing Committee that v. Provident Funds account were State of West Bengal and others not maintained properly.
2.
CO No. 10391(W) of 1994 : For Supersession of the  Supriya Bhaduri and others then Managing Committee by Versus appointing an Administrator.
State of West Bengal and others  3.
CO No. 18220(W) of 1995 : Allegations against the then Supriya Bhaduri and others Managing Committee for non-Vs. payment of arrears salaries.
State of West Bengal and others.
4.
CO No. 22607(W) of 1995 : Being aggrieved by the Smt. Lata Pal appointment order of Vs.
Administrator.
State of West Bengal and others  5.
CO No. 8167(W) of 1996 : Being aggrieved by the Smt. Supriya Bhaduri and others appointment order of Vs.
Administrator and non-State of West Bengal payment of salaries.
6.
CO No. 10670(W) of 1996 : Being aggrieved by and Smt. Lata Pal and others dissatisfied with the order Vs. of suspension of State of West Bengal and others Headmistress.
7.
CO No. 17591(W) of 1996 : Being aggrieved by the Smt. Ila Mondal and others appointment order of Vs. Teacher-in-charge.
State of West Bengal and others  8.
CO No. 18635(W) of 1996 : Appropriate direction upon Smt. Ila Mondal and others the respondents to pay Vs. compensation of Rs. State of West Bengal and others, 1,00,000/-  9.
C.R.R.
886 of 1997 : Against the order of Smt. Ila Mondal and others S.D.JM.
to investigation in Vs. connection with criminal Sri Pranabesh Ch.
Roy proceeding.
(Criminal Revision)  10.
WP No. 9024(W) of 1997 : Prayer for injunction not to Smt. Anuradha Sen & others process of selection of v. Assistant Headmistress and State West of Bengal and others teaching Staff.
11.
WP 9025(W) of 1997 : Prayer for injunction Jayashree Bhattacharya and others restraining the teacher-in Vs. charge not to sign any State of West Bengal and others cheque.
12.
WP No. 9026(W) of 1997 : Prayer for injunction not to Jayashree Bhattacharya and others fill up any post of teaching Vs. and no-teaching staff.
State of West Bengal and others  13.
Before proceeding to deal with the questions raised in these appeals we may remind ourselves about the intention of the Legislature of the State of West Bengal in framing West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963 and consequent making of Rules known as Management of Recognised Non-Govt. Institutions (Aided & Unaided) Rules, 1969 which in no unmistaken terms state that in a normal situation the administration and the control of the schools would be in the hands of the Managing Committee constituted for that purpose and in the manner laid down therein.
The fact of these matters show that a Managing Committee was constituted but a section of the teaching staff made complaints about the functioning thereof.
An administrator was appointed who was accused of not only committing various irregularities and illegalities in the matter of functioning of the said school but was also accused of defalcation of a huge amount.
Questioning the appointment of the Administrator, a section of teachers and the suspended Headmistress filed writ application.
14.
DK Basu, J by reason of the impugned order dated 2121997 passed in CO No. 8167(W)/96 which was followed by some other order not only initiated a suo moto contempt proceedings against the administrator but appointed a learned lawyer of this court as a special officer to manage the administration of the school.
The Board and the Administrator have filed 3 appeals against the order passed by Basu, J in the meantime the Administrator requested the Board to relieve him of his duties.
Such prayer being acceded, the Board appointed an ad hoc Committee.
The constitution of Ad hoc Committee was questioned by a section of teachers, viz. Smt. Dipti Ganguly and others in Writ Petition No. 16949(W) of 1997 wherein the following prayers were made :-  (a) A writ and/or order or orders and/or Directions in the nature of a writ of Mandamus commanding the Respondents, their employees, agents, subordinates and other assignees to forbear from giving any effect or further effect to the purported Letter No. 3223/G dated 2071997, issued by the Secretary of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education (Annexure-G) and further direct the Respondents No. 7 to 13 not to act as Ad hoc Committee of the said Baidyabati Gharusila Bose Balika Vidyalaya within Police Station : Serampur, District Hoogly pursuant to the said letter No. 3223/G dated 10.7.1997 and further command them to recall/rescind/withdraw/cancel the said letter : (b) A writ and/or orders and/or Directions in the nature of a writ of Mandamus commanding the Respondents employees, agents, subordinates and other assignees in particular the respondent No. 6 Mr. Pranabesh Chandra Roy, to continue as Administrator of the said Baidyabati Charusila Bose Balika Vidyalaya till the reconstitution of the Managing Committee of the said Vidyalaya : (c) A writ and/or order or orders and/or directions in the nature of a writ of certiorari commanding the respondents, their employees, agents, subordinates and other assignees to produce and cause to be produced before this Hon'ble Court the records of the case so that conscionable justices may be done to the petitioners by quashing the purported Letter No. 3223/G dated 3071997."
15.
The said petition was dismissed resulting in filing of the appeal being No. MAT 4282/97.
16.
A bare perusal of the reliefs in the said writ application would show the real purpose for filing such a writ application was supersession of the Ad hoc Committee and re-induction of the Administrator.
17.
All the appeals for one reason or other suffer from certain infirmities as would be indicated hereinafter.
However, the question which would ultimately arise is : Can we turn a blind eye to the allegations and counter allegations which are of serious nature resulting in passing of the impugned orders by taking hyper-technical stand ?
However, technicalities coupled with compelling circumstances cannot be lost sight of.
18.
FMA No. 545/97 has been filed by the Board questioning the order appointing the special officer upon cancellation of the appointing the Administrator.
Admittedly, an Administrator is no longer holding the post as on his own showing the Board has acceded to the request of the Administrator to relieve him from his duties and thus, no Administrator is functioning for the present.
19.
MAT 763/97 and MT 606/97 were filed by the Administrator against the orders dated 2121997 and 2821997 in terms whereof his appointment was cancelled.
A suo moto contempt proceeding was initiated and a special officer was appointed.
The Administrator represented by Mr. Manick Das, the ld.
Counsel, admittedly is no longer looking after the functioning of the school.
As indicated hereinbefore, he himself prayed that he may be relieved of his duties and in his place and stead an ad hoc Committee has been appointed.
He has, therefore, lost the locus to continue with these appeals to ventilate his grievances.
So far as initiation of suo moto contempt proceeding by the ld trial Judge is concerned, evidently no appeal lies in relation thereto.
In terms of Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act an appeal lies only if an order has been passed by a Judge of this court in exercise of his jurisdiction under the Contempt of Courts Act.
Initiation of a contempt proceedings in exercise of the said jurisdiction is not an order which is appealable either under Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act or Clause 15 of the Letters Patent of this court.
Section 19 postulates a final order which in view of the recent Supreme Court decision (1996(6) SCC 291) may mean an order of punishment imposed upon contemnor by a court.
Although a great deal of argument has been advanced by the ld.
Counsel for the parties as to the right of a party to prefer an appeal, inter alia, on the ground that there exists certain other decisions including a full bench decision of this court holding that a right to file an appeal under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent has not been taken away but it is not necessary to go into such a question as the Apex Court in no uncertain terms has stated in Purushotam Dass Goel v. Hon'ble Mr. Justice BS Dhillon and others, reported in AIR 1978 SC 1014 that no appeal lies against an order issuing a notice to contempt as thereby the court does not finally pronounce upon the rights and obligations of the parties.
A judgment within the meaning of Clause 15 of the Letters Patent postulates a final order meaning thereby an order determining the rights and obligations of the parties finally.
A rule issued under the Contempt of Courts Act is not a final order touching upon rights and obligations of the parties.
Strong reliance had been placed by the ld.
Counsel in Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd v. Ramniwas Poddar, AIR 1989 Cal.
375 wherein Section 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act was declared ultra vires Article 215 of the Constitution in order to show that the court has an independent power under Article 215 of the Constitution of India irrespective of its power under the Contempt of Courts Act.
Yet again it is not necessary for this court to finally pronounce upon the scope and purport of Article 215 vis-a-vis the provision of the Contempt of Courts Act but we may not lose sight of the fact that Tata Iron Steel Co Ltd stands overruled by a division bench of this court in Arthur Branwell and Co Ltd v. Indian Fibres Ltd, 1993(2) CLJ 182.
20.
So far as MAT 4282/97 is concerned a section of the teachers may not have any right to prefer an appeal as against appointment of Ad hoc Committee by the Board to which it is entitled to under the provision of the Management of Recognised Non-Govt. Institutions (Aided & Unaided) Rules, 1969, but as indicated hereinbefore, this court may not shut the door of justice despite the fact of the matter requires a suitable direction for smooth running of the officers of the School.
21.
A right of a Board to appoint an Ad hoc Committee may normally be allowed to be questioned only at the instance who is aggrieved thereby or whose substantial right either in his individual or representative capacity is effected, but the judgment of the ld.
trial Judge clearly shows that politics took an upper-hand in the administration of the school.
22.
Mr. Sadhan Roy Chowdhury, the ld.
Counsel appearing on behalf of the suspended headmistress supporting the Appellant Smt. Dipika Ganguly and others had taken us through various allegations as to how the Administrator has misused his position.
In view of the fact that the said Administrator is no longer in office, it is not for this court to pronounce finally upon the said allegations and counter allegations.
Suffice it to say that it is for the Board or any other appropriate forum or court to consider the same if and when any occasion arises therefor.
We may also note that admittedly some of the teachers have not been paid their salaries for the last 17 months.
According to the Board and/or erstwhile Administrator, teachers refused to accept their salaries only on the ground that the cheques are signed by the present teacher in charge who according to a section of the teachers represented by the appellant Dipti Ganguly in MAT No. 4282/97 had been holding the post illegally.
23.
The teachers in turn have categorised the actions on the part of the authorities of the Board as political ones and according to them those against whom various allegations had been made either as members of the erstwhile Managing Committee or Administrator have been appointed again to turn the administration of the school as member of the Ad hoc Committee.
The ld.
trial Judge upon going into the contentions of the parties has arrived at such a finding.
24.
It may be true that before the ld.
trial Judge the issue related also to appointment of the Administrator and his alleged not functioning in the said capacity but we, however, cannot lose sight of the fact that a piquant situation has been created resulting in mal-administration of the school.
Although the members of the Ad hoc Committee have not filed any affidavit either before the ld.
trial Judge or before us controverting the allegations made against them the right of the Board to appoint an Administrator or ad hoc Committee successively for a long span cannot also be countenanced in view of the fact that the statute presupposes, administration of the school by a duly constituted Managing Committee.
We do not intend to go into the details of such allegations as we are of the opinion that keeping in view the nature of the cases it is advisable that in stead and place of an Advocate being entrusted with the running of the administration of the school, the Sub- Divisional Officer be appointed as a Special Officer of this court to run the administration of the school.
The said Special Officer shall, however, would be entitled to take the assistance of the District Inspector of Schools.
25.
A question had been raised as to whether the suspended Headmistress had made over all the documents to the Administrator or not.
26.
Mr. Sadhan Roy Chowdhury, the ld.
Counsel states that his client has no other document with her and all the documents have been handed over to the authorities of the school.
The statement shall be verified and Mr. Roy Chowdhury's client may be called upon by the Special Officer to state the details of such documents which have been handed over to the school authorities.
He may also enquire into the matter as to whether the statements made at the Bar evidently on instruction of the said Headmistress are correct or not.
27.
The foremost concern of this court is to see that a properly constituted Managing Committee takes over the administration.
The ld.
Counsel appearing on behalf of the parties, although are at logger heads, accepted this position.
However, practical difficulties in holding the election have been pointed out inasmuch as the correct Voters' List cannot be prepared unless the new session starts.
28.
The notice for election, therefore, can only be issued in July after preparation of a complete Voters List in accordance with law.
Keeping in view the explosive situation we think that interest of justice will be sub-served if the election of the Managing Committee is held under the supervision of a ld.
Counsel of this court who may take the assistance of such persons as he may deem fit and for that purpose we appoint Sri Subrata Basu, the former General Secretary of the Bar Association of this court.
The remuneration of Sri Basu is fixed at 500 Gms.
consolidated.
The said remuneration of Sri Basu and other expenditure which may be incurred by him shall be borne by the school.
The ld.
Special Officer and other authorities of the Directorate of the School Education including the officers of the District Inspector of Schools Secondary Education, Hooghly shall render all co-operation to the Special Officer as also Sri Basu.
The said election should be completed as early as possible and not later that 31st August, 1998.
Any obstruction made by anybody whosoever he may be or any failure on the part of the authorities of the schools or the State and in particular of the officers of the District Inspector of Schools Education shall be viewed seriously.
29.
These appeals are disposed of with the aforementioned directions and observations.
There will be no order as to costs.
We make it clear that we have not entered into the merit of the contentions which have been raised by the respective parties in any writ application which is not before us and such writ application may be disposed of in accordance with law.
30.
Let a plain copy of the operative portion of this judgment countersigned by the A.R.
(Court) be handed over to Sri Pranab Chatterjee, the ld.
Counsel who is requested to communicate the same to the Special Officer as also to Sri Basu for necessary action.
Orders accordingly.