VS Aggarwal, J - By this common judgment both the Civil Writ Petitions bearing Nos. 18154 and 18155 of 1996 can conveniently be disposed of together as the basic questions involved in both these petitions are identical.
For the sake of convenience, facts from CWP No. 18154 of 1996 are mentioned.
2.
Petitioners seek quashing of orders dated 411996 and award dated 23.5.1996 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory Chandigarh, and for direction that petitioners should be reinstated with continuity of service and with full back wages.
3.
It has been alleged that petitioner No. 2 Joginder Mohan had joined as a Clerk with the respondent-management (M/s Indian Express Newspapers) in December, 1984.
He was the Joint Secretary of the Union.
The working journalists wanted 2611991 to be observed as a holiday.
There were negotiations with the respondent-management.
The respondent-management did not agree with the request of the Union and decided to observe 2611991 as a working day.
The Union of which petitioner No. 2 is a member decided otherwise.
The petitioners assert that the respondent-management charge- sheeted him.
Three separate charge-sheets dated 3111991, 721991 and 2021991 were served.
It was asserted that the petitioner was the chief instigator to organise the strike on 2611991.
He left his place of work at 430 pm and instigated the workmen to assemble at the gate and that he indulged in raising abusive slogans against the management.
Mr. Raj Kumar Goyal was appointed as Enquiry Officer by the management.
4.
Petitioner's claim is that Mr. RK Goyal was the legal consultant and conducting cases of the management.
The petitioner requested for change of Enquiry Officer but the management did not agree.
The petitioner participated in the enquiry under protest.
The Enquiry Officer accepted the version of the management and returned the finding that charges against the petitioner have been proved.
Thereupon, the petitioner was dismissed and no show cause notice was served upon him before that.
A demand notice was served by the petitioner on the respondent management for setting aside the order of suspension and dismissal.
A reference was made to the Labour Court, Chandigarh.
The Labour Court, Chandigarh, framed the following preliminary issue on 31.5.1993 :-  "Whether the enquiry conducted by the management is not fair and proper and if so its effect ?"
5.
On the preliminary issue, evidence was produced.
After conclusion of the evidence, the Labour Court decided the preliminary issue in favour of the management.
He rejected the objection of the petitioner that a sham enquiry was got conducted from a legal consultant who has close relations with the management.
Thereupon, the Labour Court adjourned the reference for arguments of the parties on merits.
On behalf of the petitioner-workman, a request was made to permit him to challenge the findings of the Enquiry Officer by leading evidence of the witnesses that were recorded during the domestic enquiry.
The representative of the management objected stating that the same stood covered by the earlier order dated 411996.
The Labour Court accepted the contention of the management and concluded that the said contention has already been decided by him while deciding the preliminary issue.
6.
The petitioner assailed the award of the Labour Court and the earlier order dated 411996 asserting that no issues were framed in the reference and no opportunity was given to the petitioners to lead evidence on the merits of the case.
The Labour Court failed to reappreciate the evidence produced in the domestic enquiry and did not allow the petitioner to challenge the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
Therefore, the impugned award dated 23.5.1996 is liable to be set aside.
Yet another plea taken up which the Labour Court failed to consider was whether misconduct alleged on the part of the petitioner merited punishment of dismissal.
There was no allegation of violation against the petitioner.
The evidence recorded during the enquiry was not reapreciated and in any case it was not a case to dismiss the petitioner on the facts alleged.
7.
The management contested the said petition and in the reply filed it was pointed that the enquiry proceedings had been conducted in accordance with law.
The Enquiry Officer found the petitioner guilty of following charges :-  i) On January 26, 1991 he was the principal instigator to organise a strike and instigated the employees not to enter the premises and perform their duties as a result of which no paper could be taken out on January 27, 1991. ii) On February 7, 1991, he caused substantial number of employees to leave their duty place at 430 pm and gather at the gate, leading to partial strike.
iii) He wrote two letters dated January 17, 1991 and February 1, 1991 to the Resident Editor, Jansatta giving threats, making false, vague and infinite allegations, which amounts to gross misbehaviour, insubordination and an act of subversive of discipline.
iv) On February 14, 1991 at 1125 am he along with two others went in the departments and intimated the employees to strike work as one Vidya Nand, paster was suspended, upon which the workers observed total strike up to 7 pm v) In order to pressurize the management to withdraw the suspension order of Vidya Nand, Workman along with others physically stopped Shri Santosh Kumar, Manager from proceeding in his car at 230 pm at the gate for lunch by forming a human-chain."
It was further pointed that the findings of the Labour Court are based on legal evidence.
There was a series of misconduct.
There was nothing wrong in appointing the Enquiry Officer who acted impartially.
The punishment was stated to be commersurating with the charges proved and was not disproportionate to the guilt.
It was denied that any show-cause notice was necessary to be issued before dismissing the petitioner.
As regards the contention that the Labour Court did not frame the issues on merit and should have considered and reappraised the evidence after the decision of the preliminary issue, on behalf of the management it has been pointed that after the decision of the preliminary issue the petitioner never pressed for the proposed issues.
The Labour Court had already returned the finding vide order dated 411996.
The petitioner could not reagitate the same and rake up the same all over.
8.
The first and the foremost question, as is apparent from the resume of the case given above, that comes up for consideration is if the alleged Legal Adviser of the management could be appointed as Enquiry Officer or not ?
It has to be remembered that it is a domestic enquiry and, therefore, unless there are other cogent reasons if a person has been employed by the employer as a lawyer cannot discredit him to be acting as an Enquiry Officer.
In the present case, though assertions have been so made but there is nothing to indicate that the Enquiry Officer did not give full opportunity to the petitioner to defend and contest his case.
There is nothing further to show any bias on the part of the Enquiry Officer.
Simply because he happened to be the Legal Adviser of the management and incidentally was so engaged in some cases is no ground by itself to return a finding that he could not act as an Enquiry Officer.
In this connection reference can well be made to some of the precedents on the subject.
In the case of Saran Motors Private Ltd, New Delhi V Vishwanath and another, 1964(9) Factory Law Reporter (Supreme Court) 7 the Supreme Court while considering a similar question held as under :-  "...but it is impossible to accept the argument that because a person is sometimes employed by the employer as a lawyer, he becomes incompetent to hold a domestic enquiry.
It is well known that enquiries of this type are generally conducted by the officers of the employer and in the absence of any special individual bias attributable to a particular officer, it has never been held that the enquiry is bad just because it is conducted by an officer of the employer.
If that be so, it is obviously unsound to take the view that a lawyer who is not a paid officer of the employer, is incompetent to hold the enquiry, because he is the employer's lawyer and is paid remuneration for holding the enquiry.
Therefore, the first reason given by the Tribunal for ignoring the findings of the domestic enquiry must be reversed."
9.
Once again in the case of M/s Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd v. Murai Lal Bikaneri, 1970(21) F.L.R.
(Supreme Court) page 201, the Supreme Court repelled a similar argument that had been advanced.
It was held as under :-  "We find ourselves unable to accept the conclusions arrived at by the Tribunal.
The tribunal seems to have been greatly impressed by the fact that instead of appointing someone in the appellant's factory itself as the Enquire Officer the Works Manager had brought in an outsider who was no other than a junior advocate occasionally assisting Anand Parkash, their counsel in some matters.
The Tribunal's view that this was wholly unwarranted and done with the purpose of loading the dice against the workmen appears to be unreasonable.
Merely because the Enquiry Officer was a junior advocate and that he had on occasions been engaged by the appellant, it is not possible to take the view that he would necessarily be biased against the workmen.
Evidently some of the workmen had behaved rudely to some members in the managerial cadre and it would not have been at all difficult for the Works Manager to appoint as Enquiry Officer some person of the factory itself over whom he was likely to have greater influence than on an outsider.
As he himself was going to be a witness in the enquiry he entrusted the appointment of the Enquiry Officer to the Director of the Company.
We find nothing unfair in this and are unable to take any exception to the course adopted."
10.
Madras High Court in the case of Sridharan Motor Service, Attur v. Industrial Tribunal, Madras and others, 1959(1) Labour Law Journal (Madras) page 380 rejected a similar contention and had concluded as under :-  " The ordinary businessman has very often no clear or firm ideas as to what constitutes principles of natural justice and if he were a prudent person, he would entrust the enquiry to someone who can be trusted to know what these principles are.
I do not think that the workmen are entitled to complain because in the present case a lawyer was engaged to hold the enquiry.
Besides, it does not appear from any part of the record shown to me that they objected to this particular gentleman holding the enquiry.
In fact, what they did was to "non-co-operate" at the enquiry.
In these circumstances, I do not consider that they can be heard to complain that the enquiry was held by a particular individual."
The same view prevailed with the Kerala High Court in the case of N Rarichan v. RK Venu Nair and another, 1973 Lab.IC 536.
As noted above, it has not been shown that the Enquiry Officer had acted contrary to law.
In fact, fair and full opportunity was given to the parties to lead evidence and address arguments.
Consequently, on the ground alleged by the petitioner, the said plea must fail.
The findings of the Labour Court in the order dated 411996 in this regard, therefore, must be approved.
11.
The main contention raised on behalf of the petitioner in this regard has been that after the order dated 411996 the Labour Court did not permit the petitioner workman to refer to the evidence recorded during the enquiry and reappraise the same.
He further asserted that after the preliminary issue was decided no further issue had been framed and refusal to do so caused prejudice to the petitioner's case.
The reply, as already point above, has been that the said question has been considered by the Labour Court before passing the order dated 411996 and had not to be reconsidered after the same.
12.
To appreciate the said controversy one can revert back to the facts of the present case.
A preliminary issue, as already reproduced above, had been framed by the Labour Court.
The same was confined to the controversy if the enquiry conducted by the management was fair and proper and it so its effect.
It was held that the enquiry conducted was fair and proper.
While deciding the same, the learned Presiding Officer further held as under :-  "....On appraisal of the evidence led at the inquiry, Shri Raj Kumar Goel, Inquiry Officer held the workman guilty of first charge as he was the principal instigator to organise the strike on 2611991 and instigated the employees alongwith others not to enter the premises and perform their duties.
He also held the workman guilty of charges No. 2 and 3 for holding gate meeting on 721991 at 430 pm by which the work in the office remained struck.
The Enquiry Officer also held charge No. 4 regarding the gross misbehaviour of the workman with the Editor Jansatta by threatening through letter which act amount to gross misbehaviour, insubordination besides an act subversive of discipline.
Under charges No. 4 and 5 the Enquiry Officer held that workman alongwith others collected at the gate and there could be no work upto 700 pm and as such there was total strike upto 700 pm although he found that no threat or rude language was used by them or asking the employees to come out.
On charge No. 6 concerning Shri Santosh Kumar, Manager, the Enquiry Officer held the charge not established.
The exoneration of the workman regarding misbehaviour with the Manager proves independent conclusion drawn by Enquiry Officer by correct appraisal of evidence led at the trial although he is a retainer of civil cases of management.
The finding of the enquiry officer are thus based on correct appreciation of evidence led at the inquiry and the same cannot be vitiated on any ground..." These findings obviously were arrived at by the Labour Court on the perusal of the evidence led by the parties.
It goes without saying that there is no issue framed in this regard.
After holding that the enquiry was fair and proper, learned Labour Court had fixed the matter for arguments on merit.
Indeed, once the preliminary issue with respect to enquiry having been conducted properly has been decided, the next question necessarily which has to be gone into was as to if the findings arrived at by the Enquiry Officer were  proper or not ?
This was not the issue framed and the above quoted finding while deciding the preliminary issue was obviously not called for.
Once after the preliminary issue was decided, it was necessary to frame the issues on merit and to consider the same in the light of evidence that might have been produced during the enquiry or during the course of the proceedings before the Labour Court.
In this regard the Labour Court misdirected himself in holding that once such a finding has been arrived at while recording reasons for disposal of preliminary issue, he cannot go back and look into the evidence recorded during the enquiry.
To this effect, the award, indeed, cannot be sustained.
The petitioner could not be restrained from looking into the evidence recorded during the domestic enquiry and request the Labour Court in reappraising the same.
In this regard, reference can well be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The Workmen of M/s Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co of India P Ltd v. The Management and others, AIR 1973 SC 1227.
In paragraph 32 of the judgment, Supreme Court held as under :-  "...This position, in our view, has now been changed by Section 11A The words "in the course of the adjudication proceeding, the Tribunal is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified" clearly indicate that the Tribunal is now clothed with the power to reappraise the evidence in the domestic enquiry and satisfy itself whether the said evidence relied on by an employer established the misconduct alleged against a workman.
What was originally a plausible conclusion that could be drawn by an employer from the evidence, has now given place to a satisfaction being arrived at by the Tribunal that the finding of misconduct is correct.
The limitations imposed on the powers of the Tribunal by the decision in Indian Iron & Steel & Co Ltd, 1958 SCR 667: AIR 1958 SC 130 case can no longer be invoked by an employer.
The Tribunal is now at liberty to consider not only whether the finding of misconduct recorded by an employer is correct; but also to differ from the said finding if a proper case is made out.
What was once largely in the realm of the satisfaction of the employer, has ceased to be so; and now it is the satisfaction of the Tribunal that finally decides the matter."
Thereafter while drawing the conclusion on the scope of Section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Therefore, it will be seen that both in respect of cases where a domestic enquiry has been held as also in cases where the Tribunal considers the matter on the evidence adduced before it for the first time, the satisfaction under Section 11A, about the guilt or otherwise of the workman concerned, is that of the Tribunal.
It has to consider the evidence and come to a conclusion one way or other.
Even in cases where an enquiry has been held by an employer and a finding of misconduct arrived at, the Tribunal can now differ from that finding in a proper case and hold that no misconduct is proved."
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of M/s Thomson Press (India) Ltd. v. The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Faridabad and others, 1996(4) All Instant Judgements 633 : 1997(1) S.C.T.
50, had also the ocasion to go into the same question.
It held as under :-  "...In the instant case the Industrial Tribunal has failed to consider the evidence produced during the domestic enquiry in order to find out whether the allegations levelled against the workman have been correctly held as proved."
It is apparent from the aforesaid that after deciding the preliminary issue, the Labour Court should have considered the evidence produced during the domestic enquiry and permit the parties to lead further evidence, if any, in this regard.
The findings on the preliminary issue were incompetent and could not be considered because at that moment the petitioners were not required to lead evidence about the correctness of the findings and urge about the appraisal of evidence in this regard.
The correctness of the same could be challenged while at the time the issues were to be framed on merit.
Therefore, the award dated 23.3.1996 cannot be sustained.
For these reasons, the writ petitions are allowed in part.
The impugned order dated 411996 is upheld as indicated above in part.
The award dated 23.5.1996 is set aside.
It is directed that the learned Labour Court will frame the issues on merit and allow the parties to lead evidence, if not already led, and thereafter dispose of the same in accordance with law.
Petitions partly allowed.