GS Singhvi, J - Whether the order of eviction passed by the Estate Officer, Union Territory, Chandigarh under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (for short, 'the Act') is illegal and whether the petitioner is entitled to allotment of government accommodation are the two issues which arise for adjudication in this petition.
2.
Shri Jagdish Chander, father of the petitioner was allotted government House No. 1211, Section 23-B, Chandigarh.
He retired on 31121995 while holding the post of Superintendent in the Directorate of Public Relations, Haryana.
During the currency of the employment of Shri Jagdish Chander, the petitioner was appointed as Proof Reader in the Directorate of Public Relations, Haryana.
Till the retirement of Shri Jagdish Chander, the petitioner continued to reside with him in the government accommodation.
In September, 1995, the petitioner applied for allotment of a house under the Government Residences (Chandigarh Administration General Pool) Allotment Rules, 1972.
The petitioner says that instead of allotting a government house to him, the respondents initiated proceedings under the Act and the Estate Officer has passed the order Annexure P 4 directing the ejectment of his father.
3.
By placing reliance on the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh in OA No. 843-Ch.
of 1996 and OA No. 1242-Ch.
of 1996, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the order Annexure P4 and also for directing the respondents to allot a government house to him.
4.
The case set up by the respondents is that in the absence of any provisions in the Government Residences (Chandigarh Administration General Pool) Allotment Rules, 1996, the petitioner is not entitled to be allotted a government house merely because his father was residing in a government house till his retirement.
The respondents have also pleaded that such provision did not exist even in the Rules of 1972, though in terms of the instructions issued on 1541974 and 1321989 allotments on priority basis were being made to the wards of retired employees provided the applicant was also in government service.
The respondents have further pleaded that in view of the judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 16863 of 1994, the ward of a retired employee is not entitled to out-of-turn allotment.
It has also been pleaded that the request of the petitioner for out-of-turn allotment has been rejected by the House Allotment Committee on 12.9.1996.
5.
In compliance of the order passed by this Court on 951997, the respondents have filed an affidavit of Shri Abhey Singh Yadav, Secretary, House Allotment Committee, Union Territory Chandigarh In paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this affidavit, the deponent has made the following statement :-  "2.
That the following Government Employees were allotted Government accommodation as per orders of the Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal being the sons of retirees :- Name of the son of Retiree OA No. & Name Judgment/order of the CAT  Ashwani KumarKaushal (son),  843 of 1996 Balraj Chand.
Judgment dated 9121996.
Harpreet Singh(son) 727/96 Jagjit Singh Judgment of CAT dated 14.11.1996.
Lal Chand(Self) OA No. 161/CH/96 Lal Chand Judgment dated 3101996.
Kamal Kant (son).
OA No. 1302/96 Kamal Kant Judgment dated 421997.
Sanjeev Singh(son) 1158/96 Sanjeev Soni Judgment dated 30.1.1997.
Pardeep Singh(son) OA No. 1307/96 Hari Singh Judgment dated 6.2.97.
Ranbir Singh(son) OA No. 1217/96 Darshan Singh Judgment dated 2711997.
Brij Mohan Sharma (son) OA No. 1297/96 Yog Raj Judgment dated 2121997.
3.
That the Special Leave Petitions were not filed against the aforesaid judgments rendered by the Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh, as per the opinion of the Legal Remembrancer, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
4.
That apart from the instances mentioned in para 2 of this affidavit no other allotments were made by the respondents to the sons of retirees after the Full Bench Judgment of this Hon'ble Court rendered on 161995."
6.
Shri Dalip Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner attacked the decision of the House Allotment Committee declining the petitioner's request for out of turn allotment on the ground of hostile discrimination and violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner has acquired a legal right to be allotted a government accommodation on the basis of the application filed by him in September, 1995 and the House Allotment Committee has acted illegally in declining his request on the basis of the Rules of 1996.
Shri Mahajan then argued that the rules framed by the Administration in the year 1996 are not retrospective and the same could not have been relied upon for rejecting the application filed by the petitioner.
He submitted that the Administration of the Union Territory, Chandigarh, is guilty of practicing discrimination between the employees of the Union Territory, Chandigarh on the one hand and the employees of the States of Punjab and Haryana on the other hand.
Learned counsel pointed out that the employees of the Union Territory who got orders from the Central Administrative Tribunal have been allotted houses on out-of-turn basis but wards of the employees of the States of Punjab and Haryana have not been given similar relief.
Shri Alok Jain, learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that no allotment has been made by the Administration to the wards of the retired employees except in compliance of the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
He submitted that the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal are contrary to the judgment of the Full Bench and the same should not be made basis for giving relief to the petitioner.
7.
The issue relating to the allotment of government houses under the Rules of 1972 was examined by a Full Bench of this Court in Court on its own Motion v. Advisor to the Administrator, Union Territory, Chandigarh and others, 1995(2) P.L.R.
450 : 1995(3) R.R.R.
137.
One of the points which was considered by the Full Bench related to the allotment of residential accommodation to the family member of the retired government employee, who is also in government service.
After considering the point, the Full Bench held :-  "It has also been urged by Mr. Sarin that the Policy of UT Administration to allot residential accommodation to a family member of a retired Govt. Servant, provided the family member was also a Government servant, did not have the sanction of the rules and, as such, the instructions on the point could not be enforced.
There is a merit in the stand of the learned counsel.
Admittedly, the rules do not envisage the kind of allotments that have been made with respect to the family members of retiring Government servants and in the absence of any such sanction, no allotment can be made.
We, therefore, direct that the UT Administration will not make any such allotments in future, but those who have already secured allotment entered into possession as of today, will not be disturbed.
No allotment be made on the basis of instructions in favour of Government employee who is a member of the family of a superannuated Government servant occupying a Government accommodation."
8.
The judgment of the Full Bench was stayed by the Supreme Court on a petition for Leave to Appeal filed by the Administration.
Simultaneously, the Apex Court stayed all future allotments.
During the pendency of the case before the Supreme Court, new rules were framed for allotment of residential accommodation and the same were approved by the Apex Court.
There is no provision in the Rules of 1996 for out-of-turn allotment to the son, daughter or other member of the family of the retired Government servant.
It is, therefore, clear that after 161995, the Administration could not make out-of-turn allotment to a person like the petitioner and we are unable to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the decision of the House Allotment Committee rejecting the petitioner's request for out-of-turn allotment is illegal or arbitrary.
The orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in some cases do support the petitioner's plea but with great respect we are unable to agree with the Tribunal that on an application submitted by a member of the family of the retired Government servant before coming into the force of 1996 Rules, a right accrues in favour of such applicant for out-of-turn allotment of the house.
The Tribunal's view that the application submitted for out-of-turn allotment of house before the enforcement of 1996 Rules should be decided under the old Rules is clearly erroneous because mere submission of the application does not create a vested right in the applicant for allotment of house.
The right, if any, available to an applicant for allotment of house is no more than a right to be considered along with similar applications under the existing Rules.
If the Rules are amended or modified, then the right of consideration will be governed by the amended or modified Rules and not by the old Rules.
If the Rules are scraped or repealed, then the right of the applicant to be considered stands extinguished.
Therefore, all the applications which were pending at the commencement of 1996 Rules were/are required to be decided in accordance with new Rules and no applicant can claim out-of-turn allotment of a Government house only on the ground that his her case is covered by the old Rules.
9.
It appears to us that the attention of the Tribunal was not drawn into the fact that in view of the judgment of the Full Bench, the Administration of Union Territory had no option but to reject the applications for out-of-turn allotment.
It also appears that the Tribunal did not direct its attention to the fact that the Apex Court had also restrained the Administration from making further allotments.
The orders passed by the Tribunal ignoring the verdict of the Full Bench and the orders passed by the Supreme Court are per se erroneous in law and on the basis of such order, the petitioner cannot raise the plea of discrimination.
Thus, there is no substance in the argument of Shri Mahajan that the petitioner is entitled to be allotted a house under the old rules on the basis of the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
In order to avoid further litigation on the subject, we deem it proper to declare that the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in various applications filed before it for allotment of houses under the old rules do not lay down correct law.
10.
There is one more reason why the petitioner's claim should not be accepted.
Recognition of the right of a ward of family member of the retired Government servant, who is in occupation of a Government accommodation, to be allotted a house from the pool of Chandigarh Administration would amount to recognition of hereditary right for allotment of residential accommodation and in the present constitutional set up, it is not possible for the counts to recognise such a right.
11.
Though we have come to the conclusion that the petitioner is not entitled to allotment of the Government accommodation, there is considerable force in the submission of Shri Mahajan that the Administration of Chandigarh has adopted dubious method of allotting houses to the wards of its employees in the garb of implementation of the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
It is surprising that the then Legal Remembrancer, Union Territory, Chandigarh, opined that the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal should not be challenged before the Supreme Court.
It is difficult to comprehend that the officer holding the post of Legal Remembrancer, Union Territory, Chandigarh, was not aware of the decision of the Full Bench and of the fact that under the new rules there is no provision for out-of-turn allotment of houses.
In our view, the decision of the Chandigarh Administration not to challenge the orders passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in favour of its own employees and to make out-of-turn allotment on the basis of such orders lacks bona fide.
We hope that even now remedial measures will be taken by the Administration at the earliest.
12.
Subject to the above observation, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.