VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner-Major Singh was a member of the Border Security Force (for short 'BSF').
It was alleged that he was in possession of a fake identity card of Punjab Police on 2491995 at Pardip Palace Cinema Hall, Mamdot, District Ferozepur.
He was tried by the Summary Security Force Court under the residuary offence Section 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (for short 'the Act').
The charge sheet dated 2411995 reads :-  "AN ACT PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER  AND DISCIPLINE OF THE FORCE.
in that he, At Mamdot, on 24 Sept 95 improperly entered Pradeep Cinema Hall and was found in possession of fake identity card of Punjab Police bearing No.
1580/1535/CB/IC/93."
The Commandant, Border Security Force passed the following order of sentence on 2411996 :  "SENTENCE BY THE COURT Taking all these matters into consideration, I now sentence the accused No. 88611006 Rank CT (GD) Name: Major Singh of 195 Bn BSF to 'DISMISSAL FROM SERVICE'.
Signed at HQ 195 Bn Mamdot this 24 days of fan 96."
2.
By virtue of the present petition, the petitioner challenges me verdict holding him guilty and quashing the order of sentence to be in violation of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 and the Rules framed thereunder.
3.
The petitioner contends that the trial was held on basis of incomplete record of evidence.
All material relied upon by the prosecution was not supplied because the copy of the alleged fake identity card which forms the basis of the charge has not been supplied to the petitioner.
Statement of none of the police witnesses recorded in the record of the evidence was supplied.
Inadmissible evidence had been recorded and further the statement of the petitioner was recorded by inducement after the cross-examination of the petitioner and pretrial legal advice is premature for extraneous reasons.
It was further asserted mat on 2111996 the petitioner had been merely served with an order of Commandant for assembly of Summary Security Force Court for the trial on 2311996.
The charge was not explained.
The petitioner was not informed of his rights under the Rules.
He was not produced before the Summary Security Force Court nor any intimation about the cancellation was given on or after 2311996 on 2411996, the petitioner was illegally produced before the Commandant without any assembly order.
The petitioner advisedly pleaded guilty to the charge in order to avoid greater punishment.
Copy of the Summary Security Force Court proceedings was not given.
It did not include the assembly order of 2411996 but only contained the assembly order dated 2311996.
He, therefore, contended that the said assembly order and the order of conviction is illegal.
Furthermore plea has been taken that the petitioner has been denied the right of legal assistance from an Advocate in violation of Rules 63(1) and 157 of the Rules (The Border Security Force Rules).
The respondents had failed to discharge their obligation to ensure that petitioner does not suffer due to his ignorance.
No reference had been made to the prescribed authority.
Me alleged-fake identity card had never been placed on the record.
On these broad facts, the above saw relief is being claimed.
Needless to say that petitioner even prayed that Rules 157 and 63(6) of the Rules are ultra vires of Section 64 of the Act besides Articles 14, 21 and 22 of the Constitution.
4.
In the reply filed the respondents have contested the petition.
The assertions of the petitioner had been controverted.
It was reiterated that petitioner had entered in Pardip Cinema Hall, Mamdot.
He was found in possession of a fake identity card and was produced before the Commandant on 2.10.1995.
The record of evidence was completed by 28101995.
The alleged fake identity card recovered from the petitioner was produced during the record of evidence.
The copies of record of evidence as well as charge sheet were given to the petitioner before holding the trial on a proper receipt.
The petitioner had confessed regarding the said offense.. No prejudice was caused to the petitioner.
It is contended that the Summary Security Force Court for unavoidable operational commitments could not assemble on that day.
It was postponed to 2411996.
It was denied that any provision as alleged by the petitioner namely Rules 157 and 63(6) of the Rules is ultra vires.
The petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed after carefully considering the points raised and the statutory provisions.
5.
On behalf of the petitioner stress was laid on the fact that certain acts of the respondents were contrary to the fundamental rights of the petitioner enshrined under Part III of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, before proceeding further it becomes necessary to consider as to what extent the fundamental rights with respect to the members of the Border Security Force can be curtailed.
6.
The Border Security Force Act, 1968 had been enacted to provide for the Constitution and regulation of an Armed Force of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders of India and the matters connected therewith.
It is patent, therefore, that the BSF is an armed force.
Article 33 of the Constitution of India permits the Parliament to modify the fundamental rights conferred by Part 111 of the Constitution of India in their application to certain members of the Forces.
It reads :-  "33.
Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this part in their application etc. - Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to, - (a) the members of the Armed Forces; or (b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or (c) persons employed in any bureau or other organization established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or (d) persons employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication system set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organization referred to in clauses (a) to (c).
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them."
It is crystal clear from perusal of Article 33 that the Parliament by law, may determine as to what extent any right conferred by Article 33 of the Constitution could be restricted or abrogated but it has to ensure that it is necessary for proper discharge of their duties and maintenance of discipline amongst them.
This question had been considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Sarup v. Union of India and another, AIR 1965 SC 247.
The Supreme Court held that every provision of the Act is the law made by the Parliament and by such a certain provisions pertaining to fundamental rights could be restricted with respect to Armed Forces.
In paragraph 16 the Court held :-  "We agree that each and every provisions of the Act is a law made by Parliament and that if any such provision tends to affect the fundamental right under Part III of the Constitution, that provision does not, on that account, become void, as it must be taken that Parliament has thereby, in the exercise of its power under Art. 33 of the Constitution, made the requisite modification to affect the respective fundamental right.
We are however of opinion that the provisions of S. 125 of the Act are not discriminatory and does not infringe the provisions of Art. 14 of the Constitution."
The same question again was reagitated and considered in the decision in the case of Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi v. Union of India and others, AIR 1982 SC 1413 : 1983(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 360.
The Supreme Court again held that for maintenance of discipline and to ensure the proper discharge of duties of Armed Forces, certain fundamental rights could be curtailed.
In paragraph 13 the Court observed :-  "Whenever a legislation is being debated for being put on the statute book, Articles 12 and 13 must be staring into the face of that body.
Consequently when the Act was enacted not only Arts.
12 and 13 were hovering over the provisions but also Article 33 which to some extent carves out an exception to Articles 12 and 13 must be present to the corporate mind of Parliament which would imply that Parliament by law can restrict or abrogate fundamental rights set out in Part III in their application to Armed Forces.
But it was said that by contemporane exposition S21 of the Act clearly sets out the limits of such restriction or abrogation and no more.
Section 21 confers power on the Central Government to make rules restricting to such extent and in such manner as may be necessary to modify the fundamental freedom conferred by Art. 19(1) (a) and (c) in their application to Armed Forces and none other meaning that Armed Forces would enjoy other fundamental freedoms set out in Part III.
Armed with this power, Rules 19, 20 and 21 have been framed by the Central Government.
Taking cue from Section 21 and Rules 19, 20 and 21, it was submitted that while Article 33 enables that Parliament by law to abrogate or restrict fundamental rights in their application to Armed Forces, Parliament exercised the same power limited to what is prescribed in S. 21 and specified the restrictions in Rr.
19, 20 and 21 and, therefore, the remaining fundamental rights in Part III are neither abrogated nor restricted in their application to the Armed Forces.
Consequently, it was urged that the Act prescribing the procedure of court-martial must satisfy the requirement of Art.
21."
While elucidating the same, the Court went to hold :-  "Article 33 confers power on the Parliament to determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by Part III shall, in their application to the members of the Armed Forces, be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of duties and maintenance of discipline amongst them.
Article 33 does not obligate that Parliament must specifically adumbrate each fundamental right enshrined in Part 111 and to specify in the law enacted in exercise of the power conferred by Art. 33 the degree of restriction or total abrogation of each right.
That would be reading into Article 33 a requirement which it does not enjoin.
In fact, after the constitution came into force, the power to legislate in respect of any item must be referable to an entry in the relevant list.
Entry 2 in List I: Naval, Military and Air Force and any other Armed Forces of the Union would enable Parliament to enact the Army Act and armed with this power the Act was enacted in July 1950.
It has to be enacted by the Parliament subject to the requirements of Part III of the Constitution read with Article 33 which itself forms part of Part III.
Therefore, every provision of the Army Act enacted by the Parliament, if in conflict with the fundamental rights conferred by Part III, shall have to be read subject to Art. 33 as being enacted with a view to either restricting or abrogating other fundamental rights to the extent of inconsistency or repugnancy between Part III of the Constitution and the Army Act."
Reference with advantage may further be made to the later decision of the Supreme Court in the case of TS Ramani v. The Superintendent of Prisons, Central Jail, Madras and others, 1984 Cri.LJ 892.
The decision in the case of Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh (supra) was referred to with approval with respect to curtailment of the powers pertaining to fundamental rights of the Armed Forces.
7.
At this stage it is worth mentioning that in case of Lt.Col.
Prithi Pal Singh (supra) the Supreme Court even went on to hold that the Rules and Regulations do not loose their character and they continue to be treated as if contained in the Act.
A similar arguments that the Rules could not be taken to be an Act made by the Parliament had been considered.
The same was negatived and while referring to the case of Chief Inspector of Mines v. Lala Karam Chand Thapar etc., AIR 1961 SC 838 the Bench held :-  "A Constitution Bench of this Court examined the position of Rules or Regulations made under an Act having the effect as if enacted in the Act.
After examining various foreign decisions, the Court held as under :-  "The true position appears to be that the Rules and Regulations do not lose their character as Rules and Regulations, even though they are to be of the same effect as if contained in the Act.
They continue to be Rules subordinate to me Act, and though for certain purposes, including one purpose of construction, they are to be treated as if contained in the Act, their true nature as subordinate rules is not lost."
The same question came up before a Constitution Bench in Kali Pada Chowdhury v. Union of India, 1963(2) SCR 904 : AIR 1963 SC 134, and the majority has almost accepted the same view."
Consequently, me contention that Rules so framed will be out of the scope of Article 33 of the Constitution of India will be out of merit.
The findings are clear and unambiguous keeping in view the settled law of the Supreme Court that the fundamental rights could be restricted or abrogated in case of members of the Armed Forces to maintain discipline and to ensure proper discharge of the duties of the said Force.
8.
Before adverting to the facts of the case, reference can well be made to the provisions of the Act and the Rules relevant.
The expression "active duty" had been defined under Section 2(1)(a) of the Act.
It reads :-  "(a) "active duty", in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as a member of the Force during the period in which such person is attached to, or forms, part of, a unit of the Force - (i) which is engaged in operations against an enemy, or (ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patdol or other guard duty along the borders of India, and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette as a period of active duty with reference to any area in which any person or class of persons subject to this Act may be serving."
Section 2(1)(u) defines "Security Force Court" to mean a Court referred to in Section 64 of the Act.
Section 64 for purposes of the Border Security Force Act explains that there were three kinds of Security Force Courts.
The said provision reads :-  "64.
For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of Security Courts, that is to say, - (a) General Security Force Courts; (b) Petty Security Force Courts; and (c) Summary Security Force Courts."
Presently, we are only concerned with the Court contemplated under Section 64(c) of the Act namely "Summary Security Force Court".
Section 70 provides mat a Summary Security Force Court can be held by a Commandant of any unit of the Force and he alone shall constitute the Court.
The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or subordinate officers..
Section 74 further explains that subject to provisions of sub- section (2) of Section 74, a Summary Security Force Court can try any offense punishable under the Act.
It refers to the powers of this Summary Security Force Court.
Under Section 116, the proceedings of the Summary Security Force Court have to be transmitted not below the rank of Deputy Inspector General.
The said provision reads:-  " 115.
The proceedings of every Summary Security Force Court shall, without delay, be forwarded to the officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector General within whose command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such officer, or the Director-General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on the merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings, or reduce the sentenced any officer sentence which the court might have passed."
Section 117 provides me remedy against a finding, sentence or order of me Security Force Court.
9.
Section 141 of me Act gives powers to frame Rules.
The same are known as the Border Security Force Rules, 1969.
Rule 62 provides the duty for convening officer while convening courts.
It provides that he has to issue a convening order in the appropriate form.
Rule 63 is important and reads as under :-  "63.
Preparation of defence by me accused.
- (1) An accused, who has been remanded for trial, shall be afforded proper opportunity for preparing his defence and shall be allowed proper communication with his defending officer or counsel and wim his witnesses.
(2) A defending officer shall be appointed to defend an accused who has been remanded for trial unless Me accused states in writing mat he does not wish such an appointment to be made.
(3) If me prosecution is to be undertaken by a legally qualified officer or by a counsel the accused shall be notified of this fact in sufficient time to enable him if he so desires to make arrangements for a legally qualified officer or counsel to defend him.
(4) As soon as practicable after a decision has been taken to place the accused on trial and in any case not less man four days before his trial he shall be given; (a) a copy of me charge-sheet; (b) an unexpurgated copy of the record or abstract of evidence showing me passages (if any), which have been expurgated in the copy sent to the senior member; (c) notice of any additional evidence which me prosecution intends to adduce; and (d) if me accused so requires, a list of me ranks, names, and units of me members who are to form me Court and of any waiting members.
(5) When an accused is given a copy of me charge-sheet and of the record or abstract of evidence in accordance wim this rule, he shall : (a) have me charge explained to him; and (b) be informed mat, upon his making a written request to his Commandant not less man twenty four hours before his trial requiring me attendance at his trial of a witness (other man a witness for me prosecution) whom he desires to call in his defence (such witness to be named by him), reasonable steps will be taken in accordance wim mese rules to procure me attendance of any such witness at his trial.
(6) The provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) shall not apply in relation to a trial before a Summary Security Force Court and in relation to such a trial the period of four days referred to in sub-rule (4) shall be construed as twenty four hours."
In addition to mat under Rule 157 during a trial at me Summary Security Force Court, an accused can take the assistance of any person including me legal practitioner buts such person cannot cross-examine the witnesses or address me Court.
10.
Perusal of mese Rules reveals mat with respect to Summary Security Force Court, mere is a slight deviation.
The next friend is not permitted to cross- examine me witnesses or address me Court.
In relation to the period prescribed and referred to under sub-rule (4), the same has been reduced to 24 hours.
11.
It is on me strength of the above said provisions mat me learned counsel urged in terms that Rule 157 and sub-rule (6) of Rule 63 are ultra vires of Section 64 of the Act besides Articles 14, 21 and 22 of the Constitution of India.
According to the learned counsel, no fair opportunity in me absence of me counsel or me next friend to cross-examine the witnesses could be provided and, therefore, me petitioner could not prepare his defence properly.
He further urged that me reduction of me period to prepare the defence from four days to 24 hours in case of Summary Security Force Court trial also prejudiced the petitioner for preparing Me defense.
12.
Taking up me first plea of the learned counsel, at me outset it may be mentioned mat mere is no escape from the findings and it must be held that fair trial is me bed rock of all the enquiries or trial mat may be conducted.
Every person has me right to prepare his defence.
In terms of Article 33 of me Constitution, keeping in view the discipline of me Force, certain fundamental rights can be curtailed.
But it cannot be that no fair opportunity shall be granted.
Such a situation may arise where a prejudice is caused to me concerned person.
13.
Strong reliance on behalf of me petitioner was placed on the decision of this Court in me case of Joga Singh v. Union of India and others, 1995(7) SLR 262.
The provisions of Rule 157 were under consideration.
It was held that keeping in view Article 22 of the Constitution, Rule 157 curtails me right when it debars the legal practitioner to cross-examine or examine a witness.
In paragraph 15 His Court observed :-  "A perusal of the above provision shows that an accused person is entitled to "take the assistance of any person including the legal practitioner as he may consider necessary."
The rule recognises me necessity of providing a reasonable opportunity to the accused.
The assistance of even a legal practitioner can be taken.
However, a proviso has been added which debars me friend of the accused from examining or cross-examining a witness.
Once the accused is provided with a friend, who can be present during me trial, it is not understood as to why he is debarred from examining or cross-examining a witness.
Continuous propping may not be possible.
It may even disturb the proceedings.
A person who is being tried may be under lot of stress.
That is why he is provided with the assistance of an officer as even a legal practitioner.
It is true that the right to be defended by a counsel is not a guaranteed right.
It is also true mat the proceedings before a court can be regulated by law.
However, me right of a person who is under restraint to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice, is guaranteed by Article 22 of me Constitution.
The proviso to Rule 157 curtails that right when it debars me legal practitioner from examining or cross-examining a witness."
14.
One has strong reservations in this regard because as a general principle it cannot be accepted mat in each and every case such an absence of me counsel to cross-examine would cause prejudice.
In me case of Joga Singh (supra) this Court did not take into account me provisions of Article 33 of the Constitution referred to above.
More so the facts of the present case must take prominence and prevail.
In mat view of the matter it is in the academic interest to go into me above said controversy.
It is apparent from the record mat petitioner was given the offer mat if he likes, he can have the services of any friend.
On 19.1.1996 me petitioner had written to the Commandant (copy Annexure R-3) that he does not require any friend for his defense.
At no stage it is alleged that the petitioner demanded that next friend should be allowed and he would like to consult a counsel.
In the absence of any such request, it is patently clear mat Me petitioner cannot be allowed to rake up me said issue later.
He had confessed.
Having done so, it would be indeed unfair to permit the petitioner to state that prejudice had been caused.
He did not want me services of next friend.
A similar situation arose before the Supreme Court in me case of Ram Sarup (supra).
That was the decision under the Army Act.
The petitioner had not made any request for being represented by a counsel of his choice.
It was held that me petitioner cannot urge that he had a right to be defended by a counsel of his choice.
It was held :-  "We are of opinion that the petitioner made no request for his being represented at the Court - Martial by a counsel of his choice, that consequently no such request was refused and mat he cannot be said to have been denied his fundamental right of being defended by a counsel of his choice."
The position in the present case as already pointed above is somewhat similar.
No request was made.
The petitioner did not want a next friend.
Therefore, no prejudice had been caused to him.
The contention so much thought of on behalf of the petitioner must fail.
15.
As regards the second contention mat only 24 hours time was given to me petitioner to prepare his defence, once again me plea must be stated to be rejected.
At no stage during the proceedings the petitioner pointed that he may be given further time.
Instead he thought it appropriate to admit the guilt.
The plea, therefore, clearly is an afterthought rather man based on any substance on me facts and the record.
16.
Confronted with that position, it had been urged mat copies had not been supplied and in mat view of me matter, me petitioner could not prepare his defence.
It is a well recognized principle in all civilized countries mat me person concerned has a right to get me copies at the threshold so mat he may be able to work and know what is me material collected against him.
The procedure has to be right, just and fair.
While looking at the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure (Section 207), in the case of M/s. Viniyoga International, New Delhi and another v. The State, 1985 Crl.
LJ 761 the Delhi High Court held that accused has the right to get the copies at the threshold.
17.
On behalf of me respondents, the attention of the Court nad been drawn to the receipt given by me petitioner that he had received the copies of the proceedings and the charge.
There was no objection ken as to what in fact had not been supplied.
That being so indeed the contention that copies had not been supplied, necessarily has to be rejected.
18.
Another limb of the argument was that the Court was to assemble on 2311996 and in fact assembled on 2411996.
The proceedings on 2411996 were not promulgated and, therefore, the entire proceedings on 2411996 are illegal.
The original proceedings had been called and perused.
It revealed that on 2311996, it was adjourned to 2411996 and the petitioner had me knowledge of the same.
The Commandant could not hold the Court on that date.
In these circumstances, it was not necessary that it should have again been promulgated.
19.
Reliance was being placed on the decision of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in the case of DP Bhose v. Union of India and others, 1989 Lab.
lC 1798.
It was a decision under the Army Act, 1950.
It was held that noncompliance of Section 109 of the Army Act would vitiate the proceedings.
There would be no controversy on the principle so enunciated.
This is because of the facts of the present case.
As noted above, it was not necessary to promulgate the proceedings for the next date.
It was pure and simple case of adjournment.
Consequently, no prejudice is caused nor the petitioner can be permitted to raise the contention in this regard.
20.
The last contention raised was that the confession of the petitioner had been recorded under allurement that 'essor punishment may be recorded.
There is denial by the respondents.
The proceedii gs does not indicate that there was such allurement.
Consequently, in the absence of any other material to substantiate the same the said plea is stated to be without merit.
21.
For these reasons, the petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.