M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The petitioner while working as Marketing Officer, Tenali, was served with a charge-sheet dated 19.1.1988.
A charge memo dated 9.1.1988 was served on the petitioner and the basis for the charges was also stated in the said charge memo.
Four charges were framed against the petitioner.
They are as under :  (1) Dereliction of duty.
(2) Wilful negligence causing huge financial loss to the Corporation.
(3) Unauthorised absence from duty for nearly two years.
(4) Disobedience of instructions in not reporting to duty when ordered to do so.
The petitioner submitted his explanation and as the same were not found convincing, an Enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct enquiry into the charges and an officer was appointed as Management representative to prosecute the case on behalf of the respondent management.
The enquiry was conducted in accordance with the rules of principles of natural justice and an Enquiry Report dated 4101993 was submitted.
No copy of the Enquiry Report was, however, furnished to the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner was not sanctioned Revised Pay Scales of 1986 nor annual grade increments on account of the enquiry pending against the petitioner, which as noted above, was initiated in 1988 and culminated with the Enquiry Report dated 4101993.
The representations made by the petitioner for regularisation of his leave, periodical increments and revised pay scales went unheeded.
Instead, the 1st respondent issued the proceedings dated 1391994 to the effect that the Enquiry Officer conducted the enquiry and submitted his report on 4101993 in which it was held that the charges against the petitioner "as not proved" since no evidence of any witness was taken during the enquiry and in view of the seriousness of the charges and the huge quantum of money involved, the findings of the Enquiry Officer are rejected and another officer named in the said order dated 1391994 was appointed as Enquiry Officer to conduct re-enquiry into charges which were held "not proved" in the earlier enquiry has been assailed in the above writ petition and is hereinafter referred to as the impugned order.
3.
By interim directions of this Court dated 2121994, the stay of enquiry was ordered.
A counter-affidavit has been filed by the Managing Director of the Respondent Organisation.
The above facts are not disputed.
It is, however, stated that as the Enquiry Officer during the course of the enquiry did not examine any witnesses and in view of the seriousness of the charges and the amounts involved, the Disciplinary Authority rejected the report and consequently appointed the 2nd respondent as Enquiry Officer to conduct an enquiry into the charges framed against the petitioner.
The reasons for the same are stated to be that the competent authority found that vital witnesses were not examined and if examined would have proved the guilt of the petitioner.
With regard to the rule position, it is stated that the Regulations of the Corporation, though silent on the issue of conducting a second enquiry, the Corporation is not prohibited from conducting a second enquiry, when the first enquiry has been irregularly conducted.
4.
In the light of the above, the short point for consideration is whether a second enquiry can be initiated on the same charges which in the enquiry already conducted were found "not proved".
5.
Sri M Krishnamohan Rao, learned Counsel for the petitioner has referred to and relied upon several judgments in support of his contention that the second enquiry is wholly misconceived and untenable and that the impugned order is contrary to law and without jurisdiction and deserves to be quashed.
6.
It would be useful to look at the legal conspectus regarding the power of the Disciplinary Authority directing a second enquiry on the same charges on which the first enquiry was held.
7.
In Dwarakachand v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1958 Rajasthan 38, a similar contention with regard to conducting of a second enquiry was considered by a Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court.
Interpretation of Rule 16 of Rajasthan Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1950 fell for consideration in that case in relation to conducting a second departmental enquiry.
Wanchoo, CJ (as he then was) speaking for the Court held as under :  "(9) On a careful consideration, therefore, of the entire matter, we are of the opinion that once a departmental enquiry is over and a public servant has been exonerated, no second departmental enquiry on the same facts can be ordered unless there is a specific provision for reviewing an order of exoneration of this kind in the Service Rules or any law to that effect.
(10) It is faintly urged on behalf of the State that the first enquiry in this case was not a departmental enquiry or that in any case, many irregularities were committed in it and important witnesses were not examined.
It is enough to say that the order of Collector dated 19th July, 1955 definitely says that it is made in a departmental enquiry.
It is in accordance with the Circular of the Home Department 1953 which we have mentioned above.
Assuming that there were some irregularities in the conduct of the enquiry, it hardly lies in the mouth of the State, which was making this enquiry through its servants, to complain of it."
8.
In KR Dev v. The Collector of Central Excise, Shillong, 1971(2) Supreme Court Cases 102, the Supreme Court considered Rule 15 of Central Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 with regard to the power of Disciplinary Authority to conduct a second enquiry.
In that case, the Disciplinary Authority viz., Collector passed an order dated 13.2.1962 appointing another Enquiry Officer to enquire afresh into the charges framed against the delinquent officer-petitioner therein.
While holding that the rules do not contemplate a second enquiry, it was held that the Disciplinary Authority has enough powers to reconsider the evidence itself and give its own conclusions under Rule 9 of the said Rules.
It would, however, be useful to extract a relevant portion of the said judgment for proper appreciation of the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court as under:  "12.
It seems to us that Rule 15, on the face of it, really provides for one inquiry but it may be possible if in a particular case there has been no proper enquiry because some serious defect has crept into the inquiry or some important witnesses were not available at the time of inquiry or were not examined for some other reason, the Disciplinary Authority may ask the Inquiry Officer to record further evidence.
But there is no provision in Rule 15 for completely setting aside previous inquiries on the ground that the report of the Inquiring Officer or Officers does not appeal to the Disciplinary Authority.
The Disciplinary Authority has enough powers to re- consider the evidence itself and come to its own conclusion under Rule 9.
(13) In our view the rules do not contemplate an action such as was taken by the Collector on February 13, 1962.
It seems to us that the Collector, instead of taking responsibility himself, was determined to get some officer to report against the appellant.
The procedure adopted was not only not warranted by the rules but was harassing to the appellant."
9.
In the State of Assam and another v. JN Roy Biswas, AIR 1975 Supreme Court 2277, the Supreme Court observed that it is not the rule of "double jeopardy" but it is the absence of power under the rules that inhibits a second enquiry by the Disciplinary Authority after the delinquent had once been absolved.
It was further observed that State could re-open the proceedings only if the rules vested some such revisory power.
Justice VR Krishna Iyer speaking for the Court, held thus:  "....No rule of double jeopardy bars but absence of power under a rule inhibits a second inquiry by the Disciplinary Authority after the delinquent had once been absolved.
The appeal must fail and is dismissed with costs.
4.
We may however make it clear that no government servant can urge that if for some technical or other good ground, procedural or other, the first enquiry or punishment or exoneration is found bad in law that a second enquiry cannot be launched.
It can be; but once a disciplinary case has closed and the official reinstated, presumably on full exoneration, a chagrined Government cannot restart the exercise in the absence of specific power to review or revise, vested by rules in some authority.
The basics of the rule of law cannot be breached without legal provision or other vitiating factor invalidating the earlier enquiry.
For the present, this is theoretical because no such deadly defect is apparent on the record."
From the above dicta, it is apparent that once a departmental enquiry is conducted, unless the rules applicable to the case so provide, second enquiry or a de novo enquiry into the same charges cannot be initiated.
The rule of double jeopardy may not be applicable, but absence of power under the rule inhibits such a second enquiry.
Where, however, some defects have crept into the enquiry or some important witnesses were not available at the time of enquiry or were not examined for some other reason, the Disciplinary Authority is empowered to ask the Enquiry Officer to record further evidence.
Also, the Disciplinary Authority is empowered to itself consider the evidence and come to its own conclusions.
10.
In the instant case, it is admitted that the Regulations of the respondent-Corporation do not provide for conducting a second enquiry.
The Disciplinary Authority, in the instant case, has not itself examined the evidence on record and come to any independent finding based thereon.
The Enquiry Officer has not been directed to examine witnesses who for some reasons were not examined.
Instead, a second enquiry has been directed to be conducted by another Enquiry Officer into the very same charges in respect of which the first Enquiry Officer submitted his Report dated 4101993 holding the charge as "not proved".
Such action, in the light of the legal position noticed above, cannot but be considered contrary to law and therefore arbitrary.
11.
The impugned order states that the evidence of witnesses was not recorded during the first enquiry which has necessitated the second enquiry and the impugned order is sought to be sustained on that ground and the second enquiry is thereby sought to be justified.
12.
Let us therefore examine whether and in what circumstances the domestic enquiry is vitiated by non-examination of the witnesses and the role of Enquiry Officer on this aspect.
13.
In Tata Oil Mills Company Limited v. The Workmen, AIR 1965 Supreme Court 155, the Supreme Court was considering the validity of the Award passed by the Industrial Tribunal re-instating the workman.
One of the grounds which found favour with the Tribunal to hold in favour of the workman in that case was that the Enquiry Officer did not give an adjournment to the workman to examine his witnesses.
The Supreme Court while examining that aspect of the matter held as under:  ".....But if the enquiry has been fairly conducted, it means that all reasonable opportunity has been given to the employee to prove his case by leading evidence.
In such a case, how can the Court hold that merely because the witnesses did not appear to give evidence in support of the employee's case, he should be allowed to lead such evidence before the Industrial Tribunal.
If this plea is upheld, no domestic enquiry would be effective and in every case, the matter would have to be tried afresh by the Industrial Tribunal".
14.
A Division Bench of our High Court in Nellimerla Jute Mills Company Limited v. Labour Court, Guntur and another, 1981(2) ALT 455 (D.B.
), considered the question whether the principles of natural justice are violated by the employer not examining a particular witness.
The Division Bench in that case had to consider the contention that the non-examination of a witness in the domestic enquiry by the management would vitiate the enquiry.
It was submitted on behalf of the employee that all other witnesses were employees of the management and that they were made to support the case of the management.
If the independent mediator in that case was examined, truth would have come out.
Inasmuch as the said independent witness was not examined by the management before the Enquiry Officer, it was contended, the Enquiry was not proper.
The Division Bench negatived the contention thus:  "....We are unable to agree with this contention.
It is open to the Management to examine such witnesses as it chooses in the domestic enquiry.
If it does not examine any witness, it takes the risk of the case being held to be not proved.
It cannot be compelled to examine any particular witness.
The mere fact that it does not examine any witness cannot vitiate the enquiry.
No standing orders have been pointed out which compel the Management to examine all the witnesses to a particular incident.
Hence, it cannot be said that any standing order is violated".
15.
It was further held in Nellimerla Jute Mills Case (supra) that, if an employee requires a particular witness to be examined and it is within the power of the employer to produce such witness for examination and it does not do so, it may reasonably be argued that the principles of natural justice are violated as the employee has not been given a reasonable opportunity to examine the witnesses to depose in his favour.
Reference was also made to G.E.C.
of India v. V Kedia, 1968(1) LLJ 731, as also to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Tata Oil Mills Company Limited (supra) and the ratio laid down in those cases was explained in the following terms :  "....In G.E.C.
of India v. V Kedia, 1960(1) LLJ 731, it was contended that the domestic enquiry was vitiated as a particular witness employed by the company was not examined.
It was held that the mere fact that the Enquiry Officer did not of his own accord examine the said witness does not vitiate the enquiry.
It was open to the parties to summon such evidence, oral or documentary which they considered necessary and if one or the other party omitted to summon a witness or a document, the Enquiry Officer cannot be blamed for it, nor is the enquiry rendered defective or unfair on that account.
Reference may also be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in Tata Oil Mills v. The Workmen, AIR 1965 SC 155.
In that case, the employee contended that the Enquiry Officer should have taken steps to get the two witnesses brought before him for giving evidence.
The Supreme Court observed that in a domestic enquiry, the officer holding the enquiry can take no valid or effective steps to compel the attendance of any witness and that just as the Management produced its witnesses, the employee should have taken steps to produce his witnesses.
It was further observed that if on refusing to adjourn the hearing at the instance of workman, the Enquiry Officer failed to give the workman a reasonable opportunity to lead evidence, that may in a proper case be considered to introduce an element of infirmity in the enquiry but it cannot be held that the enquiry suffered from infirmity merely because the Enquiry Officer did not compel the witnesses whom the employee wanted to come and give evidence.
In our view, the present case is a fortiori one.
If the fact that the Enquiry Officer does not compel a witness whom the employee wants to give evidence does not vitiate the enquiry, it would follow that the fact that the Enquiry Officer did not examine a witness who would support the Management would not vitiate the enquiry."
An analysis of the above-cited judgments shows that the mere fact that the Enquiry Officer did not of his own accord examine witnesses who would support the case of the Management, the enquiry is not vitiated.
It was open to the parties to have summoned such evidence oral or documentary which was considered necessary and if one or the other party omitted to summon a witness or a document, the Enquiry Officer cannot be blamed for it, nor is the enquiry rendered defective or unfair on that account.
The Enquiry Officer can take no valid or effective steps to compel the attendance of any witnesses nor can the Enquiry Officer of his own accord examine any witness.
It is open to either party to produce such witnesses as it wanted on its side.
16.
Applying the above principles to the instant case, it is apparent that the respondent-Corporation did not produce the witness nor was the Corporation denied the opportunity to examine any witnesses.
The respondent-Corporation should have taken steps for examination of such witnesses as it wanted.
The instant case is not one where any such request of the Corporation to examine witnesses on its behalf was either denied or refused.
For the lapse on the part of the respondent-Corporation in not producing or examining any witnesses on its side, the Enquiry Officer cannot be blamed nor can the enquiry be rendered defective on that account.
17.
In the light of the above, it has to be held that the respondent is not justified in law for directing the re-enquiry or a second enquiry into the charge which were held "not proved" in the first enquiry on the ground that vital witnesses were not examined.
18.
For the reasons aforestated, impugned proceedings are liable to be quashed and set aside and are accordingly quashed and set aside.
Consequential directions shall issue to the respondent directing that the petitioner shall be granted all such benefits as he may be entitled to in law with respect to the increments in the salary, revised pay scales, promotion etc., which were denied to the petitioner on account of the pendency of other disciplinary enquiry.
19.
In the result, the Writ Petition is allowed in terms as above with costs.
Petition allowed.