RL Anand, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Constable in the Central Industrial Security Force on November 5, 1991.
In September 1994 the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet.
It was alleged that he was guilty of gross-misconduct and indiscipline inasmuch as he had misbehaved with shift incharge Sub Inspector TS Gogoi on August 17, 1994 and had physically assaulted and manhandled him.
The petitioner had also used unparliamentary language.
A regular inquiry was initiated.
The charges were proved.
The Disciplinary Authority had ordered punishment of reduction to the lowest stage in the time-scale vide its order dated November 20, 1994.
On December 17, 1994 the petitioner filed an appeal against the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
The Appellate Authority after consideration of the matter, gave a show-cause notice dated February 3, 1995 (proposing a penalty of Removal) to the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted his reply on March 29, 1995.
The Appellate Authority rejected the petitioner's appeal and awarded the proposed punishment of removal from service.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed a revision petition before the Inspector General.
Vide order dated September 18, 1995 the Inspector General rejected the revision petition.
Aggrieved by these orders the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He prays that the orders dated November 20, 1994, March 29, 1995 and September 18, 1995, copies of which are produced on the record as Annexures P9, P13, and P15, be quashed.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been stated by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioner was posted in Andhra Pradesh when the order of punishment was passed.
Consequently, this court has no jurisdiction to hear and decide the petition.
On merits it has been maintained that the petitioner had misbehaved with a senior person.
He was also guilty of gross misconduct.
Consequently, the petitioner was not entitled to continue as a member of the disciplined force.
On this premise, the respondents maintain that the orders regarding the petitioner's removal from service are absolutely legal and valid.
The respondents pray that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. KS Dadwal, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the orders passed by the appellate as well as the revisional authorities were communicated to the petitioner at Hoshiarpur.
Consequently, part of the cause of action had accrued within the jurisdiction of this court.
As a result, he maintains that the writ petition is competent.
On merits it has been submitted that the evidence produced by the respondents does not prove the charge of any misconduct against the petitioner.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner was posted at Sriharikota when the order of punishment was passed.
He had filed an appeal against this order.
Copy of the appeal is annexure P10 with the writ petition.
Even this appeal was submitted by the petitioner while he was in Andhra Pradesh.
Thereafter a show-cause notice dated February 3, 1995 was given to the petitioner.
A copy of this notice is Annexure P11.
It was served on the petitioner while he was at Sriharikota.
He had submitted his reply from Sriharikota.
Copy of the reply is at Annexure P12.
The appellate authority had disposed of the appeal vide order dated March 29, 1995.
This order was sent to the petitioner through the Commandant, Central Industrial Security Force Unit, SHAR Centre.
There is nothing to suggest that it was communicated to the petitioner when he was at Hoshiarpur.
The petitioner had then filed a revision petition.
Copy of this revision petition is at Annexure P14.
Even this petition was submitted by him from Sriharikota.
The final order passed by the revisional authority, viz.
Inspector General, is at Annexure P15 with the writ petition.
This order was sent to the petitioner through the D.I.G., CISF, Madras.
Vide order dated September 18, 1995 the petitioner was conveyed a copy of the order passed by the Inspector General, Central Industrial Security Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bombay, dated August 2, 1995.
Since the order dated 2nd August, 1995 had been communicated to the petitioner at Hoshiarpur, it is maintained that part of the cause of action had accrued within the jurisdiction of this Court.
In view of this factual position, Mr. Anil Rathee, learned counsel for the respondents, prays that this court may consider this petition on merits and he does not press the objection regarding territorial jurisdiction.
This brings us to the merits of the controversy.
5.
The petitioner is a member of the disciplined force.
It has been, inter alia, alleged that the petitioner had misbehaved with a person senior to him.
He had physically assaulted and manhandled him.
After a detailed inquiry, the charges were found to have been proved.
It was also found that the petitioner had used bad language.
The Disciplinary Authority had clearly found that the acts of the petitioner "are very serious and highly objectionable rendering......... official unfit for retention in the disciplined armed force like CISF" However, keeping in view his age, a lenient view was taken.
He was ordered to be reduced to the lowest stage in the time scale.
The appellate authority, however, felt that "the quantum of punishment awarded to the individual is not commensurate with the gravity of the proven delinquency".
The appellate authority, therefore, invoked the provision of Rule 47(2)(c)(I) of the Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1969 and called upon the petitioner to show-cause as to why the punishment be not enhanced to that of removal from service.
After the petitioner had shown cause, it imposed the penalty of removal from service.
Even the revisional authority confirmed this order and dismissed the petitioner's application.
It has not even been suggested that the order is not in conformity with the provisions of the statutory rules governing the petitioner.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. KS Dadwal, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the evidence on the record does not prove the charge.
This contention cannot be accepted.
It has been specifically pointed out by the respondents in the written statement that the statements of the witnesses recorded by the Inquiry officer clearly prove the alleged misconduct.
Specific reference has been made to the statements of the PWs 3, 4, 5 and 6.
The petitioner has not controverted this factual position by either controverting the averments or even by filing the copies of the statements of the witnesses.
The High Court in the exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not examine the matter as a Court of Appeal.
Once there is some evidence, the quantum is not a matter for this court to consider.
In the circumstances of the present case it cannot be said that there is no evidence to support the charges.
Still further, the view taken by the competent authority is not arbitrary.
Keeping in view the gravity of the charge, the authority could have legitimately formed the opinion that the petitioner did not deserve to continue as a member of the service.
Such a view having been taken, it calls for no interference.
The contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is, thus, rejected.
6.
The petitioner being a member of the disciplined force and the misconduct of assaulting a senior person having been proved, we find no ground either in law or in equity to interfere.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
Consequently, it is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.