KK Srivastava, J - This judgment will dispose of two Letters Patent Appeals (Nos. 928 and 1006 of 1988) which arise out of the judgment dated 26th July, 1988, passed by AP Chowdhri, J (as then he was), delivered in Civil Writ Petition No. 4135 of 1982 (Kehar Singh and Joginder Singh v. The State of Punjab and 3 others).
The aforesaid writ petitioners (Kehar Singh and Joginder Singh) in their petition sought the quashing of order dated 8121981, passed by respondent No. 2/The Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur, whereby the appellants (of LPA 928/1988 namely, GD Gaba and Ajaib Singh), who were arrayed as respondents No. 3 and 4 in the writ petition, were selected and appointed as officiating Naib-Tehsildars on purely ad hoc basis against the leave vacancies of one Khushi Ram, Naib Tehsildar, who proceeded on leave w.e.f.
2121981 to 521982 and Mohan Singh, Naib Tehsildar, who proceeded on leave w.e.f.
2121981 to 821982 respectively.
At the time of their selection and appointment, Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba were working as Ziledars in the Irrigation Department of the State of Punjab.
The writ petitioners (Kehar Singh and Joginder Singh) had been initially appointed as Patwaris in the Revenue Department in the years 1952 and 1953 respectively and were promoted as qualified Kanungo w.e.f.
621980 and December, 1980 respectively.
The appointment of GD Gaba and Ajaib Singh as Officiating Naib Tehsildars by the impugned order (Annexure P1) was challenged on the ground that respondent/Commissioner Ferozepur Division completely ignored the instructions as contained in para 37(ii) of the Standing Order No. 12, issued by the Financial Commissioner, which when read with Rules 8 and 6(i)(b) of the Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932 (in short called as "the Rules, 1932") would clearly show that the qualified Kanungos, like the writ petitioners had a preferential claim of being promoted and posted even against officiating vacancies of Naib Tehsildars.
The Standing Order No. 12 did not envisage the appointment by promotion of Ziledars in the Irrigation Department and as such, the appointment of aforesaid Ziledars, Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba, as officiating Naib Tehsildars in the leave vacancies was contrary to the express provisions of the Standing Order No. 12 and the rules.
The writ petitioners claimed a right to be promoted to the aforesaid posts of Officiating Naib Tehsildar, as having a right under the rules to be promoted to the aforesaid posts of Officiating Naib Tehsildar, as having a right under the rules to be promoted and appointed as such.
A representation had been made by the writ petitioners against the appointment of the appellants/GD Gaba and Ajaib Singh, but despite the representation and the personal interview with the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, the impugned order was not withdrawn.
2.
The respondent/State of Punjab and the Commissioner Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur, filed a written statement, wherein a preliminary objection was raised that though the petitioners had a right to file representation against the impugned order (Annexure P1), yet they did not file any such representation and, therefore, the writ petition was premature.
On merits, the appointment of Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba Ziledars to the post of Officiating Naib Tehsildar by means of the impugned order was defended as being strictly in accordance with the rules and the Standing Order as well as the Punjab Government Revenue Department instructions contained in Memo No. 37/46/78-VII/2110 dated 1121981 (a copy of which is Annexure R1).
It was stated that according to the instructions Annexure R1, 80% posts were to be filled from amongst the cadre of Kanungos; 10% posts from amongst the District Revenue Accountants; 6% posts from amongst the Assistant Consolidation Officers and 4% posts from amongst the Ziledars of Irrigation Department.
It was categorically mentioned that according to these instructions (Annexure R1), read with Punjab Government Revenue Department Instructions contained in Memo No. 10/3/79-EII/11185 dated 25.5.1979, 4% post of Naib Tehsildars in Officiating capacity were to be filled up from amongst the Ziledars of the Irrigation Department.
In the instructions (Annexure R1), it was mentioned that necessary action to amend the Standing Order No. 12 and Rules 1932 was being taken separately, but in the meantime the instructions contained in Annexure R1 were to be followed.
Even the instructions dated 25.5.1979 provided for four per cent reservation to be kept in view while making even officiating appointments of Naib Tehsildars.
Besides it, the explanation 2 below Rule 12 of the Rules, 1932 provides that all posts of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars are selection posts and no body shall be deemed to have suffered the penalty of withholding of promotion by reasons of not having been appointed to fill in any such post.
As a fact, it was mentioned in para 6 of the reply that due representation had already been given to the Kanungos in the matter of promotion as Naib Tehsildars.
Reference was made to a representation dated 22.7.1982 sent by Shri K Lall Bharu, Secretary of the Kanungos Association, Punjab (a copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P2 with the writ petition), and, it has been submitted that a requisite reply with regard to the said representation was sent to the Punjab Government in the Revenue Department vide office Memo No. EA.I.82/9826 dated 8121982 (Annexure RI).
3.
Respondent No. 4/GD Gaba filed a separate written statement taking similar pleas to the ones taken by the official respondents in their written statement.
Respondent No. 4 defended his appointment as Officiating Naib Tehsildar by quoting the instructions of the Punjab State as contained in the memo dated 1121981 (Annexure R1), read with State Government instructions contained in earlier memo dated 25.5.1979, providing for a reservation of 4% of posts in the enlistment of B-Class Naib Tehsildar candidates to be filled up from amongst the Ziledars of the Irrigation Department.
Reference was also made to Rule 22(b) of the Standing Order No. 12 regarding the recruitment to Naib Tehsildars, which provided, inter alia, that preference has to be given to the Canal Ziledars.
It was further mentioned that the State Government after seeing the work and conduct of respondent No. 4 accepted him as B-Class Naib Tehsildar candidate on the cadre strength of Ferozepur Division against the quota of Ziledars of Irrigation Department.
A copy of the order was placed on record as Annexure R-4/1.
It was further averred in the written statement that he was appointed as Naib Tehsildar by way of transfer from the post of Ziledar in the Irrigation Department in accordance with Rule 6(b)(i) of the Standing Order No. 12.
Respondent No. 4 referred to the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4113/1971, wherein it was observed that the appointment of Naib Tehsildar from the post of Ziledar is a transfer and as such the petitioners had no right to challenge the said appointment.
It was averred further that the writ petitioner had no locus standi to challenge his appointment by way of transfer from one Department to the other, i.e. from Irrigation Department to Revenue Department.
He further alleged that he was holding a post in accordance with law and no illegality, whatsoever, had been committed in his appointment under the impugned order Annexure P1.
4.
The learned Single Judge at the very outset considered the question as to the effect of the coming into force of the Punjab Naib Tehsildars (Class III) Service Rules, 1984 and held that since the vacancies in question arose in December, 1981, and the impugned order was passed on 8121981 appointing respondents No. 3 and 4 (Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba Ziledars) as Officiating Naib Tehsildars, the said vacancies would not be governed by the Rules of 1984 and would continue to be governed by the old rules.
He placed reliance on the case of XV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852, wherein it was held that the vacancies, which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
The learned Single Judge further held that the old rules read with the Standing Orders of the Financial Commissioner, clearly provided that Kanungos were entitled to be promoted as Officiating Naib Tehsildars to the exclusion of Ziledars, provided the other condition of non-availability of Naib Tehsildar candidates was fulfilled.
Regarding the nature of vacancies, he held that though it was stated in the written statement that the promotion of respondents No. 3 and 4 (i.e. Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba) was purely on ad hoc basis, but there was nothing on record to show that on the expiry of the leave vacancies, the said respondents had been reverted to their substantive posts.
He held that the petitioners were clearly entitled to be considered for promotion as officiating Naib Tehsildars in accordance with the rules and to the exclusion of the Ziledars.
While allowing the writ petition, the learned Single Judge ordered as under :-  "For the reasons mentioned above, the appointment of respondents No. 3 and 4 as officiating Naib Tehsildar by order dated 8121981 (Annexure P1) is hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioners for appointment as Naib Tehsildars in accordance with the Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932, read with clause 37 of the Standing Order No. 12 of the Financial Commissioner.
In terms of the ratio in State of Mysore v. Syed Mehmood, 1968 SLR 333, Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed at this stage to consider the fitness of the petitioners for officiating promotion to the post of Naib Tehsildar in December, 1981.
If on such examination, the respondents arbitrarily refuse to promote them, different considerations would arise.
The respondents 1 and 2 would upon such consideration be under a duty to promote the petitioners as from 8121981, if they were then fit to discharge the duties of the higher post and if the respondents fail to perform their duties, the court may direct them to promote the petitioners as from 8121981.
If the petitioners are promoted in terms of the above direction, they shall be entitled to all consequential benefits in pay and allowance from the date of their deemed appointment, i.e. 8121981.
Respondents 1 and 2 are given six months' time to comply with the above direction.
The petitioners are entitled to costs from respondent No. 1, which I quantify as Rs. 1,000/-.
Sd/- AP Chowdhri Judge" July 26, 1988.
5.
Feeling aggrieved against the judgment of the learned Single Judge as aforesaid, the State of Punjab and the Commissioner Ferozepur Division filed LPA No. 1006/1988, wherein the writ petitioners (Kehar Singh and Joginder Singh) were impleaded as respondents No. 1 and 2 while Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba were arrayed as respondents No. 3 and 4.
The private respondents of the writ petition (i.e. Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba) filed separate LPA (No. 928/1988) and impleaded the writ petitioners as respondents No. 1 and 2 while the official respondents, the State of Punjab through Secretary to Government, Punjab, Revenue Department, at Chandigarh and the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur were impleaded as respondents No. 3 and 4.
Both these appeals are directed against the same judgment of the learned Single Judge and involve discussion of common questions of facts and law.
Hence they are being disposed of by this common judgment, which is being delivered in LPA No. 1006/1988.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellants in the two appeals as also learned counsel for the respondents/writ petitioners.
We have carefully perused the judgment of learned Single Judge and record of the case.
7.
The stand taken by the appellants in the two appeals in common.
The appointment of the two Ziledars, i.e. Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba (appellants before us of LPA 928/1988) has been defended under the relevant rules and the Standing Order No. 12, coupled with the Government instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1) as also the earlier instructions dated 25.5.1979.
The learned counsel for the appellants laid great stress to the fact that Rule 8 of the rules 1932, read with paragraph 22 of the Standing Order No. 12 and Government instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1) provided about the method of Officiating appointments of Naib-Tehsildars.
Rule 6(b)(i) specifically provided the filling up of the officiating vacancies by transfer from amongst the officials employed in the Revenue, Irrigation, Consolidation, Special Assessment, Excise or Police establishment of the Division.
The stand of the appellants is that the post of Ziledar is of the same cadre as that of the Naib Tehsildar and as such, there was no question of promoting the Ziledar to the post of Naib Tehsildar for filling up the officiating vacancies, whereas the post of Kanungo in the Revenue Department is certainly an inferior post to the post of Naib Tehsildar and before the Kanungo can be posted as Naib Tehsildar, he is first to be promoted to the post of Naib Tehsildar and then posted as such in order to fill up the officiating vacancies.
Apart from it, the stand of the appellants is that the State Government vide instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1) clearly provided for appointment of Ziledar against 4% reservation on the posts of Naib Tehsildars and notwithstanding the fact that the State Government did not amend the Standing Order No. 12, as mentioned in the said instructions dated 1121981, these instructions were meant to be followed by the Revenue authorities till steps were taken to amend the Standing Order No. 12.
The learned DAG for the State of Punjab, as also Shri A.K.
Chopra, learned advocate appearing for the appellants (Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba) submitted that the Government instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1) had been issued undoubtedly by the Financial Commissioner and the same have the force of a Standing Order and to be complied with by the revenue authorities, subordinate to the Financial Commissioner.
8.
Learned counsel for the writ petitioners, on the other hand, defended the findings of the learned Single Judge and submitted that till the Standing Order No. 12 is suitably amended and the instructions dated 1121981 are incorporated therein, the said Order cannot have the force of a Standing order and as such, the same could not be resorted to while filling up the officiating vacancies by the Commissioner Ferozepur Division, ignoring the statutory rules and the Standing Order No. 12.
He contended that as a matter of fact, the post of a Kanungo is the main source for filling up the higher post of the Naib Tehsildar in the Revenue Department and the Kanungos cannot be ignored in order to accommodate the officials of the other department.
9.
Before dealing with the rival contentions raised by learned counsel for the appellants and the respondents/writ petitioners, we deem it appropriate to refer to the impugned order of appointment of the appellants (Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba) and the relevant rules of the Rules, 1932 as also the relevant provisions of the Standing Order No. 12, besides the Government Instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1).
10.
The impugned order (Annexure P1) passed by the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, reads as under :-  "ORDER The following Ziledars are hereby selected and appointed as Officiating Naib Tehsildars on purely ad hoc basis against the leave vacancies :-  S. No Name of the Official From To Remarks 1.
Sh. Ajaib Singh Ziledar Officiating Naib Tehsildar, Dev.
Bhatinda Sh. Khushi Ram N.T.
Proceeding for leave w.e.f.
2121981 to 521982 2.
Sh. GD Gauba Ziledar Officiating NT Agrarian, Abohar Vice Mohan Singh Proceeding on leave from 21281 to 8282.
Dated 8121981 Commissioner Ferozepur Ferozepur Division Ferozepur.
Commissioner, Ferozepur Division Endst No. EA-I-81/12405 dated 8121981 to SEFCC : for information and necessary action.
He is requested to relieve the officials selected as Naib Tehsildars.
Sd/- Commissioner, Ferozepur Division."
Rule 7 of Rules, 1932 provides for method of filling the substantive vacancies in the selection grade of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars.
Rule 8 of Rules 1932 provides for method of filling the officiating vacancies of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars.
This rule reads as under :-  "When an officiating vacancy occurs or is about to occur in the post of Tehsildar or Naib Tehsildar, it shall be filled by the Commissioner subject to any instruction that may be issued in the Standing Orders of the Financial Commissioners, from among any of the classes respectively mentioned in rule 6, classes (a)(b)."
Rule 6(1)(b) of the Rules, 1932, deals with the classes of persons to be recruited as Naib Tehsildars and read as under :-  "6.
Posts in the service shall be filled - (1)(a) in the case of Tehsildars (1)(b) in the case of Naib Tehsildars - (i) by transfer from amongst the officials employed in the revenue, irrigation, consolidation, special assistant, excise or police establishment of the division."
(ii) By direct appointment."
Para 37 of the Standing Order No. 12, which provides for appointments of Naib Tehsildars, reads as under :-  "(i) Officiating appointments of Naib Tehsildars are made by Commissioners of Divisions.
Preference should be given to direct Tehsildar candidates who have undergone revenue training for one year under paragraph 4(i)(a) but not completed the requisite period of service as Naib Tehsildar under paragraph 4(i)(b).
(ii) If no such Tehsildar candidate and no qualified Naib Tehsildar candidate of his list is available for a vacant post of Naib Tehsildar, the Commissioner may appoint a Tehsildar candidate who has completed his two years' service if unemployed or an unqualified Naib Tehsildar candidate or a Kanungo to fill the vacancy until a qualified person becomes available."
11.
Learned counsel for a writ petitioners/respondents in these appeals has placed reliance upon the provisions of para 37(ii) of the Standing Order to support his argument that while making officiating appointment of Naib Tehsildars, the Commissioners of the Divisions are to give preference to Kanungos if other officials mentioned in para 37(i) and (ii) are not available, to fill vacancy, until a qualified person becomes available and has pointed out that para 37 does not provide for the filling of the officiating vacancies by the Commissioner of the Division concerned from any other source, including the Irrigation Department.
On the basis of the exclusion of Ziledars of the Irrigation Department in para 37(ii), the writ petitioners have prayed for quashing of the impugned order (Annexure P1), appointing Ziledars to the post of officiating Naib Tehsildars.
12.
Learned counsel for the appellants while controverting the aforesaid argument of learned counsel for the writ petitioners/respondents argued that the provision for appointment to the post of officiating Naib Tehsildar from amongst the employees of the Irrigation Department besides other Departments is made specifically in Rule 6(b)(i) of the Rules, 1932, which are statutory rules and if there is a conflict between the statutory rules the Standing Orders, which is in the nature of only guidelines contained in the executive instructions issued by the Financial Commissioner, the statutory rule shall prevail.
To support his argument, learned counsel for the appellants, cited the judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of S Mohan Singh v. The Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Punjab and others, 1967 (LIXX) PLR 377, wherein if was held, "it is, therefore, clear that the status of Standing Orders issued by the Financial Commissioner under the Revenue Act is not more than that of administrative directions or executive instructions.
It has been repeatedly held that the rules made under a statute must be treated for all purpose of construction or obligation exactly as if they were in the Act and are to be of the same effect as if contained in the Act and have, therefore, to be judicially noticed for all purposes.
This was authoritatively so held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and others v. Babu Ram Upadhya, AIR 1961 SC 751.
Once it is settled that the Tehsildari Rules are statutory and the Standing Orders contain merely executive directions, there appears to be no difficulty in holding that whereever the standing order comes into conflict with the Tehsildari Rules the same must give way in favour of the Statutory Rules.
It appears to me that these Standing Orders can only be issued because of the general power of superintendence granted to Financial Commissioners under Section 11 of the Revenue Act."
13.
The submission of learned counsel for the appellants, in our considered view, has considerable force.
The Rules, 1932, which were in force at the relevant time when the impugned order (Annexure P1) was passed, contain a specific provision in Rule 6(b)(i), which enabled the Commissioner of the Division to fill the officiating vacancies of Naib Tehsildar purely on ad hoc basis against the leave vacancy, by transfer of Ziledar of the Irrigation Department.
Before the impugned impugned order (Annexure P1) is quashed, it has to be held that the appointment of Ziledar of the Irrigation Department by transfer and appointment to the post of officiating Naib Tehsildar is wholly contrary to the provisions of the relevant rules.
It is a different matter that the Commissioner ought to have given preference to the officials of one category over the other.
Merely because preference has not been given to the writ petitioners, who were Kanungos and had first to be promoted to the post of Naib Tehsildar before being appointed to fill the officiating vacancies, will not by itself render the appointments of Ziledars (GD Gaba and Ajaib Singh appellants) as officiating Naib Tehsildars by transfer wholly invalid and contrary to rules.
Apart from this, the instructions of the Government as contained in Annexure R-1 dated 1121981, issued by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Punjab, were to be taken into consideration and followed by the Commissioner of the Division.
We deem it appropriate to refer to these instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1), which may be reproduced for proper appreciation of the stand of the appellants :-  "PUNJAB GOVERNMENT (REVENUE DEPARTMENT) (REVENUE ESTABLISHMENT I BRANCH) To All the Commissioners of the Divisions in the Punjab State.
Memo No. 27/46/78-EII/2110 Chandigarh Dated the 1121981 Subject :- Promotion to the post of Naib Tehsildars from amongst the Kanungos and District Revenue Accountants etc.
Please refer to this Department Memo No. 824-EII-78/12742 dated 2061978 on the subjected noted above.
It was mentioned in the instructions referred to above that 85% vacancies falling to the share of `B' Class Naib Tehsildar candidates should be filled up by promotions from the cadre of Kanungos and the remaining 15% vacancies from the District Revenue Accountants, officials of Consolidation and Special Assessment Department etc. of the Tehsil.
It was further mentioned that no official of the Irrigation, Excise or Police establishment should be considered for promotion to the post of Naib Tehsildar.
3.
This matter has been reconsidered, it has been decided that henceforth the enlistment of `B' Class Naib Tehsildar candidates shall be made from the following categories of officials as below :- (i) from amongst the cadre of Kanungos, 80% (ii) from amongst the District Revenue Accountants, 10% (iii) from Assistant Consolidation Officers, 6% (iv) from Ziledars of Irrigation Department, 4% 4.
Other conditions contained in this Department Memo No. 825-EII- 78/12742 dated 2061979 shall remain the same.
5.
Necessary action to amend the Standing order No. 12 and Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932 is being taken separately.
In the meantime, you are requested to take action as per above mentioned decision.
6.
Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.
Sd/- Under Secretary (E) for Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Punjab."
14.
It may be pointed out that the Standing Order No. 12 are the executive instructions issued by the Financial Commissioner.
The instructions dated 1121981 (Annexure R1) have also been issued by the Financial Commissioner and in the nature of a Standing order.
Para 5 of the instructions, as quoted above, no doubt, said that necessary action to amend the Standing Order No. 12 and Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932 is being taken separately.
But at the same time, it did mention that in the meantime, these instructions are to be followed for taking action by the Commissioners of the Divisions in the State of Punjab.
The matter regarding the Standing Orders being followed by the Commissioners of the Divisions, came up for consideration before a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Naunihal Singh v. Janga Singh alias Jang Singh and others, 1975 PLJ 300, wherein it was observed in para 5 as under :-  "True, the Standing order issued by the Financial Commissioner or the rules contained in the Land Administration Manual may not have the status of law, but it had to be accepted that the same are worthy of affording guidance on the matters dealt by the same."
15.
Viewed from this angle, the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division was well within his jurisdiction to consider the appellants (Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba) Ziledars to fill up the posts of Officiating Naib Tehsildars by their transfer on a purely ad hoc basis and as a measure of stop-gap arrangement to fill up the leave vacancies.
It is not the case of the appellant/State and the Commissioner, Ferozepur division, Ferozepur as also of the appellants, Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba that these vacancies were to be considered in accordance with the provisions of the amended rules of 1984.
As a matter of fact, no reference to the rules of 1984 has been made in the written statement of the official respondents or in the writtenstatement of Shri GD Gaba/respondent No 4.
Therefore, it was not necessary for the learned Single Judge to test and examine the impugned order in the light of the Tehsildari Rules, 1984, as the same was not pleaded by any party to the case.
16.
Learned counsel for the appellants drew our attention to Annexure A/1 dated 1241982 and Annexure A-II dated 221984, annexed with the affidavit of Shri CL Bains, IAS, Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur.
By Annexure A-1, the impugned order dated 8121981 was modified and the appointments of Sarvshri GD Gaba and Ajaib Singh were made as officiating Naib Tehsildar (Agrarian) Abohar and Officiating Naib Tehsildar (Dev.
), (Bhatinda) respectively.
The order dated 221984, (Annexure AII) shows that Shri Guranditta Gabha, officiating Naib Tehsildar was accepted as B-Class Tehsildar Candidate on the Cadre strength of Ferozepur Division against the quota of Ziledars of the Irrigation Department subject to the decision of Special Leave Petition No. 1702/1983, pending in the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, Civil Writ Petition No. 4135 of 1982 pending in the Punjab and Haryana High Court and a civil suit pending in the Court of Seni or Sub Judge, Jullundur, Para 4 of the affidavit filed by Shri CL Bains, Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozpore, reads as under :-  "That respondent Nos. 3 and 4 (S/Sh.
Guran Ditta Gaba and Ajaib Singh in CWP No. 4135 of 1982) being Ziledars of the Irrigation Department were selected and appointed as officiating Naib Tehsildars, on purely ad hoc basis against the leave vacancies vide order dated the 8th December, 1981 of the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, whereby Shri Guran Ditta Gaba was shown at Serial No. 1 and Shri Ajaib Singh at serial No. 2 in the order of merit.
A copy of the modifed order dated 1241982 is at annexure A/1.
Respondents had challenged only original order of appointment of S/Sh.
Guran Ditta Gaba and Ajaib Singh and as such the Writ petition ought to have been dismissed on this score alone."
17.
Learned counsel for the appellants (Ajaib Singh and GD Gaba) referred to para 1 of the preliminary objections as contended in the written statement of respondent No. 4 and which reads as under :-  "That the order impugned by the petitioners has been modified vide order dated 12/1041983 issued by the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur and the petitioners have not challenged the modified order.
On this score alone the writ petition is liable to be dismissed."
He has further drawn our attention to the following averments made in para 6 of the said written statement :-  "............
The answering respondent was at the relevant time working as Ziledar in Irrigation Department and was posted at Abohar and consequently selected for the post of Naib Tehsildar (officiating).
The Government after seeing the work and conduct of the answering respondent has accepted the answering respondent as B-Class Naib Tehsildar candidate on the cadre strength of the Ferozepur Division against the quota of Ziledars of Irrigation Department."
Reference may be made to the contents of Annexure R-4/a, which reads as under :-  "ORDER Shri Guranditta Gaba, Officiating Naib Tehsildar is hereby accepted as B-Class Naib Tehsildar candidate on the cadre strength of Ferozepur Division against the quota of Ziledars of the Irrigation Department subject to the decision of Special Leave Petition No. 1702 of 1983 pending in the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, Civil Writ Petition No. 4135 of 1982 pending in the Punjab and Haryana High Court and Civil Suit pending in the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Jullundur.
Dated : Sd/-  Commissioner, Ferozepur Ferozepur, Division" the 2nd February, 1984 18.
The petitioners, it is relevant to note, despite coming to know of the modified order dated 1241982 and the order dated 221984 (Annexure R-4/1) did not seek the quashing of these orders by amending their writ petition.
The impugned order, thus, stood replace by the modified order (Annexure A1) and the same was required to be impugned inasmuch the quashing of the order Annexure P1 dated 8121981 would still leave the order (Annexure A1) intact.
19.
Apart from this, it is noteworthy that the petitioners (Kehar Singh and Joginder Singh) did not make any representation against the impugned order Annexure P1 to the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur.
The representation which has been referred to in the writ petition (Annexure P2) is in fact a representation made by the General Secretary of the Kanungos Association, Punjab, which cannot be treated to be a representation for and on behalf of the writ petitioners.
20.
After carefully examining the rival contentions of the parties from all possible angles, we find that the Commissioner Ferozepur Division was well within his jurisdiction under the rules to make appointment by transfer of the appellants (GD Gaba and Ajaib Singh), who were working as Ziledars, to the post of Officiating Naib Tehsildars on purely ad hoc basis to fill the vacancies and the impugned order of the their appointment does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
21.
As regards the stand of the writ petitioners for their right to be promoted to the post of officiating Naib Tehsildar in respect of the said officiating vacancies, the stand of the State of Punjab and the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur is that they cannot claim their right to the said leave vacancies.
They have referred to the explanation appended below Rule 12 of the Rules, 1932, which reads as under :-  "All posts of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars are selection posts and no body shall be deemed to have suffered the penalty of withholding of promotion by reasons of not having been appointed to fill in any such post.
Due representation has already been given to the Kanungos in the matter of promotion as Naib Tehsildars."
22.
It has been submitted that the writ petitioners did not file any replication controverting the said averment made.
The averments made in para 9 of the affidavit aforesaid would go to show that there were many Kanungos senior to respondent No. 2, who were to be considered for promotion as officiating Naib Tehsildars and in case respondent No. 2/Joginder Singh is promoted as officiating Naib Tehsildar, the claim of the persons senior to him shall be ignored and as such, the respondents No. 1 and 2, i.e. Kehar Singh and Joginder Singh could not be given promotion w.e.f.
8121981 on account of many Kanungos being senior to them were to be considered for promotion.
It was stated as a fact that respondent No. 1/Kehar Singh was promoted as officiating Naib Tehsildar vide order dated 2641987, keeping in view his seniority in the category of Kanungos.
23.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the considered view that the learned Single Judge was in error in allowing the writ petition and quashing the impugned order (Annexure P1) and issuing directions to the official respondents to consider the case of the writ petitioners for promotion to the said vacancies w.e.f.
8121981.
Resultantly, the appeals are allowed.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the costs shall be borne by the parties.
Appeals allowed.