Dr. Sarojnei Saksena, J - The petitioner has challenged his dismissal order dated 2511985 (Annexure P.8) and dismissal of his appeal dated 721986 (Annexure P.9)  2.
Facts of the case are that vide order Annexure P.1, the petitioner was appointed Chowkidar on 24.11.1965.
His services were confirmed vide order dated 20.8.1966 (Annexure P.2).
He was allowed to cross efficiency bar w.e.f.
121978 (Annexure P.3).
He was posted as a chowkidar in the office of District Forest Officer, Bhatinda.
On the intervening night 17-1881980 Government jeep No. PV-2645 was stolen and the First Information Report (Annexure P.4) was registered at Police Station Kotwali Bhatinda on 1881980.
The said jeep was later on recovered and challan was presented against the persons responsible for committing theft of this jeep.
The petitioner was suspended on 1881980, but was later on reinstated on 341981, though was not paid full wages of the period of suspension.
3.
The petitioner was served with a charge-sheet (Annexure P.5) vide letter No. 1899 dated 991980 by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda and an enquiry was ear marked to the Range Officer, Rampura.
The petitioner's contention is that he made several representations oral as well as written alleging that the Range Officer, Rampura, being Enquiry Officer, is not acceptable to him.
His request was turned down by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda.
Against that order, he filed an appeal before the Forest Conservator, Punjab at Patiala, (Annexure P.6) but before this appeal could be decided, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report.
During the pendency of the enquiry, the petitioner was, first of all, transferred to Rampura, then to Mansa and thereafter to Faridkot Division.
He received a Show-Cause Notice dated 27121984 but copy of the report of Enquiry Officer was not furnished to him.
He appeared before respondent No. 3 and there he was made to thumb mark on a typed paper and was assured orally that he would be let off with a warning, but to his chagrin after 18 days, he received the dismissal order (Annexure P.8).
He also filed departmental appeal before the Forest Conservator, Patiala, which was rejected vide order dated 721986 (Annexure P.9), which is a non-speaking order.
He applied for copy of the detailed dismissal order, but vide letters Annexures P.9 and P10, he was intimated that the copy of the dismissal order dated 721986 be obtained from the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot or Bhatinda.
4.
In the petition it is averred that the orders Annexures P.7 and P.8 are illegal, void, unjust, arbitrary, biased, prejudicial and against the principles of natural justice and equity.
Petitioner is illiterate.
The officer responsible for the theft has taken undue advantage of the petitioner's illiteracy and obtained his thumb impression on a paper without disclosing its contents to him at the time when the First Information Report (Annexure P.4) was lodged.
Copies of the statements of the witnesses, copies of the documents relied on by the department were not supplied to him as required by Note under rule 8(II)(ii) of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
On the first date of hearing of this enquiry on 26121980 the petitioner requested in writing for transfer of the enquiry out of Bhatinda Range Division as the petitioner was apprehending that he will not get justice from the Enquiry Officer, who is subordinate to the punishing authority.
Without waiting for the disposal of the criminal case and the decision of petitioner's appeal filed in connection with rejection of his prayer of transfer of the departmental enquiry to another division, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report.
Copy of this report and the statement of the findings of Punishing authority were not supplied to him along with `Show Cause Notice'.
It is also averred that the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot, was not competent to award punishment as the alleged theft took place at Bhatinda; charge-sheet was served by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda; Enquiry Officer was of Bhatinda Division and the report was furnished by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda.
The petitioner was not heard on the matter of punishment.
He had unblemished record of 20 years' service.
Hence, on all these counts, it is prayed that the orders Annexures P.8.
and P.9 be quashed, as they are passed with a biased mind and without application of mind.
It is also prayed that full pay of suspension period and other benefits be ordered to be paid to him.
5.
In the reply submitted by respondent 1 to 3, it is submitted that when the theft was committed, the First Information Report was lodged and being chowkidar as he was responsible for the theft of jeep, he was rightly suspended and an enquiry was initated against him.
He failed to join the enquiry.
Copy of the enquiry report was supplied to him along with Show Cause Notice.
He gave his statement before the Punishing authority; admitted his guilt and thereafter the order dated 2511985 (Annexure P-8) was passed.
The dismissal order is legal, just and proper.
Due procedure was followed strictly.
it is in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
It is also denied that the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot at Muktsar was not competent to pass dismissal order.
it is averred that since the petitioner was posted in that division, the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot at Muktsar was competent to pass the dismissal order.
Petitioner's appeal was also rightly dismissed.
6.
The petitioner's learned counsel submitted that right from 1881980 the petitioner was alleging that the jee was not kept in the garage of the office, but was at the residence of the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda from where it was stolen.
He is illiterate person.
He was made to thumb mark a piece of paper, the contents of which were not read over to him.
Even in the departmental enquiry, he was consistently alleging that since the jeep was stolen from the house of the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda, the Enquiry Officer, Rampura, being subordinate to Divisional Officer Bhatinda, cannot decide the enquiry impartially, but his prayer to transfer the departmental enquiry from the forest division Bhatinda to another forest division, was firstly declined by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda and later on when his appeal against that order was pending, the departmental enquiry was hurriedly conceded.
On that count, he did not join the enquiry.
The learned counsel submitted that these facts are evident from the copy of the transfer application (Annexure P-6).
Thus, his contention is that the whole of the enquiry was conducted with a bias against him as the Enquiry Officer was sub- ordinate to the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda, who was also a party in the matter in dispute, but his prayer for transfer was declined by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda and before his appeal could be decided by the Forest Conservator, Patiala, the departmental enquiry was concluded and report was submitted.
7.
Petitioner's learned counsel relying on M/s. Sutlej Cotton Mills Limited and others v. Rajasthan Textile Mazdoor Panchayat, Bhawani Mandi and others, 1993(4) SLR 243, vehemently argued that this Court can reappreciate the evidence recorded in a domestic enquiry; conclusion in respect of allegations of misconduct and to examine whether the punishment is justified or not.
He submitted that for a minor lapse, punishment of dismissal from service is utterly disproportionate.
8.
Respondents' learned counsel submitted that once the disciplinary authority on the basis of findings of enquiry report has passed the order of dismissal against the petitioner, the Civil Court should not substitute its own view on the nature of punishment.
He also submitted that the petitioner was the Chowkidar; he was negligent in his duty; therefore, the jeep was stolen from the garage of the office and hence, he was rightly suspended and charge-sheeted.
In the departmental enquiry, despite various notices sent to him he declined to join and therefore the departmental enquiry proceeded ex parte and finally on the evidence adduced in the departmental enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report.
On the basis of this report, the dismissal order was rightly passed by the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot at Muktsar.
He has placed reliance on The State of Punjab and others v. Bakhshish Singh, JT 1997(5) SC 633 : 1997(3) SCT 401.
9.
Respondents' learned counsel also submitted that the petitioner was appointed by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda; therefore the Divisional Forest Officer was competent to pass the dismissal order.
It is not material that the petitioner was appointed by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda and his dismissal order was passed by the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot at Muktsar.
10.
So far as the last contention is concerned, it has no substance.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed by the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda, but the dismissal order was passed by an officer of the rank of Divisional Forest Officer, may be of Faridkot at Muktsar.
If the petitioner would have been dismissed by an officer below the rank of Divisional Forest Officer, the dismissal order could have been challenged on that ground.
Hence, the above contention is not sustainable.
11.
So far as the point of disproportionate punishment is concerned, it can be looked into only when the Court considered that the departmental enquiry was held impartially, in consonance with the statutory rules and principles of natural justice.
The petitioner was a government servant belonging to lower echelons of Class IV service.
From the documents placed on record, it is evident that he was never apprised of the right of the delinquent to take help of another government servant before commencement of the enquiry which amounts to denial of reasonable opportunity.
For holding this view reliance is placed on Shri Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh others, 1983(1) S.L.R.
626 wherein their Lordships held that if the delinquent is not informed by the authority of his right to take help of another government servant before commencement of the enquiry, the fact that the delinquent did not seek permission for appointment of another government servant for representing his case is a highly technical approach not conducive to a just and fair adjudication of the charges and it amounts to denial of reasonable opportunity.
12.
So far as the case relied on by the respondent's counsel is concerned, it has no bearing on the facts of this case.
That was a case in which the disciplinary authority on the basis of findings of dereliction of non- reporting for duty dismissed him.
The respondent in that case was constable in police service of the State of Punjab.
He remained absent from duty for a long period without any leave.
On that basis, he was dismissed from service.
When he challenged his dismissal in the civil suit, the trial Court dismissed the suit, but in appeal, the first appellate court remanded the matter for reconsideration to the trial Court on the point of punishment.
The High court dismissed the Second Appeal.
The Apex Court held that....``the appellate Court ought not to have interfered with the decree of the trial Court.
The High Court dismissed it without application of mind and ignoring the settled legal principle.
It is for the disciplinary authority to pass appropriate order.''
13.
In this case, from transfer application (Annexure P-6) it is evident that right from the very first date, the petitioner was clamouring for impartial enquiry.
His contention was that the jeep was stolen from the kothi of the Divisional Forest Officer and his involvement in the matter is unjustified.
He prayed that as the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda, is a party in the matter in dispute and the enquiry by his subordinate will only serve his ends and the enquiry officer, being subordinate to the Divisional Forest Officer, cannot go beyond and apart the wishes of Divisional Forest Officer and therefore, on this allegation he prayed that the enquiry be transferred out of the forest range, Bhatinda.
It is pertinent to mention that no doubt this application was presented to the Range Officer (Enquiry Officer, Rampura), but the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda should not have decided this application, then the petitioner preferred an appeal against the dismissal order of his transfer petition and when it was pending before the Forest Conservator, Patiala, the Enquiry Officer should not have proceeded with the departmental enquiry proceedings.
14.
It is common feature that the official vehicles are some time taken by the officers at their residence in the late hours of the office and remain at their residence during the night and holidays.
Petitioner has averred that 15 to 17th August, 1980, were holidays.
Hence, it could not have been said that the contention raised by the petitioner that the said jeep was stolen from the residence of the Divisional Forest Officer was not required to be enquired into or it was such an allegation which entailed brushing aside forthwith.
From the very outset, the petitioner was submitting that since the jeep was stolen from the residence of the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda, his involvement in the matter is obvious and the Enquiry Officer, being subordinate to him, may not pass any order against his wishes, but despite his transfer application, by departmental enquiry was concluded by the Range Officer, Rampura, subordinate to Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda and as during the pendency of the enquiry he was transferred to Faridkot Range Division, the dismissal order on the basis of the enquiry report was passed by the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot at Muktsar.
15.
The Apex Court in Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2386, has observed :-  ``.......It is the essence of a judgment that it is made after due observance of the judicial process; that the Court or Tribunal passing it observes, at least the minimal requirements of natural justice is composed of impartial persons acting fairly and without bias and in good faith.
A judgment which is the result of bias or want of impartiality is a nullity and the trial ``coram non judice.''
Their Lordships further observed:-  ``As to the tests of the likelihood of bias what is relevant is the reasonableness of the apprehension in that regard in the mind of the party.
The proper approach for the Judge is not to look at his own mind and ask himself, however, honestly, ``am I biased?
'', but to look at the mind of the party before him.
Thus tested the conclusion becomes inescapable that, having regard to the antecedent events, the participation of officer in the CourtsMartial rendered the proceedings coram non judice.''
16.
The above enumerated facts are not disputed by the respondents.
Respondents have relied on letter (Annexure R-1).
About this letter also, the petitioner has averred that when he appeared before the Divisional Forest Officer, Faridkot at Muktsar, he was assured that he will be let off with a warning and he was made to sign on a blank paper.
The words used in this letter are very relevant....''and requested that he may be excused of the lapses committed by him.
Government jeep was stolen from the Bhatinda Division Office, during my duty.
That I could not know of it that earlier in the statement/complaint it was mentioned that the jeep was stolen from the residence of the D.F.O.
It had been written due to party faction.
I could not understand being illiterate.
My thumb impression got affixed.....'' From these lines it is evident that he was made to thumb mark on this letter.
From this letter also it is evident that this point was in dispute whether the jeep was stolen from the residence of the Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda or from the Division Office.
Therefore the petitioner was praying that the enquiry be transferred to another forest division.
But nobody heard him.
The Divisional Forest Officer, Bhatinda should not have decided such a transfer petition himself at it is settled principle of administration of justice that no man can be judge of his own cause.
But he dismissed petitioner's transfer petition and before petitioner's appeal against that order could be decided by Conservator Forest, enquiry officer submitted his report in hot haste.
Thus, the enquiry was conducted with a clear bias and on this count also it stands vitiated.
17.
Since the departmental enquiry is hereby held to be vitiated because of the bias and non-compliance or principles of natural justice, it is not necessary for me go into the question whether the punishment is proportionate to the guilt or not.
Accordingly, the petition is hereby allowed.
Orders (Annexures P.8 and P.9) are hereby quashed.
Petitioner is entitled to be reinstated and to get his pay and other benefits for all this period.
The department may hold a fresh enquiry against the petitioner on the basis of the said charge-sheet.
Petition allowed.