Tarun Chatterjee, J - This appeal has been preferred against the judgment and decree passed by Sri N K Batyabal, Additional Distt.
Judge, 3rd Court at Murshidabad in Title Appeal No. 194 of 1977 affirming the judgment and decree dated 15th September, 1977 passed by Sri Anup Das, Munsif 2nd Court at Kandi in Title suit No. 236 of 1970.
The appellant as a plaintiff instituted the suit for permanent injunction upon a declaration that the resolution of the Managing Committee of Margram High School, Kandi in the district of Murshidabad (hereinafter referred to as the 'school') taken on 19th September, 1970 terminating the service of the appellant as an assistant teacher of the school was void, illegal and inoperative and for other incidental reliefs.
2.
The case made out by the appellant in the plaint may be briefly stated as follows :-  On 2nd December, 1967 the appellant was appointed as an Assistant Teacher of the school of which the respondent Nos. 1 to 12 were the members of the Managing Committee of the School.
On 24th March, 1970 the Managing Committee of the school passed a resolution confirming the appellant as an assistant teacher of the school.
The appellant claimed in his plaint that he also became a permanent assistant teacher of the school by working there continuously for more that 3 years.
A resolution was passed by the Managing Committee of the school on 19th of September, 1970 terminating the service of the appellant with effect from 15th November, 1970.
In the plaint the aforesaid order of termination was challenged as illegal and invalid and without jurisdiction.
3.
The respondents filed a joint written statement wherein they categorically denied the allegations made by the appellant in his plaint.
In the written statement the respondents alleged that the resolution of the Managing Committee of the School terminating the service of the appellant was legal and valid and that the Managing Committee had the discretionary power to pass such order of termination against the appellant.
4.
The Trial Court after taking evidence and after considering the materials produced by the parties in support of their respective cases dismissed the suit by holding that the resolution passed by the Managing Committee of the School terminating the service of the appellant was legal and valid and, therefore, the same was binding upon the appellant.
In appeal, the Appellate Court affirmed the decision of the Trial Court.
Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid two concurrent judgments, this second appeal has been preferred by the appellant.
Before the Appellate Court only one question was raised by the appellant.
The question was that the termination of service of the appellant could not arise prior to taking of approval from the Board.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant before the Appellate Court that under rule 28(8) of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969 framed under the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963, the Managing Committee of an aided or unaided institution shall have the power, subject to the prior approval of the Board, to remove or dismiss the permanent and/or temporary teachers and other employees of such institutions.
Therefore, on behalf of the appellant it was contended that since admittedly prior approval of the Board was not taken before taking such resolution terminating the service of the appellant the order of termination was absolutely illegal and without jurisdiction and therefore, the appellant was entitled to a declaration that he was entitled to continue as an Assistant Teacher of the School.
The Appellate Court, on consideration of the aforesaid rule came to a conclusion that in view of the second sentence of sub-rule (8) of the Rule 28 which says that before passing an order of removal or dismissal of service by any Managing Committee of an aided or unaided institution, the Managing Committee of such institution shall first draw up formal proceedings and issue charge sheet to the teacher or the employee concerned and offer him reasonable facilities for defending himself, and as the service of the appellant was terminated not on charge framed against him but for some other reasons, it must be held that it was a termination of service and not a dismissal or removal from service.
In the above view of the matter the Appellate Court dismissed the appeal of the plaintiff/appellant.
5.
Before me, Mr. Chatterjee appearing on behalf of the Respondent contended that the suit for declaration and injunction filed by the appellant was not maintainable in law even in a case of termination of service as held by the Appellate Court.
According to the Appellate Court, the termination of service of the appellant cannot come within the purview of rule 28, sub-rule (8) of the said rules as the termination of service was not made in the case of appellant on the basis of any charge framed against him or by holding any enquiry of such charges.
According to the Appellate Court, since the termination was made simply on the basis of the resolution of the Managing Committee of the School which was not based on any charges, it was a simple case of termination of service and therefore, approval of the Board of such termination was not necessary in terms of Rule 28 sub-rule (8) of the said rules.
On such reasonings, the Appellate Court held that such termination was not illegal and invalid and without jurisdiction.
In support of the contention that the suit for declaration of this nature is not maintainable in law, Mr. Chatterjee referred to a decision of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1976 SC 888 : 1976 Lab IC 576 Vaish Degree College v. Laxmi Narayan and contended that as the order of termination of service of the appellant was passed, the appellant was not entitled to a declaration that he was still in service and therefore, the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to grant a declaration and injunction as prayed for by the appellant in the suit.
Mr. Sarkar on the other hand for the appellant contested the submissions of Mr. Chatterjee and contended that once it was established that the termination of service of the appellant was invalid inasmuch as the approval of the Board was not obtained before such order was passed, the declaration that the appellant continued in service and injunction as prayed for must be granted as a matter of course.
Before proceeding further, it may be noted that on behalf of the appellant Mr. Chatterjee did not contest that in view of Rule 28 sub-rule (8) of the Rules it was mandatory on the part of the Managing Committee to get the resolution for removal of the appellant approved by the Board and he also could not dispute that such approval was not taken by the Managing Committee of the School.
As noted hereinabove, he only contended relying on the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court that the appellant was not entitled to a declaration that he was still in service and therefore, he submitted that the civil court had no jurisdiction to grant a declaration and injunction as prayed for by the appellant in the suit.
In the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court at paragraph 17 at page 897 the Supreme Court laid down the principle that a contract of personal service cannot ordinarily be specifically enforced and the Court normally would not give a declaration that the contract subsists and the employee, even after having been removed from service can be deemed to be in service against the will and consent of the employer and that this rule, however, was subject to three well recognised exceptions :  (1) Where a public servant is sought to be removed from service in contravention of the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
(2) Where a worker is sought to be reinstated on being dismissed under the Industrial Dispute Law, and  (3) Where a statutory body acts in breach of violation of the mandatory provisions of the statute.
6.
So far as this case is concerned, it is not disputed by the learned counsel for the parties that the exceptions mentioned in (1) and (2) cannot be made applicable to the case of the appellant.
7.
So far as the exception No. (3) is concerned, I am of the view that such an exception shall not also be applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
It is not in dispute that the school is either an aided or an unaided institution.
In the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, it was held that before an institution can be said to be a statutory body, it must be created by or under statute and owes its existence to a statute, and this must be the primary thing which has got to be established.
A distinction was made in that decision between an institution which is not created by or under a statute but is governed by certain statutory provisions for the proper maintenance and administration of the institution.
It was also observed in paragraph 9 of the said decision that there have been a number of institutions which though not created by or under any statute have adopted certain statutory provisions but that by itself, in the opinion of the Supreme Court, sufficient to clothe the institution with a statutory character.
Keeping this principle of the Supreme Court laid down in the aforesaid decision in mind, I am of the view that the Managing Committee of the School in the instant case cannot be said to be a statutory body as it was not created by or under any statute or owes its existence to any statute but only it was governed by certain statutory provisions for proper maintenance and administration of the school.
Following the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Vaish Degree College v. Lakshmi Narayan (supra) the Supreme Court in the case of Dipak Kumar v. Director of Public Instruction, AIR 1987 SC 1422 at page 1427 : 1987 Lab IC 1012, held that since the Executive Committee of the College was not a statutory body as it had not been created by or under the statute and it did not owe its existence to a statute, the teacher would only be entitled to a degree for damages even if her dismissal was wrongful and not to an order of reinstatement or a declaration that notwithstanding the termination of services she continued to be in service.
Therefore, in my view, the Managing Committee of the School cannot be said to be a statutory body and the present case, therefore, does not fall within the excepted categories mentioned above and accordingly the appellant was not entitled to any declaration and injunction.
That apart it would appear from the aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court that even assuming that a suit of this nature was maintainable in law even then it was held that in such types of suits such reliefs for declaration and injunction could not be granted as under provisions of Specific Relief Act such reliefs are purely discretionary and the plaintiff cannot claim it as of right.
8.
Mr. Sarkar appearing on behalf of the appellant has placed reliance on a Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of Purna Das v. Warren Industrial Ltd, 95 CWN 1022 : 1992 Lab IC 1326.
On reliance of this decision Mr. Sarkar submitted that the Civil Court was entitled to grant a decree for declaration and injunction.
In my view, this decision does not support the contention of Mr. Sarkar.
But it really supports the contention of Mr. Chatterjee.
In paragraph 9 of the said decision it has been clearly stated that where there is a contractual relationship, there must be some special public law element before the Court for granting relief otherwise than by way of damages.
That being the position, I am unable to agree with the argument of Mr. Sarkar and accordingly, the argument of Mr. Sarkar is not accepted.
9.
But there is another aspect of this matter.
In Deepak Kumar v. Director of Public Instruction (supra) it has been held that although the plaintiff was not entitled to a declaration that he continued to be in service, but he was entitled to a decree for damages.
In the said decision of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court however, granted a decree for damages notwithstanding the conclusion that the suit for declaration and injunction was not maintainable in law.
It is now well-settled that in an appropriate case appropriate relief can be granted by moulding the prayer of the plaintiff.
In this case admittedly the appellant was an approved teacher of the School.
The dismissal of his service was made long back, that is, in the year 1970.
Considering the fact that the appellant has been litigating for the last 26 years and also considering the fact that the order of dismissal was passed without approval of the Board, I am inclined to give some reliefs to the appellant instead of brusque dismissal of the appeal on account of legal impediments for granting relief of declaration of his continuance in service.
In the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court directed 3 years' salary and allowances to the appellant at the rates prevalent when the service was terminated.
Following this decision I direct the respondents to pay 3 years' salary and allowances to the appellant at the rates prevalent when his service was terminated in the year 1970.
This amount, however, shall be paid by the respondent to the appellants within 3 months from the date of supplying a certified copy of the judgment and decree passed in this second appeal.
10.
For the reasons foresaid, the appeal is dismissed subject to the modification and/or variation of the judgments of the courts below, as made hereinabove.
11.
This judgment, however, shall not stand in the way of the appellant from approaching any other appropriate forum for redressal of his grievances in respect of the order of termination passed by the Managing Committee of the school in question.
12.
Before parting with this judgment one fact needs to be stated.
This appeal was disposed of by a judgment delivered on 27th of November, 1995 in the absence of the learned counsel for the parties.
I perused the papers and the judgments of the courts below and on consideration of the materials on record, I had set aside the judgments and decrees of the courts below and the suit was decreed.
The matter was mentioned when the judgment was not signed.
On mentioning I recalled my judgment and gave liberty to the parties to argue the matter afresh.
Thereafter the matter was again reheard and is now disposed of by me.
13.
Office is directed to supply the certified xerox copies of this judgment to the learned Advocate for the respective parties within a week from the date of application for obtaining the same.
14.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.