GS Singhvi, J - On 26th day of January, 1950, the people gave to themselves the Constitution of India which represents a fine synthesis and the rights and duties of the State and the citizens.
The Preamble to the Constitution pronounces :-  ``We, the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist Secular Democratic Republic and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;' EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation.''
2.
The word ``Socialist'' was introduced in the Constitution by the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976.
Part-III of the Constitution contains various provisions relating to the fundamental rights of the citizens and the individuals.
It also contains several prohibitive injunctions.
The provisions of Part-IV contain directive principles of State policy which are fundamental for the governance of the country.
The State has been obligated to enact laws for improving the lot of the weaker sections of the society and the rural population.
Part IV-A enumerates the fundamental duties of every citizen of India.
In the words of KK Mathew, J (Keshavananda Bharti v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1461) :-  ``....The object of the people in establishing the Constitution was to promote justice, social and economic; liberty and equality.
The modus operandi to achieve these objective is set out in Parts III and IV of the Constitution .............. As I look at the provisions of Parts III and IV, I feel no doubt, that the basic object of conferring freedoms on individuals is the ultimate achievement of the ideals set out in Part IV...........  May I say that the directive principles of State Policy should not be permitted to become `a mere rope of sand.'
If the State fails to create conditions in which the fundamental freedoms can be enjoyed by all, the freedom of the few will be at the mercy of the many and then all freedoms will vanish.''
The addition of Part IV-A emphasises the need of the day, namely, that every citizen must do his duty towards the nation as well as the fellow citizens because unless every one does his duty, the ideals of justice and equality can never be achieved.
Article 51-A enjoins upon every citizen to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem; to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom; to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; ..........to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;.......to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.
What has been incorporated in the form of Part IV-A was implicit in the Preamble Part III and Part IV of the Constitution because fundamental rights of the citizens could become meaningful only if the State and other citizens would do their duty to bring about real equality between the people belonging to different segments of the Indian society.
3.
Education for all is one of the constitutional goals.
It is also one of the imperative social duties of the State as envisaged under Articles 45 and 46 of the Constitution of India.
In order to achieve the constitutional goal of equality and also to fulfil its social obligations towards the citizens, the State has established a hierarchy of educational institutions and an endeavour is always made to engage qualified and competent persons to teach the students.
In the pre-independence era and first two decades of independence, teaching was considered to be one of the most pious duties.
Members of teaching community were treated with reverence and respect in the society.
However, things have dramatically changed during the last two decades.
The advent of materialism has changed our value system.
The profession of teaching has not remained unaffected by the see saw changes which have taken place in our social values.
The evil of commercialisation has spread its tentacles in the field of education.
The mad race among youngsters of the present day to get job in Government services and its agencies has largely been responsible for the mushroom growth of fake institutions which award degrees/diplomas/certificates and the same are used for getting into Government service.
Of late, there has been growing realisation among right thinking people that unless immediate measures are taken to curb the menace of fake degrees, diplomas/certificates etc., the goal of education will be completely frustrated.
With this object in mind, the University Grants Commission (for short `The UGC') has taken steps to identify the bogus institutions.
The Courts have also taken a strict view in the matters in which employment is sought on the basis of such fake degrees, diplomas/certificates etc.
The present cases are illustrative of the attempt made by the petitioners to secure employment on the basis of such types of degrees and diplomas.
The petitioners have prayed for directing the official respondents to consider them for selection and appoint them as Hindi Teachers by recognising qualification of Shiksha Vishard/Language Teachers Course (OT) from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad.
4.
In order to decide whether any relief deserves to be granted to the petitioners, it is appropriate to take notice of some of the facts:  C.W.P.
No. 16320 of 1996 5.
Petitioner-Ram Bhagat and others have passed Matriculation examination from the Board of School Education, Bhiwani, Parbhakar from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, and Shiksha Vishard/Language Teachers Course from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad.
All of them got themselves registered for employment in the services of the State of Haryana.
Other petitioners who have also passed Shiksha Vishard/Language Teachers Course from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad have been registered with different employment exchanges in Haryana.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the respondent Nos. 5 to 8 have acted illegally because they did not sponsor the names of the petitioners for recruitment as Hindi Teachers in response to the requisitions sent by the Education Department and this has resulted in violation of their right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The plea of the petitioners is that in view of the instructions issued by the Government vide circular dated 1831975 (annexure P-3) and 1661979 (annexure P-6) read with letter dated 261984 (annexure P-7), Shiksha Vishard Examination passed by the petitioners from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Allahabad must be treated as recognised for the purpose of employment in the service of the Government of Haryana and the decision contained in letter No. 956/Coord/4 dated 1741995 (annexure P-8) cannot adversely affect their right of consideration.
6.
The respondents have contested that writ petition on the premise that Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Allahabad has not been recognised either by the Government of India or by the Government of Haryana and the petitioners cannot be treated eligible for recruitment as Hindi Teachers because they do not fulfil the minimum qualifications prescribed by the competent authority.
The respondents have further stated that Shiksha Vishard Examination has not been treated as equivalent to Hindi Language Teachers Course conducted by the Education Department of the Government of Haryana.
C.W.P.
No. 2241 of 1997 7.
Petitioner-Suresh Kumar has passed Matriculation Examination and OT from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Allahabad.
His name was sponsored by the Employment Exchange, Hissar, for recruitment as Hindi Teacher.
He was interviewed by the District Education Officer, Hissar, but the respondents refused to appoint him on the ground that he does not possess the minimum qualifications prescribed by the Government.
The written-statement filed by the respondents is similar to the one filed in C.W.P.
No. 16320 of 1996.
C.W.P.
No. 3142 of 1997 8.
Balwan Singh and 17 others have filed this petition with the grievance that the respondents have failed to consider their candidature for selection and appointment as Hindi Teachers in complete disregard of the judgments of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 4038 of 1984 `Sachidanand v. State of Haryana and others decided on 23.1.1985 and C.W.P.
No. 7002 of 1994 `Surinder Kumar Sharma v. State of Haryana and others' decided on 2191994.
C.W.P.
No. 3163 of 1997 9.
Raj Kumar and seven others, who are petitioners in this petition, have sought the intervention of the Court to nullify the decision of the respondents not to consider them for appointment as Hindi Teachers on the ground that the examination of Shiksha Vishard which the petitioners have passed from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Allahabad has not been recognised by the Government of Haryana.
The grounds on which the petitioners have questioned the legality of the decision of the respondents are identical to the grounds raised in C.W.P.
No. 16320 of 1996.
C.W.P.
No. 6629 of 1997 10.
The case of Dev Raj is more or less identical to the case set up by other petitioners.
It is, therefore, not necessary to set out the detailed facts of this case.
Suffice it to say that this petitioner would succeed or fail along with other writ petitioners.
11.
On 17101996, notice of motion was ordered to be issued in C.W.P.
No. 16320 of 1996.
The official respondents were also directed to provisionally interview the petitioners for selection as Hindi Teachers.
However, they were directed not to declare the result of the interview.
Similar directions were again given to the official respondents on 19111996.
On 2721997, that writ petition was admitted for hearing.
However, when other similar petitions were listed for hearing, the Court directed that all the cases be listed together.
This is how C.W.P.
No. 16320 of 1996 has been placed before the Division Bench.
12.
After the arguments were heard on 2131997, the respondents No. 1 and 2 were directed to institute a thorough enquiry into the genuineness of the degrees/diplomas/marks sheets/certificates issued by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, and/or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad because it was felt that many candidates have secured such degrees/diplomas/certificates on the basis of fake examinations conducted at some centres being run within the State of Haryana.
The Court directed respondent No. 1 to appoint a committee headed by an officer not below the rank of Joint Director, Secondary Education, Haryana.
The committee was directed to make a thorough investigation into the working of the examination centres within the State of Haryana on behalf of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Allahabad and/or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad and similar other institutions.
13.
In compliance of the directions of the Court, a committee consisting of Sh. SK Joshi, Additional Director (Enquiry), Directorate of Secondary Education, Haryana, and Shri Har Gobind Arora, HES (II), Senior Specialist, State Council of Educational Research Training, Haryana, Gurgaon was appointed to find the modus operandi of granting degrees/diplomas/marks sheets/certificates of Shiksha Vishard, a Language Teachers Course being run by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Paryag, Allahabad.
In compliance of the order of the Government, the committee visited Allahabad and made a detailed enquiry into the working of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad/Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad.
The committee found that Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, was founded in the year 1910 by Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya and the institution known as Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad is being run by Shri Shridhar Shastri from 188, Bahadur Ganj, Allahabad.
The committee noted that Hindi Shitya Sammelan, Prayag, 12 Sammelan Marg Allahabad is a society registered under the Registration of Societies Act, 1860.
The committee also met Sh. Prabhat Shastri, Pradhan Mantri, Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, and requested him to give clarifications on the following points :  ``(i) Whether this examination has been recognised by National Council of Teacher Education (NCTE).
The Parliament enacted an Act (No. 73 of 1993) to provide for the establishment of NCTE with a view to achieving planned and co-ordinated development of the teacher education system throughout the country, the regulation and proper maintenance or norms and standards in the teacher education system and for matters connected therewith.
Under the Act, it is compulsory for an institution to apply for recognition of a teacher education course being run on or after 17 August, 1995.
(ii) Copy of the curriculum.
(iii) List of examination centres being run in the State of Haryana.
(iv) Conduct rules of examinations.
(v) Eligibility conditions for admission.
(vi) Yearwise gazette.
(vii) Date of start of admission and the last date''.
14.
In reply to the letter of the committee, Sh. Parbhat Shastri informed that the correspondence was going on with NCTE for recognition of the degree (Shiksha Vishard).
The committee also examined the candidates who have procured Shiksha Vishard degree from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Allahabad.
Most of them failed to give the names of papers offered by them and the contents thereof.
Some could not even tell the names of the examination centres and the number of papers offered by them.
15.
With regard to the examination centres, the committee recorded the following observations :  ``The committee has come to know that there are numerous examination centres spread all over the State who attract the children to get Shiksha Vishard and other degrees of Hindi Shitya Sammelan, Prayag/Allahabad.
Out of these, committee visited 10 centres in a short span of time situated at Hissar, Bhiwani, Chiria (Bhiwani), Charkhi Dadri (Bhiwani), Ambala Cantt.
and Shahbad Markanda.
Most of these centres are housed in single room or in the residences.
They charge a lump-sum amount of Rs. 1,500/- to Rs. 6,000/- depending upon the economic status and the requirements of the candidates.
Centres in-charges are not well qualified for the coaching of Shiksha Visharad students.
No high school is attached to any of the centres for the class-room teaching practice of the so-called examinees.
They receive question papers, date-sheet and answer sheets from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag/Allahabad.
Afterwards they run their centres independently.
They give full surety to the candidates to get through the examination by securing good marks.
They say that cow-herds come to us and we get them the certificates procured.
Though two colleges (annexures C) have advertised their admission notices and the last date for admission is 3041997, yet they have not been able to muster even a single admission so far.
S.C.E.R.T declares the result of entrance test for admission in OT (Hindi) in October.
Candidates who cannot qualify come to these centres for procuring these degrees.
The committee collected two copies of date-sheets (one printed by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad and other by the local newspaper `Rashtriya Shiksha Darpan').
The two date-sheets differ altogether indicating that the centre in-charge has changed the date sheet of his own (see annexure D).
In the same newspaper at page-4, the centre in-charge has given special information for inviting the candidates for admission with late fee.
There is no mention of class-room teaching practice paper in the date sheet while the marksheet shows the marks obtained by the examinees in teaching practice paper.
Centre in-charges use every means of foul play and liberal assistance is provided to the examinees during the conduct of examination.
To attract the students, the decisions of Courts made in favour of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag/Allahabad were also displayed by Rashtriya Degree College, Hissar.
Finally the committee is of the opinion that Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag/Allahabad are doing dis-service to the cause of education, especially Hindi, by issuing such certificates through a network of agents throughout the country.''
16.
Annexure `A' appended with the report of the committee is a copy of the letter dated July 24, 1993, written by Deputy Registrar (Academic) to the Principal, District Institute of Education and Training, Gurgaon.
Annexure-A2 is a copy of the letter dated 23.7.1993 written by Superintendent (Academic), Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, to the Principal of District Institute of Education and Training, Gurgaon.
These two letters are also reproduced below for reference purposes :  ``Kurukshetra UniversityKurukshetra-132 119(Haryana) No. ACM.II/222/22784 REGISTRAR (ACADEMIC)  Dated July 24, 1993 To  The Principal,  District Institute of Education and Training.
Gurgaon.
Sub : Supply of Information.
Dear Sir,  Kindly refer to your letter No. Steno-93/667-68 dated 21st July, 1993 on the subject cited above.
It is intimated that Uttama (Sahitya Rattan) Examination of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad was recognised by this University as equivalent to its Prabhakar Examination w.e.f.
2451984.
After the recognition was granted to the above examination, this University was facing a difficulty in deciding the eligibility of the concerned students on one or the other reasons.
On enquiry from the University Grants Commission, New Delhi, the Under Secretary, of the UGC vide his letter dated 27101988 informed this University that Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, has neither been established by a Central or State Act nor has been declared as deemed to be a University under Section 3 of the UGC Act; as such it is not empowered to award its own degrees in terms of the provisions contained under Section 22 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
The Academic Council of this University in its meeting held on 2071966 has decided that the examinations conducted by Institutions which are not universities or which do not have the status of a University under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, be not recognised.
In view of the information received from the University Grants Commission, New Delhi, and the decision of the Academic Council, this University decided that the examinations conducted by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, which is neither a University nor deemed to be University be de-recognised with effect from 10.1.1992.
The photo copies supplied by you vide your letter under reference are returned herewith.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/-  Deputy Registrar (Academic)''.
``MAHARSHI DAYANAND UNIVERSITY ROHTAK.
No. AC-III/95/124/10069 Dated: 23.7.1993 To  The Principal,  District Institute of Education and Training,  Gurgaon.
Sub: Supply of Information.
Sir,  Kindly refer to your letter No. Steno-93/667-68 dated Gurgaon, 21st July, 1993, on the subject cited above.
I am desired to inform you that none of the examinations of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad and Prayag Institutions has been recognised by this University.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- Superintendent (Academic) For REGISTRAR''.
The above narration shows that Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, and/or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, have neither been established under an Act of the Parliament or of the State Legislature nor have they been recognised by Kurukshetra University or Maharshi Dayanand University.
The so-called examination centres being run in the State of Haryana appear to be bogus.
As per the committee, they are being run in single room or in residences and the students are charged between Rs. 1,500/- and Rs. 6,000/-.
These centres are not qualified for coaching Shiksha Vishard students.
They receive question papers etc. from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, but thereafter the centres are run independently and full sureties are given to the candidates to get through the examination by securing good marks.
It can thus be said that the examinations conducted at these centers are totally farce and the degrees/diplomas/certificates etc. awarded by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, and/or Hindi Shitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, on the basis of such examinations cannot but be treated as bogus.
On the basis of such degrees etc., the petitioners or any other candidate cannot claim eligibility for the purpose of appointment of Hindi Teacher.
17.
Before completing this part of the judgment, we may refer to the decision of the High Court in Damyanti v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 966.
In that case, the Supreme Court considered the constitutional validity of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Act, 1962, and held that the said Act was violative of Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
After that no statute was enacted by the Legislature of Uttar Pradesh conferring statutory status on Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad.
Thus, it is not possible to hold that Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, and/or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, is a body created by statute and, therefore, the degrees/diplomas/certificates etc. awarded by it should be treated as recognised for the purpose of appointment in the service of the Government of Haryana.
18.
We also do not find any merit in the argument of Shri Sangwan that the examinations conducted by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, through the centres established in the State of Haryana should be treated as duly recognized because a number of candidates who have passed such examinations have already been employed as Hindi Teachers in the Education department of the State of Haryana.
The issue of recognition of the examination conducted by a particular institution has to be considered and decided by the authority which prescribes the qualifications for recruitment to a particular post.
In this case, it is the State Government which prescribes the requisite qualifications.
Therefore, the decision to recognise or not to recognise the particular qualifications has to be taken by the State Government and not by the Court.
Admittedly, the State Government has not taken such a decision, therefore, we cannot draw an inference on the issue of recognition of qualifications merely because some persons possessing similar qualifications have been appointed as Hindi Teachers.
In this regard, it will be useful to refer to the observations made by the Supreme Court in Director, AIIMS and others v. Dr. Nikhil Tandon and others, 1996(7) Supreme Court Cases 741 : 1996(2) SCT 270.
``The two years' training at the Cambridge University undergone by the respondent while working for his PhD cannot be treated as a qualification recognised as equivalent to DM.
Schedule I to the AIIMS Recruitment Rules speaks of DM qualification or a qualification recognised as equivalent thereto.
It is not mere equivalence that is enough.
It must also be recognised as equivalent.
Recognised evidently means recognised by the Institute or at least by the Medical Council of India.
Admittedly, neither has recognised the said research work/training for two years in the Cambridge University as equivalent to DM. "
19.
We shall now refer to some of the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The first of these decisions is Sachida Nand Vashista v. The State of Haryana and others, 1985(2) SLR 114.
Sachida Nand had passed examination conducted by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag.
He was appointed as Hindi Teacher on ad hoc basis.
He filed petition for directing the respondents to regularise his service.
When the petition came up for hearing before the Division Bench, the learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that the petitioner was qualified to be appointed in the service and that the decision of the departmental authorities was not justified.
Relying on the concession made by Deputy Advocate General, the Court observed that it was not necessary to make any further probe into the matter.
But at the same time, the court gave a direction to the respondents to regularise the service of Sachida Nand Vashista.
This all is evident from paragraphs 6 and 7 of the judgment, which are reproduced below :  ``It is not necessary to state the facts as Mr. Duhan, learned Deputy Advocate-General concedes at the Bar that the averment made in para 3 of the written statement that ``examination conducted by the Haryana Education Department'', is not correct as the same is not supported by the Rules or any executive instructions issued by the Department.
The learned State counsel also concedes at the Bar that OT in Hindi is not substituted by LTC and that any candidate possessing LTC qualification from any educational institution in the country is eligible for being considered for appointment as a Hindi Teacher.
It is further stated by the learned State counsel that the prayer of the petitioners for regularisation has been wrongly declined on the ground that they did not pass L.T.C.
examination from the Haryana Education Department.
In view of all this, the learned State counsel concedes that these writ petitions have to be allowed and the cases of the petitioners have to be considered afresh for regularisation in accordance with law.
In view of what is stated by Mr. Duhan, we allow these petitions and direct the respondents to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of their services.
In C.W.P.
No. 4282 of 1984 the petitioner's services have been dispensed with.
The Department is directed to reinstate the petitioner forthwith and consider her case for regularisation also in accordance with law.
It may, however, be observed that in her case the break in service shall not be taken into consideration while considering her case for regularisation, but she would not be entitled for the pay or other emoluments for the period for which she has not worked.
No costs.''
20.
In Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(2) SLJ 131, it was pleaded on behalf of the respondents that the concession was made by the learned Deputy Advocate General in Sachida Nand's case inadvertently and the same could not bind the Government.
A learned Single Judge negatived this plea and observed:  ``Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, contends that Sachida Nand's case (supra) was decided on the basis of a concession made by the learned Deputy Advocate-General before the Division Bench.
He contends that the concession so made was not based either on the written statement filed in that case or on such instructions according to which a candidate possessing the aforesaid qualification might have been eligible for being considered for appointment as a Hindi Teacher in the Haryana Education Department.
According to him, the statement was made by the learned Deputy Advocate General inadvertently.
Be that as it may, it is admitted that the judgment in Sachida Nand's case (supra) though based on concession was duly implemented and the services of the petitioner therein were regularised.''
In C.W.P.
No. 1404 of 1989 `Kiran Devi v. State of Haryana', which was decided on 741989, the learned Single Judge observed that if the petitioner was not qualified, the question of regularisation of her services did not arise.
However, after making this observation, learned Single Judge gave relief in view of the concession made by the learned Government counsel in Sachidanand's case.
21.
In C.W.P.
No. 7002 of 1994, `Surinder Kumar Sharma v. State of Haryana and others', decided by a Division Bench to which one of us (GS Singhvi, J) was a party, relief has been given to the petitioner who had passed Shastri Examination conducted by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad.
A careful reading of the Division Bench's order dated 2191994 shows that no reply was filed on behalf of the respondents and the court proceeded to decide the petition on the assumption that the averments made in the petition are correct.
The court also took note of the averments made in the petition that Kurukshetra University had treated the examination conducted by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, as equivalent to its own examination and then observed;  ``On the basis of uncontroverted averments made in the petition, it is clear that the respondent-Board had not taken into consideration the Government decision contained in annexure P-6 and the fact that Kurukshetra University has treated the OT examination of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, as equivalent to its own examination for prosecution of higher studies.
In view of the annexures P-6 and P-7, the decision taken by the respondent-Board to treat the petitioner ineligible has to be declared as illegal.
Accordingly, the petition is allowed.
The order, annexure P-4, is declared illegal and is hereby quashed.''
In our opinion, none of the decisions can be made basis for giving relief to the petitioner.
Of these, first three decisions, relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners, have been considered by another Division Bench in Satnam Kaur v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) AIJ 142 : 1995(4) SCT 435.
In that case, the Court was called upon to determine the issue of eligibility of the petitioner, who had passed the Language Teachers Examination from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (Uttar Pradesh).
After making reference to the previous decisions, the court observed :  ``With great respect to the learned Single Judges who decided the cases of Jagat Singh and Kiran Devi, we are unable to agree with the view taken by them that a concession once made by the Government counsel in a proceeding is binding on the Government in all subsequent proceedings even though such a concession may be against the provisions of law or may have been made inadvertently.
In a given case the Government counsel or its representative may inadvertently or otherwise make a concession and the Court may decide the case on the basis of such concession.
However the Government cannot be bound down or estopped from pleading that the concession was erroneous and that a subsequent case arising before the court be decided on its merits on the basis of correct interpretation of law.
Even an admission made in a written statement by the Government in a given case is not binding on it in other proceedings if it can be shown that the admission was made under a mistaken impression or that such admission was contrary to the record.
Admission made in a written statement filed by the Government in a given case or a concession made on its behalf in a particular proceedings cannot be equated with an admission made by a private litigant.
The enormity of the Government work and involvement of innumerable personnel cannot altogether be ignored by the courts and the Government cannot be bound down by the admission or concession made in one particular proceeding even though such admission or concession may be wholly erroneous.
This principle will apply with greater rigour where interpretation of a provision of law is involved.
Court is not always bound to accept the same.
At times the courts refuse to follow the interpretation placed by the departmental authorities on the provisions of law or the executive instructions.
Therefore, an erroneous concession made by the Government counsel cannot be a ground on which the court can refuse to make a correct interpretation of the provisions of law.
xx xx xx  Record of this case shows that for recruitment to the post of Language Teacher the minimum prescribed qualifications are Giani and Language Teacher's Certificate.
The Government of Haryana has issued instructions detailing the qualifications recognised by it for the purpose of recruitment in its services and the courses and examinations of Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, are not included in the list of recognised qualifications.
Annexure R.1 further shows that the UGC has cautioned various Universities and educational institutions as well as the Governments against admission of students in the fake and self-styled Universities.
At item No. 8 of this document appears the name of Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, Allahabad (U.P).
It is, thus, evident that in the eyes of the UGC the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag is a bogus institution.
It is also clear from the record that neither the Government of Haryana nor the UGC has recognised the Language Teacher's Examination conducted by Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag.
There may have been some justification in the claim of the petitioner for recruitment to the service or regularisation in the service if she was possessed with the certificate issued by a University established by law in India or a Deemed University as defined under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, but it is not in dispute that the petitioner does not possess such qualification.
For the purpose of recruitment in the service of the Government of Haryana or for regularisation of her service the petitioner cannot seek a writ of mandamus unless she is able to show that she possesses the qualifications recognised by the Government of Haryana.
When recruitment is made to the service of a particular State, the Government of the State is fully justified in insisting that the candidate seeking recruitment must possess the qualifications recognised by that Government.
Perusal of Annexure P.1 also shows that only those ad hoc class III employees are entitled to be regularised in service who possess the prescribed qualifications for the posts at the time of appointment on ad hoc basis and as the petitioner has failed to show that she possessed the requisite qualifications.
We do not find any substance in her claim that a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise her service only on the ground that some other persons have been given benefit of regularisation of service on the basis of direction given by the Court or even otherwise.''
In view of the decision in Satnam Kaur's case, it is not necessary to again deal with the issue of correctness of the judgments in Sachida Nand Vashista v. Sate of Haryana and others (supra), Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana and others (supra), and Kiran Devi v. State of Haryana and others (supra).
22.
The judgment in Surinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) cannot be treated as a precedent for the purpose of conferring eligibility upon the petitioners, because (a) that case was decided on the basis of the averments made in the writ petition which remained uncontroverted.
For the reasons best known to them, the respondents failed to produce relevant material before the court regarding the nature of examination conducted by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag; (b) the decision taken by Kurukshetra University not to treat the examination of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, as equivalent to its examination was not brought to the notice of the Court; and (c) in view of the report of the committee headed by SK Joshi, the examinations conducted by the centres being run in the State of Haryana cannot but be described as bogus and the candidates who have passed such examinations are not entitled to be considered for appointment as Hindi Teachers.
23.
Before concluding we deem it necessary to observe that the appointment of unqualified teachers causes serious injury to the society at large because the students who are taught by the unqualified teachers suffer injustice throughout their career and life.
24.
In Andhra Kesari Education Society v. Director of School Education, AIR 1989 SC 183, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed :  ``Before parting with the case, we should like to add a word more.
Though teaching is the last choice in the job market, the role of teacher is central to all processes of formal education.
The teacher alone could bring out the skills and intellectual capabilities of students.
He is the engine of the educational system.
He is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values.
He needs to be endowed and energised with needed potential to deliver enlightened service expected of him.
His quality should be such as would inspire and motivate into action the benefitter.
He must keep himself abreast of ever-changing conditions.
He is not to perform in a wooden and unimaginative way.
He must eliminate fissiparous tendencies and attitudes and infuse nobler and national ideas in younger minds.
His involvement in national interaction is more important, indeed indispensable.
It is, therefore, needless to state that teachers should be subjected to rigorous training with rigid scrutiny of efficiency.
It has greater relevance to the needs of the day.
The ill-trained or sub-standard teachers would be detrimental to our educational system; if not a punishment on our children.
The Government and the University must, therefore, take care to see that inadequacy in the training of the teacher is not compounded by any extraneous consideration.''
25.
Once again in Ram Sukh v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1990 SC 590, their Lordships emphasised the necessity of appointment of properly trained persons and observed :  ``The primary school teachers are of utmost importance in developing a child's personality in the formative years.
It is not just enough to teach the child alphabets and figures, but much more is required to understand child psychology and aptitudes.
They need a different approach altogether.
Only trained teachers could lead them properly.
The untrained teachers can never be proper substitute to trained teachers.
We are, therefore, unable to give any relief to the petitioners.''
In the result, the writ petitions are dismissed.
With a view to protect the interest of the students community, we direct the Government of Haryana to take steps to prevent future recruitment of persons possessing qualifications awarded by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, and/or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad, and at the same time take appropriate measures to dispense with the services of unqualified teachers.
For this purpose, the Government of Haryana is directed to issue written instructions to all concerned that in future no appointment be given to the persons possessing qualifications by the institutions referred to here-in-above.
We also direct the Goverment of Haryana to take steps for terminating the services of all such teachers who have secured employment on the basis of degrees/diplomas/certificates issued by Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad and/or Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag, Allahabad.
However, those who have completed three years service should be given an opportunity to acquire the requisite qualification within a stipulated time.
In case they fail to acquire such qualification, then appropriate order be passed to dispense with the services of such persons.
26.
The Government of Haryana is also directed to appoint a committee headed by the Secretary, Education Department, to go into the issue of equivalence and recognition of the examinations degrees/diplomas/certificates and similar other qualifications awarded by the institutions other than the Universities established by law or the deemed Universities.
This committee shall consist of at least three eminent educationists.
The committee should make a detailed evaluation of the various examinations, degrees etc., courses and syllabus and then take a policy decision on the issue of recognition and equivalence.
The committee should be asked to submit its report within a period of three months.
The Government shall then take an appropriate decision on the issue of recognition and equivalence of examinations, degrees/diplomas/certificates within next one month.
27.
Immediately after the Government takes a policy decision about the recognition of the examinations, degrees, diplomas, certificates of various institutions, a list thereof shall be published in two newspapers (one Hindi and one English) having wide circulation in the State of Haryana.
28.
The Government shall also issue written instructions to all the recruiting agencies and the appointing authorities not to select or appoint any person who has passed examination or secured degree, diploma or certificate from any institution not recognised by the Government.
Petition dismissed.