THB Chalapathi, J - Challenging the award passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Faridabad, dated December 9, 1982, the petitioner approached this Court by way of this writ petition.
2.
Respondent No. 1 who was employed as a Teacher in the Primary School, Faridabad, run by the Haryana State Electricity Board, raised an industrial dispute questioning the termination of her services by the Board.
The said dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Tribunal on the basis of the material placed before it, found that the termination of the services of respondent No. 1 was in contravention of the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act and, therefore, set aside the order of termination and directed reinstatement with back wages from November 26, 1980.
3.
In this writ petition, the only point that was urged on behalf of petitioner-HSEB is that respondent No. 1 is not a workman within the definition of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act and, therefore, the Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide the dispute and, therefore, the impugned award is liable to be quashed.
4.
There is no dispute of the fact that respondent No. 1 was working as a Teacher in the Primary School at Faridabad run by the HSEB It has been held by the Supreme Court in Miss A Sundarambal v. Government of Goa, Daman & Diu, AIR 1988 SC 1700 that a teacher employed in School is not a workman.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. R Rajappa, AIR 1978 SC 548 and contends that the petitioner Board is an industry and the school is being run by the Board as an anciliary activity and its function is to provide education to the children of its own workers.
According to him, when the Board is to be treated as an industry, all the persons employed by the Board including teachers working in the Primary School run by the Board come within the definition of workman and, therefore, the reference is valid and that the Industrial Tribunal has jurisdiction to go into the question.
He also argued that the question whether the teacher is a workman or not has not been raised before the Industrial Tribunal and further the representative of the management while giving evidence before the Industrial Tribunal referred respondent No. 1 as a workman and, therefore, it is not open to the petitioner Board to raise the contention that the petitioner is not a workman and, so, the Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to go into the dispute.
5.
It is no doubt true that the Apex Court in Bangalore Water Supply's case (supra) held that an educational institution is an industry but the workmen in that case are not teachers working in the educational institutions.
That decision was considered by the Supreme Court in Miss A. Sunderambal's case (supra).
6.
In paragraph 6 of the judgment, it is observed as follows :-  "Thus, it is seen that even though an educational institution has to be treated as an industry in view of the decision in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. R Rajappa (supra) the question whether teachers in an educational institution can be considered as workmen still remains to be decided."
After observing thus, and after considering the definition of workman as contained in Section 2(s) and other decisions of the Supreme Court, it has been held as follows :-  "The question for consideration is whether even after the inclusion of the above two classes of employees in the definition of the expression `workman' in the Act a teacher in a school can be called a workman.
We are of the view that the teachers employed by educational institutions whether the said institutions are imparting primary, secondary, graduate or post-graduate education cannot be called as `workmen' within the meaning of section 2(s) of the Act.
Imparting of education which is the main function of teachers cannot be considered as skilled or unskilled manual work or supervisory work or technical work or clerical work.
Imparting of education is in the nature of a mission or a noble vocation.
A teacher educates children, he moulds their character, builds up their personality and makes them fit to become responsible citizens.
Children grow under the care of teachers.
The clerical work, if any, they may do, is only incidental to their principal work of teaching.
We agree with the decision given by the High Court for taking the view that teachers cannot be treated as `workmen' as defined under the Act.
It is not possible to accept the suggestion that having regard to the object of the Act, all employees in an industry except those falling under the four exceptions (i) to (iv) in section 2(s) of the Act should be treated as workmen.
The acceptance of this argument will render the words `to do any skilled or unskilled manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work' meaningless.
A liberal construction as suggested would have been possible only in the absence of these words.
The decision in May and Baker (India) Ltd. v. Their Workmen, AIR 1967 SC 678 precludes us from taking such a view.
We, therefore, hold that the High Court was right in holding that the appellant was not a `workman' though the school was an industry in view of the definition of `workman' as it now stands."
7.
In view of the above authority of the Apex Court, it has to be held that respondent No. 1 is not a workman and, therefore, the Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute raised by respondent No. 1.
8.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 further argued that petitioner is precluded from urging that respondent No. 1 is not a workman in this writ petition as the said plea was not taken before the Industrial Tribunal.
When a notice of demand was served on the petitioner-Electricity Board filed its statement before the Deputy Labour Commissioner wherein it is clearly stated that the applicant was employed as a primary school teacher and teachers are not covered under the Industrial Disputes Act.
In the reply to the reference, the petitioner has taken the plea that reference is bad in law.
Therefore, the plea that respondent No. 1 is not a workman has been taken at the initial stage itself.
Apart from that the question whether respondent No. 1 is a workman or not is purely a question of law depending on the interpretation of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It does not involve any determination of disputed question of fact on adducing any evidence.
Such a plea which can be decided on the basis of admitted facts can be taken even for the first time in the writ petition when it does not involve any determination of the factual aspect.
Simply because the representative of the management in his deposition given before the Industrial Tribunal referred to the respondent No. 1 as workman, it cannot be said that respondent No. 1 has been treated as a workman.
It is not for the representative of the management to confer any status on workman on respondent No. 1.
Whether a person employed by an industry falls within the purview of the definition of workman as defined in Section 2(s) is to be decided on the basis of the statutory provisions.
I am, therefore, not in a position to accept the contention of the learned counsel for respondent No. 1.
9.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 also contended that the writ petition was filed eleven months after the passing of the award.
That award was passed on December 9, 1982, the writ petition was filed on November 25, 1983.
The award was published in the gazette on March 22, 1983.
Therefore, the writ petition is filed within eight months from the date of publication.
No limitation has been prescribed for filing the writ petition.
Normally, the writ petition is to be filed within a reasonable time.
In the instant case, respondent No. 1 has not been reinstated in service as per the direction given in the award.
The admission Bench granted stay of the impugned award.
In these circumstances, I find that there is no inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner in approaching this Court.
Further, the writ petition is pending in this Court since 1983.
Respondent No. 1 has not been reinstated and he is not in the service of the petitioner for more than fifteen years.
I do not, therefore, think that any relief can be granted to the petitioner.
10.
In view of what has been stated above, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
11.
Writ petition is accordingly allowed.
Impugned award of the Industrial Tribunal dated December 9, 1982, is hereby set aside.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.