RK Patra, J - During the pendency of this matter, the petitioner KC Rangarajan having died, his legal representatives have been substituted in his place and are brought on record as the applicants.
The deceased KC Rangarajan (hereinafter referred to as `the delinquent') while serving as an officer (Junior Management Grade) under the State Bank of India was charged in a disciplinary proceeding for certain acts of misconduct.
The charges were enquired into.
The Chief General Manager, as the Disciplinary Authority, after going through the enquiry report passed the order dated 30.6.1988 at Annexure-3 removing him from service.
Aggrieved by the order of removal, the delinquent preferred appeal and the appellate authority substituted the penalty of removal from service by inflicting the penalty of reduction of basic pay by two stages in its order dated 22.7.1989 at Annexure-4.
The reviewing committee apparently being not satisfied with the penalty substituted by the appellate authority called upon the delinquent to show cause as to why the original order of removal from service passed by the disciplinary authority should not be restored.
After perusing the records, the reviewing committee was of the view that the gravity of the charges scribed dismissal from service and in supersession of the appellate authority's order, restored the penalty of removal from service as per its order dated 3.12.1990 at Annexure-7.
In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, all the aforesaid orders, namely, Annexures-3, 4 and 7 have been challenged by the delinquent.
2.
The misconduct alleged to have been committed by the delinquent was during his incumbency as the Branch Manager at Baroda Branch of the State Bank of India from June, 1981 to December, 1983.
On 2711986, the delinquent was served 11 charges which were enquired into.
In the report (Annexure-2), the Enquiry Officer exonerated the delinquent of charge Nos. 1(c), 8 and 10.
The remaining charges were either proved fully or partially.
3.
It was contended on behalf of the delinquent that during enquiry, no evidence was led by the employer except that the Cashier of the local branch of the bank was examined as PW 1 whose evidence did not throw any light on the allegations forming the basis of the charges.
The contention therefore according to the learned counsel is that the findings of guilt recorded by the Enquiry Officer are not supported by any evidence and the conclusion on the very face of it is so arbitrary that no reasonable person could have come to such conclusion.
The learned counsel appearing for the opposite parties, on the other hand, submitted that a writ Court cannot reappreciate the evidence as if it exercises the appellate jurisdiction over the Disciplinary Authority and cannot upset the findings of fact recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
It was further submitted that in any case assuming some charges are not established, two charges, i.e., charges Nos. 6 and 7 have been proved beyond doubt and that was enough for the Disciplinary Authority to inflict the penalty and a writ Court cannot substitute it.
4.
Law is now fairly settled that a writ Court cannot sit in appeal over the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer in a departmental enquiry.
The jurisdiction of the Court in such matter being supervisory, it cannot reassess the evidence to find out whether the finding of the Enquiry Officer is correct.
The Court cannot enter into the question of sufficiency or reliability of the evidence.
If, however, it is shown that the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer are not supported by any evidence or the conclusion on the very face of it is so arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable person could have come to such conclusion, a writ Court would be justified in setting aside such findings/conclusions.
At this stage we may note that the Enquiry Officer held the delinquent guilty of charge Nos. 1(a), (b), 2 to 7, 9 and 11.
The law relating to the power of the Court exercising judicial review to interfere on the question of imposition of penalty in a disciplinary proceeding is now well settled.
It was held by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Bidyabhusan Mohapatra, AIR 1963 SC 779 that if the High Court is satisfied that some but not all of the findings are unassailable, the order determining appropriate punishment is final in absence of any rule restricting its imposition.
In other words, if the order is supportable on any finding as to substantial misdemeanour for which the punishment can lawfully be imposed, it is not for the Court to consider whether that ground alone would have weighed with the authority in imposing the punishment.
This principle was followed in Railway Board, New Delhi v. Niranjan Singh, AIR 1960 SC 966 : 1969 Lab IC 1368, Union of India v. Paras Nanda, AIR 1989 SC 1185 : 1989 Lab IC 1338, State Bank of India v. Samarendra Kumar Endow, 1994(2) SCT 250 : 1994(2) SCC 537 : 1994 AIR SCW 1465, BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, 1996(1) SCT 617 : 1996(6) SCC 749 : 1995 AIR SCW 4374, State of UP v. Nand Kishore Shukla, 1996(2) SCT 627 : 1996(3) SCC 750 : AIR 1996 SC 1561 and State of Tamil Nadu v. Subramanyam, 1996(7) SCC 509 : 1996 Lab IC 1046.
May it be stated that in the case of BC Chaturvedi it was observed that the High Court in exercise of power of judicial review cannot normally interfere with the punishment imposed by the disciplinary or appellate authority except where it shocks the judicial conscience in which it can mould the relief by way of directing the authority to reconsider the punishment or penalty imposed or in exceptional cases by itself imposing the punishment recording cogent reasons.
5.
Keeping the aforesaid legal position in view, let us now proceed to consider the correctness of the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and what would be the effect on the ultimate penalty imposed if some of the findings are found unassailable.
Charge No. 1(a) .
The gravamen of this charge is out of 33 loans sanctioned under I.N.D.P./N.R.R.P.
schemes, documentation was not done in proper manner in 28 cases inasmuch as many columns were left blank and signatures/LTIs.
were not identified and this act of negligence was deterimental to the interest of the bank.
The defence of the delinquent was that due to case banking and pressure from the governmental authorities by sending applications in bunches at the last moment, it became impossible for him being the Branch Manager to complete all the documents before sanctioning the loans.
Such omissions had also been committed by others which would be found in any inspection report.
His further plea was that he did not have sufficient experience/knowledge in handling advances and there was no guidance available to him.
The Enquiry Officer held the delinquent guilty by observing that while sanctioning loans he had not made documentation in proper manner leaving many columns therein blank and signature/LTIs.
were left without being identified and if he had not acquired sufficient knowledge/experience, it was his duty to ask for training or any guidance from neighbouring branches.
In the note of argument, it was stated on behalf of the delinquent that copies of documents were not supplied on account of which he was handicapped to make out a proper defence.
It was also mentioned that the loanees were recommended by the Block Officers and the identification for distribution of loans/assets were also made by them and if any particular loan form containing the LTI of loanee had not been identified the primary responsibility was that of Block officials.
The aforesaid plea does not seem to have been taken in the explanation submitted by him.
However, the imputation was admitted by stating that due to lack of sufficient knowledge/experience it had so happened.
In view of the admission of imputation, the finding of guilt recorded by the Enquiry Officer cannot be disturbed.
Charge No. 1(b).
The gist of this charge is that 5 loanees at serial Nos. 29 to 33 were not available at the addresses given in the documents and the delinquent created fictitious documents in those cases.
The Enquiry Officer held this imputation to have been proved in respect of three loanees, viz. Sulochana Pardhan, Eta Oram and Budhu Oram.
The defence of the delinquent was that all the 5 loanees were identified and sponsored by the Block authorities as per Exts.
6, 6A, 7A, 8A and 9A.
On perusal of the report of the Enquiry Officer on this charge, it would appear that the finding of guilt was recorded solely on the basis of the letter of BDO dated 1881983 wherein he stated that Sulochana Pradhan, Eta Oram and Budhu Oram were not existing in village Qmatta.
The fact, however, remains that the 5 loanees were identified and sponsored by the Block authorities.
In view of such identification and sponsoring by the Block authorities as per Exts.
6, 6A, 7A, 8A and 9A, the finding that the delinquent made fictitious documents for these cases cannot be supported for absence of evidence.
Charge No. 2(a).
The substance of this charge is that the delinquent resorted to purchase of assets like cows, goats etc. without approval of the purchase committee and even though in some cases purchase committee reports are on record, the signatures of other members of the committee were not taken.
The plea of the delinquent was that he did not make purchase himself in absence of other members of the purchase committee.
The Enquiry Officer held that this charge was partly proved.
The BDO Nuagaon in his letter dated 881983 clearly instructed the delinquent not to resort to purchase of all the assets without approval of the purchase committee.
The Enquiry Officer has found that the relevant purchase certificates, namely, Exts.
1A, 4A, 6A and 1DA either contained no signatures or contained some signatures of members of purchase committee.
From the aforesaid finding, it follows that in respect of some purchasers, approval of the purchase committee was not taken and that was the reason why signatures of the members of the purchase committee did not find place in some of the purchase certificates.
In the circumstances, the finding that part of this imputation was proved, does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Charge No. 2(b) .
Under this charge, the delinquent was alleged to have paid cash to the loanees instead of providing them with assets contrary to the instruction issued.
There is no dispute that as per Exts.
18A to 26A and 40A, the delinquent himself made cash payments after making necessary entries in the payment register instead of providing those payees/loanees with assets.
It is a clear case of contravention of instruction.
For the reasons stated above, there is little scope for us to disturb the finding of guilt recorded by the Enquiry Officer on this charge.
Charge No. 2(c)  The allegation is that because of negligence of the delinquent in maintenance of records, improper purchase and non-adjustment of subsidy in proper way, there was difficulty in reconciliation of figures with the BDO, Nuagaon resulting in a discrepancy of Rs. 3,14,57500.
The plea of the delinquent was that there was no such discrepancy in the subsidy accounts except that there was some delay in reconciliation of the accounts at the branch.
The Enquiry Officer found from Exts.
33A and 38A and RK Special Letters No. 29/103 dated 181983 and 20/93 dated 671983 that there were discrepancies in the figures of subsidy received and appropriated.
Such discrepancies occurred on account of negligence on the part of the delinquent in maintenance of records/subsidy registers.
In view of the aforesaid documents the finding of guilt cannot be faulted with.
6.
On reading of the report in respect of charge Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 11, it may appear that finding of guilt in respect of some of the charges is based on surmises.
We need not examine them in detail in view of the fact that the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge Nos. 1(a), 2(a), 2(b), and 2(e) are unassailable and it is not for us to consider whether those findings alone weighed with the authority in passing the final order of removal.
7.
For the aforesaid reasons, we have not been able to persuade ourselves to concede to the prayer made on behalf of the delinquent.
In the result, the writ petition if dismissed being without any merit.
Petition dismissed.