DH Nasir, J - The Writ Petitioner before this Court retired on 31121994 from the post of Headmaster in Luthern Model High School, Guntur.
However, the pensionary benefits to which he was entitled were not paid to him for a considerably long time after he retired which eventually necessitated the filing of the present Writ Petition.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the pension and the gratuity were provisionally paid to the petitioner by the respondents in pursuance of the interim directions given by the Court separately for pension and gratuity.
However, even till today the amounts finally payable to the petitioner as pension and gratuity have not been worked out and not paid in spite of the matter being vigorously pursued with the concerned authorities by the petitioner.
These facts are not in dispute.
However, the respondents, five in number, are throwing blame on each other for the delay in finalising the pensionary benefits payable to the petitioner.
Since the matter is pending only for finalising the dues payable to the petitioner, the Writ Petition could straightway be allowed by giving a direction to the concerned respondents to finalise the pensionary dues on or before 31st May, 1997 and in fact the payment should be released to the petitioner on or before 31st May, 1997 without fail.
The respondents shall become liable to the subjected to adverse consequences in the event of any failure on their part to comply with the said direction.
2.
Ordinarily, the Writ Petition would have been disposed of after giving the aforesaid direction; but for the fact that the respondents seem to be indulging into throwing blame on one another for this inordinate delay of more than two years and three months and they seem to be making the petitioner run from pillar to post for getting his pensionary dues finalised.
The Supreme Court came very heavily on the concerned authorities of the Government in a similar situation of inordinate delay in finalising the pensionary dues in State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356 : 1985 Lab IC 664.
The Supreme Court deplored callousness on the part of the concerned authorities as expressed in para 3 of the judgment which is reproduced below :-  "3.
The instant case is a glaring instance of such culpable delay in the settlement of pension and gratuity claims due to the respondent who retired on 19.5.1973.
His pension and gratuity were ultimately paid to him on 1481975, i.e., more than two years and three months after his retirement and hence after serving lawyer's notice he filed a suit mainly to recover interest by way of liquidated damages for delayed payment.
The appellants put the blame on the respondent for delayed payment on the ground that he had not produced the requisite L.P.C.
(Last Pay Certificate) from the Treasury Officer under Rule 185 of the Treasury Code.
But on a plain reading of Rule 186, the High Court held and in our view rightly that a duty was cast on the Treasury Officer to grant to every retiring Government servant the last pay certificate which in this case had been delayed by the concerned officer for which neither any justification nor explanation had been given.
The claim for interest was, therefore, rightly decreed in respondent's favour."
3.
In the instant case, the petitioner has not ventured to go beyond seeking a declaration that the inaction on the part of the respondents was arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of the principles of natural justice, otherwise this Court would have found it difficult to refrain from allowing interest at a rate not less than 12% per annum, as done in the aforesaid case before the Supreme Court.
4.
The material papers produced by the petitioner make no concealment of the callousness on the part of the concerned authorities and rendering a deaf ear to the petitioner without realising the plight of the petitioner, in these hard days, to live and let the members of his family live with honour and dignity with which the petitioner retired from service from the post of Headmaster of the School.
Such observations with regard to the apathy and inertness are amply borne out from the material papers which the petitioner has produced along with the Writ Petition itself and the additional material papers produced subsequently during the pendency of the Writ Petition from page Nos. 1 to 17 and I need not reproduce the same in this judgment for indicting the callousness and negligence on the part of the respondents.
One may have only a cursory glance at such papers to realise the magnitude of the blame shifting attitude on the part of the respondents.
5.
Every word of the judgment of the Supreme Court which has been pressed into service by the learned counsel for the petitioner is relevant for demonstrating the "don't care" attitude shamelessly manifested by the respondents.
The Supreme Court condemned such attitude by observing that pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to its employees on their retirement but are valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty of payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment.
The Supreme Court also lamented that they fail to appreciate why the process of collecting the requisite information and issuance of the necessary documents, such as, Last Pay Certificate, No Liability Certificate, etc., should not be completed at least a week before the date of retirement so that the payment of pensionary dues and benefits could be made to the Government Servant on the date of his retirement or on the day following his retirement and start paying regularly the pension at the expiry of the following month.
The Supreme Court also expressed a view in paragraph 5 of the Judgment that the State Government was rightly saddled with a liability for the culpable neglect in the discharge of duty by the District Treasury Officer who delayed the issuance of the Last Pay Certificate.
6.
It need hardly be stated that the lamentation expressed by the Supreme Court in the above ruling aptly could be made applicable to the respondents before this Court having regard to the fact that not only the fact situation but the "don't care" attitude showed by the respondents in this case is almost the same as the case before the Supreme Court in the above ruling.
How much do we wish that the Officers of the respondents may read the writing on the wall and gear up themselves to ensure that all the pensionary benefits are allowed to the retiring employee on the date of his retirement itself instead of indulging into finding fault and throwing blames on different departments and different limbs of the Government.
7.
In any case, the respondents are peremptorily directed to ensure that all pensionary dues and other benefits payable on retirement are released in favour of the petitioner latest by 31st May, 1997.
The respondents shall be individually and collectively liable to ensure that this order is scrupulously complied with.
8.
The respondents Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5, each of them, shall pay Rs. 2,500/- each by way of costs to the petitioner, which also shall be paid to the petitioner on or before 31st May, 1997.
9.
The Writ Petition is allowed accordingly.
Petition allowed.