GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for directing the respondents to treat the petitioner eligible for appointment as Science Master and to direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner on the basis of selection made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
2.
The petitioner passed matriculation examination from Haryana School Education Board in the year 1983.
He passed B.Sc.
and B.Ed.
examinations from Kurukshetra University in the year 1987 and 1988.
He had appeared in the papers of Mathematics, Physics and Electronics during his B.Sc.
course.
3.
In response to the advertisement issued by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh in July 1991 for recruitment of 342 posts of Science Masters (male), the petitioner submitted his application in the prescribed form and disclosed the details of his qualifications.
The selection made by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana led to the appointment of a large number of candidates.
*******That selection became subject matter of challenge in various writ petitions filed before the High Court which quashed the same.
However, in the Special Leave Petitions filed by the State of Haryana and the selected candidates, the Supreme Court passed an order on 8.10.1982 upholding the appointments already made.
At the same time the Supreme Court directed the respondents to re-interview those who had not been selected.
The Apex Court further directed that the vacancies occurring within one year of the fresh selection shall be refilled by appointing the selected candidates.
In compliance of the directions given by the Supreme Court, the respondents again interviewed all those who had not been selected earlier and prepared fresh select lists.
The name of the petitioner appeared at serial No. 368 in the list prepared by the respondents.
Notwithstanding this selection, the petitioner has been denied appointment on the ground that he has not passed B.Sc.
with any of the two subjects, namely, Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology or B.Sc.
education from College of Education, Kurukshetra or B.Sc.
education with four years course from Regional College of Education, Ajmer.
The petitioner represented to the respondents for treating him eligible by pleading that he fulfils the conditions of eligibility prescribed in the Punjab Educational Service, Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955 and the respondents have no authority to deny him appointment on the basis of qualifications which are not to be found in the rules.
That selection became subject matter of challenge in various writ petitions filed before the High Court which quashed the same.
However, in the Special Leave Petitions filed by the State of Haryana and the selected candidates, the Supreme Court passed an order on 8.10.1982 upholding the appointments already made.
At the same time the Supreme Court directed the respondents to re-interview those who had not been selected.
The Apex Court further directed that the vacancies occurring within one year of the fresh selection shall be refilled by appointing the selected candidates.
In compliance of the directions given by the Supreme Court, the respondents again interviewed all those who had not been selected earlier and prepared fresh select lists.
The name of the petitioner appeared at serial No. 368 in the list prepared by the respondents.
Notwithstanding this selection, the petitioner has been denied appointment on the ground that he has not passed B.Sc.
with any of the two subjects, namely, Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology or B.Sc.
education from College of Education, Kurukshetra or B.Sc.
education with four years course from Regional College of Education, Ajmer.
The petitioner represented to the respondents for treating him eligible by pleading that he fulfils the conditions of eligibility prescribed in the Punjab Educational Service, Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955 and the respondents have no authority to deny him appointment on the basis of qualifications which are not to be found in the rules.
4.
Having failed to persuade the respondents to appoint him as Science Master the petitioner has filed this petition and has prayed for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to appoint him as Science Master on the basis of his placement at serial No. 368 in the list published in February 1994.
5.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications notified in the advertisement issued on 2971991 inasmuch he has not passed B.Sc.
with any two of the following subjects, namely :-  (1) Physics  (2) Chemistry  (3) Botany and  (4) Zoology.
6.
The respondents have pleaded that mere inclusion of the name of the petitioner in the select list does not entitle him to claim appointment particularly when he does not satisfy the requirement of qualifications.
7.
First contention urged by Shri SP Laler, learned counsel for the petitioner is that in view of the judgment of this court in Dharamvir v. State of Haryana and another, 1996(1) RSJ 296 the respondents are not entitled to deny appointment to the petitioner.
He pointed out that Dharamvir's case (supra) is exactly similar to that of the petitioner and there is no justification for the respondents not to apply that judgment to the case of the petitioner.
Second contention urged by Shri SP Laler is that the respondents have discriminated the petitioner, inasmuch as, persons possessing qualifications identical to that of the petitioner have been appointed as Science Masters.
He invited our attention to the appointments of Shri Gita Ram and Shri Rakesh Malhotra and pointed out that both these candidates possess qualifications identical to the qualifications of the petitioner and if they have been treated as eligible for appointment as Science Masters, there is no rhyme or reason why the petitioner should not be treated eligible for recruitment as Science Master.
Learned counsel for the respondents argued that the petitioner has been treated ineligible for appointment because he does not satisfy the requirement of qualifications as specified in the advertisements issued on 2971991.
Shri H.P.
Verma argued that the competent authority is entitled to prescribe qualifications and the rules which were framed almost 40 years prior to the recruitment cannot be applied for the purpose of judging the requirement of qualifications.
8.
In our opinion, the case of the petitioner deserves to be decided in the light of the documents judgment in Dharamvir v. State of Haryana (supra).
In that case the court had examined the provisions of `1955 Rules' in the light of the advertisement issued by the Director, Secondary Education and held that a candidate who fulfils the requirement of qualifications enumerated in the rules cannot be treated ineligible for appointment on the basis of some different qualifications notified by the recruiting authority.
The learned Deputy Advocate General has not been able to point out any special feature which distinguishes the case of the petitioner vis-a-vis the case of Dharamvir (supra).
We, therefore, do not find any justification to take a different view.
We also find substance in the argument of Shri Laler that the respondents have not acted fairly in the case of the petitioner.
The fact that S/Shri Gita Ram, Parveen Kumar and Satbir Singh who possess qualifications similar to those possessed by the petitioner have been appointed has not been contested by the respondents.
What they have stated is that the appointment of such persons will be looked into and action will be taken in the matter as per rules.
However, it has not been shown to us that the respondents have rescinded the appointments of the persons named in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the writ petition.
Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the respondents have appointed persons who possess qualifications similar to the qualifications of the petitioner.
Therefore, there is no justification why a different yardstick should have been adopted in the case of the petitioner.
Absence of any rational explanation by the respondents in giving differential treatment to similarly situated person leads to an inference that the action of the respondents in denying appointment to the petitioner is arbitrary and is contrary to the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Science Master as per his merit position in the select list prepared by the recruiting authority.
If it is found that persons less meritorious than the petitioner have been appointed as Science Masters then appropriate order be issued appointing the petitioner as Science Master within a period of two months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
In that event the petitioner shall be entitled to seniority as per his placement in the select list.
Fixation of his pay shall be done with effect from date persons less meritorious than him had been appointed.
However, the petitioner will not be entitled to arrears of salary.
If it becomes necessary to terminate the services of a less meritorious person in order to accommodate the petitioner then a notice and an opportunity of hearing be given to such person before the competent authority passes any order adversely affecting such person.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.