KA Abdul Gafoor, J - The petitioner, who got appointment as Excise Guard as per Ext.
P6 Government order pursuant to a scheme for employment assistance to the dependents of those who died in harness seeks a declaration that he is eligible for appointment as per para 19 of the scheme issued as per GO dated 17121987, to the post of Excise Inspector.
2.
The Government has evolved a scheme in the said GO (P)34/87/P & ARD dated 17-12-1987 for such employment assistance.
The Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 : (1994) 4 SCC 138 (SC) has held that 'the whole object of granting compassionate employment is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood'.
But at the same time some compassion has to be shown to such family.
It is in that background that the scheme evolved by the Government for this purpose has to be viewed.
3.
The petitioner, a graduate with good physique claimed employment assistance to the post of Excise Inspector, Assistant Excise Inspector, Preventive Officer or any other posts eligible, in successive preference as per Ext.
P1 application.
That application was duly processed and the Board of Revenue recommended his appointment, by Ext.
P2, to the post of Excise Guard in Ernakulam and that was approved by Government as per Ext.
P6.
It is true that, in Exts.
P3 and P4 and reminded by Ext.
P5, the petitioner had appraised Government his desire to get posting at least as Preventive Officer.
It is in spite of that the Goverment showed compassion to the petitioner and offered employment as Excise Guard.
The petitioner accepted this and dissatisfied with the attitude of the Government in not giving atleast a posting as Preventive Officer, he approached this Court by filing this Original Petition.
4.
A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
The posting of the petitioner as Excise Guard has been justified.
Pointing out the provisions of the Scheme mentioned above, the petitioner is not entitled to any post than Excise Guard.
5.
Paragraph 19 of the Scheme provides that the appointment under that scheme shall be limited to a post in the subordinate service, last grade service and in the part-time contingent service and in the lowest grade of the particular category in respect of which the normal method of appointment is through direct recruitment.
Among the different categories in the Excise and Prohibition Subordinate Services, the lowest category is driver.
But the petitioner is not qualified to be appointed as driver.
The category above driver is Excise Guard.
The recruitment to that post, as per the Special Rules is recruitment by transfer to 10% of the vacancies and direct recruitment to 90% of the vacancies.
So it is amply clear that the normal method of appointment to that post is by direct recruitment.
Therefore there is no illegality in appointing the petitioner as Excise Guard, in tune with para 19 of the scheme.
6.
The petitioner submits that category No. 2 Excise Preventive Officer in Excise Prohibition Subordinate Service which is also mentioned by him as a preference in Ext.
P1 application, comes under Para 19 of the Scheme.
This is a higher post than Excise Guard and is mainly a promotion post to Excise Guards.
The normal method of appointment to the higher post is always by promotion and any other mode of recruitment cannot be stated as normal method of appointment.
The method of appointment provided in the Special Rules is by direct recruitment to 25% of the vacancies and by promotion to the balance vacancies.
That still shows that the normal method of appointment to the post of Preventive Officer is by promotion and not by direct recruitment.
Same is the position as regards Excise Inspectors.
Therefore in terms of Para 19 of the scheme referred to in para 5 of the counter affidavit, the petitioner cannot claim appointment, to the post of Preventive Officer or Excise Inspector.
7.
The petitioner alleged discrimination, referring to certain instances pointed out by him in the original petition and in Ext.
P7 GO (MS) No. 169/93/TD dated 29111993.
As per Ext.
P7, one AR Zulficar, S/o late M. Abdul Rasheed, Circle Inspector of Excise died in harness, was appointed as Excise Preventive Officer.
Petitioner has also pointed out, at the time of hearing, the orders in GO (MS) 18/96/TD dated 2-2-1996 whereby a person similarly placed as him was offered appointment as Excise Preventive Officer.
Ext.
P7 is before the filing of the counter affidavit.
The other GO pointed out by the counsel was issued after filing the counter affidavit.
It is averred in the counter affidavit that "precedents mentioned by him are not known to this Department.
As long as dying in harness scheme is only a concession shown to dependents of Government servants who died in harness, the petitioner, a dependent of a deceased Government servant who could not secure a posting under the scheme from Government could not have questioned the Government orders by which he was appointed".
'Whatever that be the law applicable to the person in similar circumstances shall be the same, and that is the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
These are specific examples pointed out by the petitioner that persons similarly circumstanced as him and less qualified than him have been appointed in a higher post applying the same scheme.
But at the same time the petitioner is denied same benefit relying on paragraph 19 of the Government order which is equally applicable in their case also.
Certainly this is a clear case of favoured treatment to a few persons of choice by the authorities.
This shall necessarily be deprecated.
8.
It is true that the petitioner has a contention of discrimination as mentioned above.
According to me para 19 of the scheme is amply clear that a person, eligible for appointment under the said scheme, can be offered appointment only to the post in the lowest category for which the normal method of appointment is direct recruitment.
therefore the petitioner can be pointed as per the scheme only as Excise Guard and not to any higher post.
The same applies to person covered by Ext.P7 as well as GO (P) 18/96/TD dated 2-2-1996.
As the very same scheme is applicable to them it is not known how they are favoured with a better appointment with better status than the petitioner.
Merely because certain persons are given a favoured treatment, over and above their entitlement as per law, it cannot be stated that this illegality shall be extended to others.
It will precipitate illegality.
Therefore the decision in State of Haryana v. Naresh Kumar Bali, 1994(3) SCT 590 : (1994) 4 SCC 448 (SC) and in Pepsu Road Transport Corporation v. Satinder Kumar, (1995)4 SCC 597 have no application to the facts of the case.
Really, the recent decision of the Supreme Court in Gursharan Singh v. New Delhi Municipal Committee, 1996(1) RRR 563 (SC) : JT 1996 (1) SC 647 squarely applies to the facts of this case.
The Supreme Court held as follows :-  "....
There appears to be some confusion in respect of the scope of Article 14 of the Constitution which guarantees equality before law to all citizens.
This guarantee of equality before law is a positive concept and it cannot be enforced by a citizen or Court in a nagative manner.
To put it in other words, if an illegality or irregularity has been committed in favour of any individual or a group of individuals, the others cannot invoke jurisdiction of High Court or of this Court, that the same irregularity or illegality be committed by the State or an authority which can be held to be a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, so far such petitioners are concerned, on the reasoning that they have been denied the benefits which have been extended to others although in an irregular or illegal manner.
Such petitioners can question the validity of orders which are said to have been passed in favour of persons who were not entitled to the same, but they cannot claim orders which are not sanctioned by law in their favour on principle of equality before law.
Neither Article 14 of the Constitution conceives within the equality clause this concept nor Article 226 empowers the High Court to enforce such claim of equality before law.
If such claims are enforced, it shall amount to directing to continue and perpetuate an illegal procedure or an illegal order for extending similar benefits to others."
This answers discrimination pleaded by the petitioner with reference to the above instance.
9.
In Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1996(2) SCT 207 : (1996) 1 SCC 301 (SC), the Supreme Court held that "the very object of appointment of a dependent of the deceased employees who did in harness is to relieve unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family".
This object is satisfied by the appointment of the petitioner as Excise Guard.
10.
The Government cannot pick and choose a favoured few, discriminating others, giving employment in higher category than that is eligible, as per the scheme as ordered in Ext.
P7 or in GO (MS) 28-91-TD dated 2-2-1996.
The Chief Secretary to the Government of Kerala shall bestow his attention to this matter, especially when the Government employment is not some thing to be distributed to the persons of choice.
11.
The employment assistance is with an object of granting compassion to a family which met with sudden crisis, it is not a right.
So whatever employment given in terms of the scheme is sufficient compliance of the scheme and the petitioner shall be satisfied with that.
Petitioner has no right to claim any other appointment than what is offered to him.
Therefore, the Original Petition is liable to be dismissed.
Send a copy of this judgment to the Chief Secretary of the State.