Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was working as Principal, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, complains that he has been dismissed from service under the garb of an innocuous order of termination passed on January 9, 1996.
Is it so ?
A few facts as relevant for the decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner who was initially working in the Education Department, State of Himachal Pradesh, was offered appointment to the "temporary post of Principal in the Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti" vide letter dated August 19, 1992.
It was inter alia provided that he will be "on probation for a period of two years from the date of appointment extendable by another one year at the discretion of the competent authority..." A copy of this letter is on record as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
In pursuance of this offer, the petitioner joined duty at the Vidyalaya, Rokh-Jagnoo, District Udhampur (Jammu and Kashmir) on September 10, 1992.
On August 17, 1993, a student Shankar Dass who was studying in Class XII at the Vidyalaya died on account of electrocution while taking a bath in the "abandoned building block" of the Vidyalaya.
On November 12, 1993, Mr. Mohi Robani who was working as Principal at Bhargam, District Etawah, in UP was transferred to Udhampur.
A copy of this order is on the record as Annexure P.7 with the writ petition.
It appears that the petitioner filed a civil writ petition No. 1387 of 1993 in the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir praying for the issue of a writ of mandamus or any other direction etc. for quashing the order dated November 12, 1993 "with further directions to the respondents thereby commanding them not to disturb/transfer" him from the present posting "on the basis of the impugned order dated 12111993."
The Court directed the issue of notice to show cause.
It also ordered that "the petitioner shall not be disturbed from his place of posting."
On February 11, 1994, the petitioner was suspended from service.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P10.
The petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 433 of 1994.
Vide order dated February 28, 1994, the court directed the issue of notice to the respondents to show cause as to why the petition be not admitted.
It was further directed that "no action shall be taken against the petitioner in pursuance of the order dated 11.2.1994 and he shall be allowed to continue on the post."
On April 27, 1994, the respondents withdrew the order of suspension.
A copy of this order is on the record as Annexure P14.
On May 15, 1994, a charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner.
A copy of this document is on record as Annexure P.11.
Two charges were levelled against him.
Firstly, it was alleged that the petitioner had "failed to take adequate steps to get the electricity connection of the abandoned building block of JNV-Rakh Jaganoo District Udhampur disconnected or to prevent the students of the Vidyalaya from entering this building which resulted in the tragic death of a student namely Master Shankar Dass, a student of Class XII of the Vidyalaya by electrocution while taking a bath in the said building".
The second charge was that while functioning as Principal, the petitioner had "allowed the driver of Vidyalaya vehicle to stay outside the Vidyalaya campus thereby violating instructions issued by the Samiti in this regard.
By his failure to comply with the written directions of the Samiti, Shri R. R. Jaswal is guilty of wilful disobedience of the Samiti's instructions and has thus shown lack of devotion to duty".
The petitioner alleges that he had filed reply to the charge sheet.
On January 16, 1995, Mr. Kuldip Singh, Deputy Director, Regional Office, Chandigarh was appointed as the authority "to inquire into the charges levelled against" the petitioner.
It appears that the petitioner challenged the validity of this order by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 133 of 1995.
The Court directed the issue of notice to show cause as to why the petition be not admitted to hearing.
It was further directed that the enquiry officer shall not proceed further in the matter.
On August 8, 1995, the writ petition was dismissed by the High Court.
A copy of the order is at Annexure P17/A with the writ petition.
3.
In the meantime, the petitioner was conveyed adverse report for the year 1993-94 vide letter dated March 9, 1995.
His academic proficiency was described as `poor'.
The organising ability was `very poor'.
It was also observed that the petitioner had not "followed the rules for purchasing".
His overall grading was - "Below Average".
The petitioner represented against these remarks on March 19, 1995.
A copy of the representation is at Annexure P19 with the writ petition.
On October 30, 1995, adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner for the year ending June, 1995.
Various defects were pointed out.
He was graded as an `Average Principal'.
He submitted a representation.
A copy of the representation which does not bear any date is Annexure P24 with the writ petition.
Almost simultaneously, vide letter dated December 14, 1995, the petitioner was informed that the writ petition challenging the departmental proceedings having been dismissed, the enquiry had been fixed for January 3, 1996.
The petitioner was asked to furnish the list of documents/witnesses by December 28, 1995.
On December 29, 1995, the petitioner submitted an application for change of Enquiry Officer.
He stated that he would not be participating in the proceedings on January 3, 1996.
A copy of this letter is on record as Annexure P27.
On January 9, 1996, the impugned order terminating his services was passed.
The petitioner challenges this order on various grounds which shall be presently noticed.
He prays that the order be quashed with all consequential benefits.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner's "work and conduct was not found satisfactory and he did not come up to the expectations of the appointing authority.
Because of his negligence and carelessness death of a student (had) occurred.
Had the petitioner taken full precautions, the incident could have been avoided....the SSP reported that it was a case of administrative inefficiency on the part of the Principal".
The Deputy Commissioner, Udhampur who "is also the Chairman of the Vidyalaya gave very poor impression of the working of the petitioner".
Even "serious financial irregularities were also detected during audit inspection.
The true copy of the office memo pointing out these financial irregularities to the petitioner is attached herewith as Annexure R.3".
Vide letter dated September 19, 1994, the petitioner had "accepted the correctness of these financial irregularities...." In May, 1995, he was transferred to Ferozepur and "here also the work of the petitioner was not satisfactory".
It has been further stated that the Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti was registered as a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1986.
The recruitment rules were notified on June 7, 1991.
These rules provide for "two years probation in case of direct recruitees....this period... is only initial period of probation and confirmation of the probationer is not automatic on completion of initial period of probation".
The petitioner's period of probation was extended "for a period of one year w.e.f.
1091994 in accordance with the terms of his appointment..." It was brought to his notice that his work and conduct has not been assessed to be satisfactory.
It has been further averred that in the internal audit inspection report on the accounts of JNV, Udhampur, conducted from July 17 to July 19, 1994, several "financial irregularities had come to notice".
The petitioner had admitted some of these irregularities in his written explanation.
Besides the financial irregularities, it has also been pointed out that there were reports against the petitioner regarding "appointment of his near relatives in the Vidyalaya, non-conformity with prescribed purchase procedures, expenditure in excess of budget, misuse of Vidyalaya funds etc. which had been found prima facie correct during investigations".
The petitioner's case was placed "before the Departmental Promotion Committee" to find out as to whether he should be confirmed or discharged from service.
The DPC met on December 8, 1995.
The whole record of the petitioner was placed before it.
It considered the cases of about 27 persons.
It recommended the petitioner's discharge from service.
It has also been averred that "the respondents were legally advised that it would not be proper to issue charge-sheet to a probationer and as such the charge-sheet or the conduct of enquiry was not pursued."
The order of suspension was withdrawn.
It has also been averred that "the discharge of the petitioner has been ordered after careful consideration of his performance and suitability for the post of Principal and in accordance with terms of his appointment.
The discharge of the petitioner is termination simpliciter and not punitive.
The order of termination does not cast any stigma on the petitioner".
On these premises, the respondents claim that there is no merit in the writ petition and it should be dismissed.
5.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder.
He has also produced certain additional documents with it.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been contended that he had completed the period prescribed under the rules viz. 2 years on September 9, 1994.
Even if it is assumed that the period of probation could be extended by one year, the maximum period had been completed on September 9, 1995.
Thereafter, the petitioner shall be deemed to have been confirmed and his services could not be terminated vide order dated January 9, 1996.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in The State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1210 and a Single Bench judgment of this Court in NK Dutta v. Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation, 1995(1) RSJ 777 : 1994(4) SCT 625 (P&H).
Secondly, it has been contended that the order is punitive.
The petitioner was suspended.
He was charge-sheeted.
An enquiry officer was appointed.
He had been asked to appear before the Enquiry Officer.
The sequence of events clearly shows an intention to punish.
However, no opportunity was given to the petitioner to prove his innocence.
He was penalised without holding any enquiry.
Consequently, the order is vitiated.
Learned counsel placed reliance on various decisions in support of his claim.
7.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner was on probation.
No orders regarding his confirmation had been passed.
The charge sheet which had been issued to him initially had been dropped.
His case was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
On consideration of the matter, it was found that the petitioner was not fit to be confirmed.
Consequently, his services were terminated in accordance with the terms of the appointment.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the respondents have committed any illegality or irregularity.
No cause for interference was made out.
Learned counsel also produced the proceedings of the DPC.
After hearing counsel for the parties, the two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Can the petitioner be deemed to be confirmed w.e.f.
September 9, 1995 as Principal, Navodaya Vidyalaya ?
(ii) Has the petitioner been dismissed from service under the garb of a simple order of termination ?
Reg: (i)  8.
On January 25, 1991, the Samiti had issued instructions relating to certain aspects of Personnel Administration.
These included the subject of probation as well.
It was inter alia provided that all the staff "including Principals in the Navodaya Vidyalayas....appointed on direct recruitment basis shall be on probation for a period of two years from the date of their joining, which may be extended further if the appropriate authority so decides keeping in view their performance during the period of probation".
It was further observed that "while the normal probation may be extended in suitable cases, it is not desirable that an employee should be kept on probation for years.
It is, therefore, suggested that except for exceptional reasons, probation should not be extended for more than a year and no employee should be kept on probation for more than double the normal period".
A copy of these instructions was placed on record by the respondents with CM No. 5348 of 1997 which was allowed by N K Sodhi, J. vide order dated March 14, 1997.
Thereafter, the recruitment rules were framed.
These were notified and came into force w.e.f.
June 7, 1991.
The provision regarding the post of Principal appears at Page 64 of the Booklet issued by the Samiti.
The period of probation for direct recruits is two years.
Counsel for the petitioner also pointed out that the Central Board of Secondary Education to which the schools run by the respondent-Society are affiliated has the affiliation bye-laws which had come into force w.e.f.
January 28, 1988.
Bye-law No. 10 at Page 15 deals with the "Staff and Service Conditions".
Clause (3) inter alia provides that - "the period of probation should normally be one year extendable for another year.
In case the management is not satisfied with the performance the same should be brought to the notice of the employee concerned in writing.
Probation should not be extended beyond two years and the Management should arrive at a decision to confirm the teacher or not before the end of the probationary period".
9.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in the instructions, it had been inter alia provided that the period of probation for a person appointed by direct recruitment shall be two years which could be further extended.
However, the employee could not be kept on probation for more than double the normal period viz. 4 years.
Thereafter, while framing the recruitment rules, the Samiti made a departure from the instructions and only provided that the period of probation shall be two years for direct recruits.
It did not reserve the power to extend the period of probation.
This was in conformity with the affiliation bye-laws wherein it had been provided that the period of probation shall be normally one year which could be extended by another year.
On this basis, the counsel submitted that the maximum period of probation was two years.
The petitioner having joined service on September 10, 1992, shall be deemed to have completed the maximum period of probation on September 9, 1994.
Even if the respondents are given the benefit of the order of extension, the period had expired on September 9, 1995.
The petitioner shall be deemed to have been confirmed with effect from that date.
Thereafter, he could not have been treated as a probationer.
His services could not be terminated without following the procedure applicable to a confirmed employee.
Is it so ?
10.
Admittedly, the Samiti is an autonomous body.
It has a right to lay down the terms of appointment of an employee.
It has framed recruitment rules.
A provision has been made that the period of probation for a person appointed to the post of Principal by direct appointment shall be two years.
The rules do not contain a prohibition against the extension of the period of probation.
It has not been suggested that the period cannot exceed two years.
In this situation, the rule cannot be read to provide that "the period of probation shall not exceed two years".
There being no express bar against the extension of period of probation, it cannot be said that the petitioner shall be deemed to have been confirmed on the expiry of the initial period of two years.
11.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram had placed reliance on the affiliation bye-laws.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that these bye-laws confer a right on an employee of the Samiti.
It may be that any one seeking affiliation to the Board has to comply with the bye-laws.
However, in case of violation, if any, the employee shall get no right.
It may only entitle the Board to take action against the school.
Secondly, even these bye-laws do not embody an inviolable rule.
At best, there is a provision that the period of probation "should normally be one year...." It can be "extendable for another year".
This provision is in the form of a guideline.
It does not take away the right of the Samiti to frame its own rules.
In any event, the bye-law does not indicate that the period of probation cannot be extended beyond two years.
There is no prohibition in the bye-law.
12.
Taking the totality of facts and the provisions into consideration, it cannot be said that the period of probation cannot exceed two years or that the respondent is not entitled to extend the period of probation beyond two years.
The rule does not embody a bar against extension of the period of probation.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the employee shall be deemed to be confirmed w.e.f.
the date he has completed the period of two or three years.
13.
Learned counsel placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Dharam Singh's case (supra).
In this case, the rule governing the service inter alia provided that "the total period of probation including extensions, if any, shall not exceed three years".
It was in view of this provision that their Lordships had taken the view that "Rule 6(3) forbids extension of the period of probation beyond three years.
Where, as in the present case, the service rules fix a certain period of time beyond which the probationary period cannot be extended and an employee appointed or promoted to a post on probation is allowed to continue in that post after completion of the maximum period of probation without an express order of confirmation, he cannot be deemed to continue in that post as a probationer by implication....such an implication is negatived by the service rule forbidding extension of the probationary period beyond the maximum period fixed by it."
There is no such provision in the present case.
In fact, to the petitioner's case, the ratio of the decision in S. Sukhbans Singh v. The State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1711, shall apply.
In this case, it was held that "a probationer cannot, after the expiry of probationery period, automatically acquire the status of a permanent member of a service unless of course, rules under which he is appointed expressly provide for such a result".
In the present case, there is no provision to that effect in the rules.
Counsel for the petitioner also referred to the decision of this court in N K Dutta's case (supra).
In this case, the rule inter alia provided that an employee shall be on probation for a period of one year from the date of appointment.
The administrative committee was authorised to "extend the period of probation by further period not exceeding six months ."
In this case, there was a bar against extension of the period of probation beyond six months.
Consequently, it was held that the employee shall be deemed to be confirmed by operation of the rule.
Such is not the position in the present case.
Reg: (ii)  14.
It was then contended that the order is punitive.
The petitioner has been dismissed from service under the garb of a simple order of termination.
15.
It is true that the petitioner had been suspended on February 11, 1994.
He had also been charge-sheeted on May 15, 1994.
However, it is the admitted position that the order of suspension was withdrawn on April 27, 1994.
It has also been categorically stated in the written statement that the charges levelled against the petitioner were not pursued in view of the legal advice tendered to the Samiti.
Still further, it is true that the file regarding dropping of enquiry proceedings could not be produced by the counsel for the respondents as it was stated to be "not traceable".
However, the file regarding the consideration of the petitionee's case by the Departmental Promotion Committee which had to consider his suitability for confirmation was produced.
A photo copy of the relevant extract has been retained on record.
A copy of the data which was placed before the Committee is Mark `A'.
The proceedings of the Committee are at Mark `B".
A perusal of the document at Mark `A' shows that the following data had been placed before the Committee :-  "Vigilance Clearance Cleared Result X=72.22% Internal Audit/Fin.
Irregularities.
1.
Embezzlement - Empty Tins worth Rs. 4670/- were sold on 12.3.93 and amount deposited on 14594.
2.
Non-adherence of purchase procedure for stationery 3.
Doubtful payment to casual Labourers transportation charges etc. 4.
Cheques amounting to Rs. 1,83,727/- issued after closing of Cash Book as on 31393.
5.
Pending recovery of electricity charges from HIM.
6.
Appointment of daily waged staff without existence of sanctioned post.
7.
Habitual litigant.
He has filed four cases against the Samiti while working as Principal in JNV Udhampur.
Complaints, if any Two complaints regarding appointment of his Nephew as Storekeeper and mismanagement of the Vidyalaya."
A perusal of the above shows that the matter regarding the petitioner's suspension or the issue of the charge-sheet was not even mentioned.
The charges which form the subject matter of enquiry were not even referred to.
The financial irregularities which had been pointed out by the Audit and the complaint regarding appointment of the petitioner's nephew as a Store-keeper were mentioned.
The committee after consideration of the matter decided that the petitioner should be dis-charged from service.
The committee had considered the cases of various persons.
In some, it recommended extension of the period of probation while in others, it thought that the employee had completed the period of probation successfully.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, the committee found that he was to be discharged.
There is not even a suggestion that any of the members of the committee was biased against the petitioner.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it appears that the committee had found that the petitioner was not suitable for confirmation.
There is nothing to indicate that there was any intention to punish the petitioner or to dismiss him from service.
16.
Learned counsel for the parties referred to various decisions.
On behalf of the petitioner, reliance was placed on the following decisions :-  (i) Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, 1974(2) SLR 701.
(ii) Anoop Jaiswal v. Govt. of India, AIR 1984 SC 636.
(iii) Sher Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(2) SLR 100 : 1994(3) SCT 1.
(iv) Sat Narain v. Haryana State Coop.
A Bank, 1995(1) RSJ 273.
Similarly, on behalf of the respondents, reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Dr. Md S Iskander Ali, AIR 1980 SC 1242 and Governing Council of Kidwai Memorial v. Dr. Pandurang, 1993(1) SCT 267 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 392.
It is undoubtedly correct that the form of the order is not conclusive.
It is also true that the court can pierce the veil and find out the true intention behind the order.
It can also determine as to whether the alleged misconduct/irregularity is only a motive behind the order or its foundation.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down in this behalf.
In the circumstances of the case, it does not appear to be necessary to examine these decisions in detail.
On the facts of the case, it cannot be said that the petitioner has been punished.
The order is in conformity with the terms of appointment.
In view of the above, both the questions are answered against the petitioner.
There is no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
No costs.