DH Nasir, J - The above four writ petitions are taken up for consideration together as common questions of law and facts are involved in the same.
In W.P. No. 932/95, the relief is claimed to the effect that the respondents (Board of Intermediate Examination, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad) should not resort to the method of recruitment by deputation from various Government Offices to the category of Deputy Secretary (Examinations) and other Deputy Secretaries so long as eligible and qualified Superintendents already employed in the service of the Board are available.
In W.P.1232/95 it is prayed that the filling up of Class II posts of Joint Secretaries (Academic, Examinations, Vocational Education, Administration and Accounts) etc., should not be resorted to by deputation from various Government Offices.
In W.P. No. 5904/95 the Board's resolution dated 2791993 is sought to be quashed on the ground that the ratio stipulated for filling up the posts of Deputy Secretaries at 2:1 was illegal, so far as it concerns the Junior Lecturers working on deputation and Superintendents of the Board of Intermediate Education, for filling up the posts of Deputy Secretaries.
In W.P. No. 19186/95, a declaration is sought to be made by this court that filling up the posts of Deputy Secretaries by bringing candidates from the State Government Services is illegal and unconstitutional and that such posts should be filled from among the Superintendents working with the Board by promotion etc.
Since all these prayers call for a consolidated approach to the averments made therein, their disposition by a common judgment is desirable and the parties have agreed to the same.
2.
During the course of arguments advanced on behalf of the petitioners by the learned Counsel Shri Y Suryanarayana on one hand and by the learned Counsel Shri N Subba Reddy for the Board and the learned Counsel Shri J Sudheer for Government Junior Lecturers Association on the other hand, the main points which emerge for our consideration are two-fold, (1) whether fixing up the ratio between Junior Lecturers working on deputation and Superintendents of the Board of Intermediate Education for appointment to the posts of Deputy Secretaries was illegal and that the resolution passed in that regard on 2791993 by the Board is required to be quashed and, (2) whether the Regulations made in connection with the methods of recruitment involved in all the four writ petitions and the delegation of power made in that behalf is illegal and void.
3.
For this purpose our endeavour would be to examine the scope and extent of the "Rules" and "Regulations", which expressions are used at different places in different contexts in the Act.
Under Clause (14) of Section 2 of the Andhra Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1971 (`Act' for short), the term `Regulation' is so defined as to mean the Regulations made by the Board under the Act.
The expression `Rules' has, however, not been defined.
4.
The provision relating to the appointment of Chairman and his functions find place in Section 5 of the Act.
Under sub-section (2) of Section 5, it is the duty of the Chairman to see that the Act and Regulations are observed and he shall have all powers necessary for this purpose.
This provision relating to the appointment of Chairman and his functions is referred to mainly with a view to emphasizing that the Chairman is invested with all powers necessary for ensuring that the provisions of the Act and Regulations are observed.
5.
Under sub-section (2) of Section 6 of the Act, the Vice-Chairmen (three in number) are required to assist the Chairman in all matters, administrative or academic, and to exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be delegated to them by the Chairman.
Under sub-section (3) of Section 6 of the Act, when the office of the Chairman is vacant, one of the three Vice-Chairmen as may be appointed by the Government in this behalf is required to perform the functions of the Chairman.
6.
Section 7 of the Act deals with the appointment of Secretary and lays down his functions.
Under sub-section (2) (c) of Section 7 of the Act, the Secretary can exercise such powers of control and supervision over the offices under the Board and the staff therein, as may be prescribed.
`Prescribed' means, prescribed by the Rules made by the Government under the Act, as provided in Clause (11) of Section 2 of the Act.
Under Clause (a) of sub- section (3) of Section 7, the Board may appoint, subject to Rules as may be made in that behalf, such other officers and servants as it may deem necessary and proper for the efficient execution of its duties.
The emphasis here is on the proposition that the power of making appointment of officers and servants is vested in the Board alone, but subject to only such rules as may be made in that behalf.
No provision is made in the Rules to delegate this power of appointment to any individual authority or Officer of the Board.
7.
Under Clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 7 of the Act, it is provided that notwithstanding anything in Clause (a), the Government may transfer any officer or servant of the Board to the service of the Government and transfer any officer of the Government to the service of the Board.
This provision is extracted in this judgment with a view to signifying that "transfer" is permissible, but only by the Government, under this provision of the Act.
8.
The question which is uppermost in our mind while dealing with the four writ petitions, stands answered by Section 9 and Section 12 of the Act.
Section 9 deals with the Powers of the Board and Section 12 deals with the Powers of the Board to make Regulations.
Under Section 9, a provision is made in Clause (xvii) to delegate such of its powers as it deems fit to any of the committees or to the Chairman or to any other authority of the Board.
It is obvious that the powers to be delegated under Clause (xvii) of sub-section (1) of Section 9, could only be those powers which are enumerated specifically in Section 9 of the Act, and the Board cannot deviate from the scope of Section 9 of the Act, for the purpose of delegating any of its powers as enumerated in Section 9 of the Act.
9.
The powers delineated in Section 9 are predominantly in respect of the academic affairs of the Board and not administrative affairs of the Board.
The power to make appointments is a matter of administrative affair of the Board and, therefore, the exercise of such powers or its delegation cannot be searched in the provisions made in Section 9 of the Act.
10.
The appropriate section is Section 12 of the Act, which provides for the power of the Board to make Regulations.
Under sub-section (1) of Section 12, the Board may, with the approval of the Government and by notification, make Regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder.
11.
Under Clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the Act, the method of management of the property of the Board and the appointment of officers and other employees of the Board and their conditions of service is included in the powers of the Board, in respect of which Regulations could be made by the Board.
Barring that provision, no other provision of the Act could be seen for deciding how the appointments of officers and other employees of the Board could be regulated.
12.
One of the most important provisions is Section 17 of the Act, which deals with the powers of the Government to make rules.
The same is extracted below :  "17.
Power of the Government to make rules :-  (1) The Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out all or any of the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall, immediately after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature if it is in session and if it not in session, in the session immediately following for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiration of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or in the annulment of the rule, the rule shall, with effect from the date of notification of such modification or annulment, have effect only in such modified form or shall stand annulled, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule."
13.
This power of the Government to make rules as provided in section 17 of the Act, and the functions of the Chairman and powers of the Board as provided in Sections 5 and 12 of the Act, make it abundantly clear that in the former it is necessary to lay before each House of Legislature every rule made under the Act, so as to make the rule effective.
However, no such requirement is laid down in Section 12 of the Act, which deals with the powers of the Board to make Regulations.
Such power of the Board is subjected only to obtaining the approval of the Government and to cause notification to be issued enforcing the Regulations as may be made by the Board in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 12 of the Act.
14.
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 17 read with Clause (c) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of Section 7 of the Andhra Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1971 the Governor of Andhra Pradesh made rules relating to the powers of the Secretary and appointment of other employees of the Board.
We are strictly concerned in these four writ petitions with the rules relating to the powers of the Secretary and appointment of other employees of the Board.
These rules are stated to have been published in Rules Supplement, AP Gazette 22nd May, 1975 on pages 37 to 40 in the form of G.O.Ms.
No. 539, Education (V), 9th April, 1975.
15.
Sub-rule (ii) of Rule 1 provides for appointment of ministerial and last grade staff and contingent staff to be made by the Secretary.
Rule 2 thereof, provides that the Secretary may delegate any of his powers to the other officers of the Board with the approval of the Board.
16.
This power of delegation conferred on the Secretary could however be read as confined only to the appointment of ministerial and last grade staff and contingent staff, and cannot be treated as extending to any appointment above the level of Ministerial Staff.
The power conferred by Rule 2 could be termed as sub-delegation of the powers by the Secretary.
In all matters of sub-delegation of powers, the authority sub-delegating its powers cannt travel beyond the powers which are originally conferred upon such authority and we have seen that under sub-rule (ii) of Rule 1, the conferment of the power of making appointment on the Secretary is limited to making appointments of Ministerial staff, last grade staff and contingent staff.
In that view of the matter, therefore, if any power is sub-delegated by the Secretary, we may have to hold that such sub-delegation is illegal except only in those cases in which ministerial Staff and last grade staff is appointed, with which of course we are not concerned in any of the four writ petitions.
17.
It is pertinent to note that under sub-rule (2) of Rule 3, the Officers and other servants required for the Board may be appointed either by direct recruitment or by promotion from the lower cadres or by deputation from the Government Departments or Autonomous Bodies.
18.
In the case before us, the manner and method in which the appointment of officers could be made has been challenged on the ground that neither the Board nor the Government had power to make appointment on deputation basis, so long as in-service candidates were available for promotion to the higher posts.
However, appointment by deputation cannot be ruled out in view of the provision made in sub-rule (2) of Rule 3.
Except that as provided in sub-rule (3) of Rule 3, the terms and conditions on which the officers and servants may be appointed by the Board on deputation, has to be normally in conformity with those under the Fundamental Rules.
The rules have gone to the extent of making a provision for allowing deputation allowance and contributions towards leave salary and pension and other allowances allowed to officers and servants taken on deputation by the Board to be met from the funds of the Board, according to sub-rule (4) of Rule 3.
Appointment by deputation is, therefore, a substantive power of the Board conferred by the rules and, therefore, the power of the Board to make appointments on deputation cannot be called in question.
19.
With the provisions of law in view, we may now proceed to examine the merits of the submissions made before the Court by the learned Counsel for the rival parties.
20.
The validity of the rules made under the AP Intermediate Education Act, 1971 came to be attacked on the ground that the Government had not accorded approval to the same and the same were not sanctioned by the Legislature.
Rules under AP Intermediate Education Act, 1971, have been published by G.O.Ms.
No. 539, Education (V) 9th April, 1975 on pages 37 to 40, Rules Supplement, AP Gazette 22nd May, 1975, which opens with a statement that "in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 17 read with Clause (c) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of Section 7 of the Andhra Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1971, the Government of Andhra Pradesh hereby makes the following rules relating to the powers of the Secretary and appointment of other employees of the Board".
But the caption is silent about the legislative sanction.
We will examine the effect of the same at a later stage.
21.
It must be distinctly understood that Regulations as defined under Clause (14) of Section 2 of the Act can be made by the Board under the Act.
As far as rules are concerned, the provision is made under Section 7(3)(a) of the Act for appointment of officers and servants by the Board subject to Rules as may be made in that behalf and under sub-section (1) of Section 17, it is provided that the Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out all or any of the purposes of this Act, and sub-section (2) of Section 17 of the Act provides for legislative sanction, as already observed earlier.
22.
However, as far as the regulations are concerned the same may be made by the Board with the approval of the Government and the consequent notification, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or Rules made thereunder to carry out the purpose of the Act, as provided under Section 12 of the Act.
We have seen earlier that such regulations could inter alia provide for the method of management of the property of the Board and the appointment of officers and other employees of the Board and their conditions of service under Clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the Act.
23.
The petitioners have produced the xerox copy of "the Andhra Pradesh Board of Intermediate Education (Superior Service) Regulations, 1980".
Before proceeding with any discussion on the said Regulations of 1980, a serious note is required to be taken of the fact that during the course of arguments before this Court it struck to the learned Counsel for the petitioners that the said Regulations had no statutory force because the Regulations had not been approved by the State Government and were not notified in the Gazette.
Affidavits and counter affidavits were filed by the rival parties in that regard and it clearly emerged therefrom that the requirement of Government's approval and notification were not satisfied.
24.
For that matter, even the rules which I have considered above could be dubbed as devoid of any statutory force because, the requirement of laying the rules before the Legislature as contemplated by Section 17(2) of the Act has not been satisfied.
But subject to further discussion, presuming for the time being that the same are operative, we may carry on our discussion on this aspect.
25.
Even with this distinction in view with regard to the power of framing Rules and Regulations, it appears at the first instance that the amendment in the regulations for the purpose of bringing Junior Lecturers on deputation to fill up the posts of Deputy Secretaries in the office of the Board of Intermediate Education was devoid of legal authority on the ground that the AP Board of Intermediate Education (Superior Service) Regulations, 1980 were not approved by the Government of Andhra Pradesh and were not notified in the Gazette of Andhra Pradesh.
However, sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 of the Rules made under Andhra Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1971 empowers the Board to appoint officers and other servants required for the Board by direct recruitment or by promotion from the lower cadres or by deputation from the Government Departments or Autonomous Bodies.
Sub-rule (3) thereof provides for the terms and conditions on which the officers and servants may be appointed by the Board on deputation, and sub-rule (4) provides for the deputation allowance and contributions towards leave salary and pension and other allowances allowed to officers and servants taken on deputation by the Board.
Therefore, even if it is believed that the Andhra Pradesh Board of Intermediate Education (Superior Service) Regulations, 1980 were not approved by the Government and were not notified in the Gazette of Andhra Pradesh, as submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioners, filling up the posts of Deputy Secretaries by Junior Lecturers on deputation in the office of the Board of Intermediate Education could not be called in question and could not be treated as devoid of jurisdiction and competence.
The provisions made in the rules in that regard can also not be questioned because, the Government is sufficiently empowered to make rules in that regard by virtue of the provisions made in Section 17 of the Act, which we have already discussed above.
26.
Even under Section 7(3)(a) of the Act, the Board can appoint such other officers and servants as it may deem necessary and proper for the efficient execution of its duties subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf.
The Board can, therefore, seek its power to make appointments in question even under Section 7(3)(a) of the Act.
27.
The Supreme Court in the case of VT Khanzode v. Reserve Bank of India, AIR 1982 SC 917 held that there was no doubt that a statutory corporation could do only such acts as were authorised by the statute and that the powers of such a corporation cannot extend beyond what the statute provides expressly or by necessary implication.
This authority was pressed into service by the learned Counsel for the respondent-Board, Mr. Subba Reddy, who submitted that no infirmity could be attributed to the same as held by the Supreme Court in the above authority cited by him.
He further submitted that the observation made by the Supreme Court in Para 15 of the above decision that it was well settled that where a specific power was conferred without prejudice to the generality of a power already conferred, the specific power was only illustrative and could not restrict the width of the general power.
In Para 16 the Supreme Court observed that Section 58(1) of the Act conferred powers on the Central Board of Directors of the Bank to make regulations in order to provide for all matters for which provision was necessary or convenient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act and the Counsel submitted that they do not go to the rescue of the petitioner in the instant case because the rules have already been framed by the Government conferring necessary power upon the Board in the exercise of the authority vested in the Government by the Act.
I agree with the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the respondent-Board on the basis of the observations made in Paras 15 and 16 by the Supreme Court in the decisions cited above.
28.
As regards validity of the Regulations in question, under Section 21 of the AP General Clauses Act, 1891, any order, notification or other matter which is required to be notified or published under any act, such notification or publication could be deemed to be duly made if it is published in the Official Gazette.
29.
Section 23 of the General Clauses Act provides as under :  "23.
The provisions of this Act shall apply- (a) in relation to any Regulation made by the Governor under Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935 in like manner as they apply in relation to the Acts made by the Provincial Legislature referred to in item (i) of Clause (I-b) of Section 3; and (b) in relation to any ordinance promulgated by the Governor under Article 213 of the Constitution or any Regulation made by him under paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in like manner as they apply in relation to the Acts made by the State Legislature: Provided that sub-section (1) of Section 5 of this Act shall apply to ordinance referred to in clause (b) as if the reference in that sub-section to the day of the first publication of the assent to an Act in the Official Gazette were a reference instead to the day of the first publication of the ordinance in that Gazette."
30.
The Supreme Court in its recent decision in I.T.C.
Bhadrachalam Paper Boards v. Mandal Revenue Officer, AP, 1996(6) SCC 634, observed in Para 13 that  "...........Section 21 of the Andhra Pradesh General Clauses Act says that even where an Act or Rule provides merely for publication but does not say expressly that it shall be published in the Official Gazette, it would be deemed to have been duly made if it is published in the Official Gazette.
As observed by Khanna, J, speaking for himself and Shelat, J, in Sammbhu Nath Jha v. Kedar Prasad Sinha the requirement of publication in the Gazette (SCC p. 578.
Para 17) "is an imperative requirement and cannot be dispensed with".
The learned Judge was dealing with Section 3(1) of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 which provides inter alia that a Commissioner of Inquiry shall be appointed "by notification in the Official Gazette".
The learned Judge held that the said requirement is mandatory and cannot be dispensed with."
31.
Chinnappa Reddy, J, speaking for himself and GL Oza., J, made the following observations in BK Srinivasan v. State of Karnataka, 1987(1) SCC 658, which are extracted in para 14 of I.T.C.
Bhadrachalam's case are reproduced below :  "But unlike Parliamentary legislation which is publicly made, delegated or subordinate legislation is often made unobtrusively in the chambers of a Minister, a Secretary to the Government or other official dignitary.
It is, therefore, necessary that subordinate legislation, in order to take effect, must be published or promulgated in some suitable manner, whether such publication or promulgation is prescribed by the parent statute or not.
It will then taken effect from the date of such publication or promulgation.
Where the parent statute prescribes the mode of publication or promulgation that mode must be followed.
Where the parent statute is silent, but the subordinate legislation itself prescribes the manner of publication, such a mode of publication may be sufficient, if reasonable.
If the subordinate legislation does not prescribe the mode of publication or if the subordinate legislation prescribes a plainly unreasonable mode of publication, it will take effect only when it is published through the customarily recognised official channel, namely, the Official Gazette or some other reasonable mode of publication."
32.
In the case before us, the statute does prescribe the mode of publication by providing in sub-section (1) of Section 17 of the Act that the Government by notification may make rules for carrying out all or any of the purposes of the Act, and we have already seen above that the notification in regard to the same has already been published in the Gazette and, therefore, sub-section (1) of Section 17 of the Act could be construed as having been complied with.
However, the notification published in the gazette is silent whether sub-section (2) of Section 17 of the Act which made it obligatory to obtain the approval of the State Legislature in regard to every sub-rule as provided in sub-section (2) of Section 17 of the Act was complied with or not.
The answer to this lacunae in the event of non-compliance could be found from the two decisions of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1972 SC 995 and AIR 1978 SC 327, which we shall advert to at a later stage.
33.
The next question emphatically sought to be brought home to the Court by the learned Counsel Mr. Y Suryanarayana, related to the promotion of petitioners from the post of Superintendents to the cadre of Deputy Secretaries in various disciplines such as Examinations, Accounts etc.
The learned Counsel urged that the Act did not confer any power on the Board to make any regulation stipulating any ratio between Junior Lecturers of the Government Junior Colleges and the Superintendents of the Board of the Intermediate Education.
Under Regulation 4 of the Regulations governing the recruitment and conditions of the officers of the Board of Intermediate Education, the method of recruitment to the category of Deputy Secretary (Examinations), Deputy Secretary (Accounts) etc., could be by way of promotion from amongst the cadres of the Superintendents of the Board and by direct recruitment and also by deputation.
However, according to the learned Counsel Mr. Suryanarayana, 1980 Regulations did not provide for fixing any ratio between various sources of recruitment and that the Act also did not confer any power upon the Board to make any regulations for fixing any ratio between the promotees and the deputationists in the matter of recruitment to the category of Deputy Secretary.
It is, however, not true to say so, in view of the fact that under sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 of the Rules under Andhra Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1971 (G.O.
Ms. No. 539, dated 9.4.1975), the officers and other servants required for the Board can be appointed either by direct recruitment or by promotion from the lower cadres or by deputation from the Government Departments or Autonomous Bodies.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 does not impose any restriction on the Board with regard to the proportion in which the appointments may be made by direct recruitment or by promotion or by deputation.
It that view of the matter, therefore, if ratio is fixed by the Board in the interest of regulating the appointments to be made from the said three sources, the same could not be treated as inoperative or devoid of authority.
Such guideline in fact would better serve the interests of justice because the matter would then be prevented from being left solely to the discretion of the appointing authority.
34.
It is however true that the Act has not provided for any power to the Secretary of the Board to fix any ratio for this purpose.
In the counter affidavit it is stated that the Secretary of the Board was authorised to fix the ratio between Junior Lecturers and Superintendents in its meeting held on 17993.
Accordingly, the Secretary fixed the ratio at 1:1.
However, the Board resolved in the meeting held on 27993 that for filling up the posts in the cadre of Deputy Secretary, the ratio of 2:1 between Junior Lecturers and the Superintendents should be followed.
No appointments were made after the said resolution because, the Staff Association submitted a representation claiming that all posts in the cadre of Deputy Secretary should be considered for the employees of the Board.
This aspect was examined by the Board at its meeting held on 11101994 and the Board resolved to refer the matter to the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance to fix the ratio and rotation points and that the matter was still under consideration.
35.
It is further stated in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the Board that according to the Act, the Regulations made thereunder and the resolution of the Board delegating power to the Secretary, the Secretary was empowered to fix the ratio.
It was argued on behalf of the Board that when different methods of appointments were provided in the Regulations for appointment to the posts of Deputy Secretary, a ratio or a method had to be evolved and followed for filling up the posts in the cadre of Deputy Secretary by the Board and that the Board was competent to fix the ratio or to refix the ratio under the Regulations.
The particulars of the present position of the Deputy Secretaries in the Board were stated to be as follows :  (i) Total No. of posts in the cadre of Deputy Secretaries ...16 (ii) No. of posts held by Jr. Lecturers/deputationists, ... ..... 5 (iii) No. of posts held by personnel of BIE.
.....6 (iv) Ratio system to be followed for filling up of vacancies as per resolution of the Board at its meeting held on 27993 between JLs.
and promotees of BIE ...21 (v) Vacancies available .....5 (vi) No. of vacancies to be filled by JLs.
in the ratio of 2:1 .....3 (vii) No. of vacancies to be filled by personnel of BIE.
in the ratio of 2:1 .....2 36.
Further according to the Board, the methods in which the Board could make Regulations under Section 12 of the Act includes the appointment of Officers and other employees of the Board and their conditions of service and, therefore, the Board was competent to fix the ratio.
The question before us at the moment, however, is not whether the Board could formulate such ratios but whether the power could be delegated to the Secretary of the Board to formulate the same.
As already seen above Clause (xvii) of Section 9(1) of the Act, which amongst other powers to be exercised by the Board provides for delegating such of these powers as it deems fit to any of the committees or to the Chairman or to any other authority of the Board.
However, as already stated earlier, the entire Section 9 of the Act deals with the powers of the Board in relation to the academic affairs of the Board and not with administrative affairs, and, therefore, in my opinion, the Board's power to delegate cannot be searched to fix ratio for appointment of Deputy Secretaries under Section 9 of the Act.
The appropriate provision in Section 12 of the Act, which provides for the power of the Board to make Regulations which includes in Clause (d) of sub-section (2) the power to make Regulations for appointment of officers and other employees of the Board and their conditions of service.
This provision does not speak of delegation of such power to the Secretary or any authority of the Board, obviously, because the power to make Regulations cannot be so delegated.
As far as powers to make appointments are concerned, the Rules provide for the Secretary to exercise the power of making appointment of ministerial staff, last grade staff and contingent staff, and no other power as far as appointments are concerned.
37.
Under Section 7 of the Act, the Secretary can exercise such powers of control and supervision over the offices under the Board and the staff therein as may be prescribed, but as far as the appointments are concerned, under sub-section (3)(a) of Section 7, subject to such rules as may be made, it is the Board only which can appoint such other officers and servants as it may deem necessary and proper for the efficient execution of its duties.
If the basic power of appointment is not conferred upon the Secretary, it is an exercise in futility to argue that the Secretary could fix the ratio between the Superintendents and Junior Lecturers.
The ratio of 2:1 between the Junior Lecturers and Superintendents for appointment as Deputy Secretaries was fixed by the Board in its meeting held on 27993, and ordinarily no illegality could be attributed to the same.
However, no formula has been placed before the Court by the Board how the ratio was fixed and on what basis the Chairman of the Board proposed the ratio of 5:4, and how it was resolved by the Board that the ratio should be fixed at 2:1.
38.
In Harry Gupta v. The Madras Port Trust, Madras, 1986(1) SLR 665, the Division Bench of Madras High court observed that there was no express provision in Regulation 5 of Major Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Promotion) Regulations, 1977, permitting the Chairman to fix a ratio between the two feeder categories from which promotions had to be made to the post of Assistant Executive Engineers.
But it was obvious that when Regulation 5 refers to the manner of appointment to a post, whether by direct recruitment or by departmental promotion or by transfer, this power necessarily implies that promotion to a particular post could be made both by direct recruitment or by departmental promotion and when there were more than one feeder category from which promotions had to be made to the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers, it would become necessary to fix a ratio between the members of the two feeder categories before promotion could validity be made.
39.
The Punjab and Haryana Court in the case of Ude Bhan Sukhija v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1976(1) SLR 600, asserted that the Courts have always recognised a distinction between the conditions of service and chances of promotion.
In the face of the assurance given out to the petitioners their conditions of service could not have been varied to their disadvantage without their consent.
But they could not raise any legitimate grievance if their chances of promotion merely become dimmer and dimmer.
In the case before us, the petitioners stand in the position of those who, according to the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case before them were not considered to be having any legitimate grievance if their chances of promotion merely became dimmer and dimmer.
40.
These submissions made by the learned Counsel for the rival parties considered in the light of the principles laid down in the authorities discussed above, lead us to believe and endorse the view that not only the sources of appointment to the posts of Deputy Secretary resorted to by the Board were not impermissible, but made it obligatory upon the Board to consider all of them as feeder cadres for appointment/promotion to the post of Deputy Secretaries in various disciplines in the Board.
The ratio which could be followed for making such promotions/appointments is indeed a matter of serious concern.
Junior Lecturers working in Government Junior Colleges who have limited avenues for promotion could indeed be not denied the opportunity of being exposed to such avenue by posting them in the Board on deputation basis.
But the question is whether they stand on equal footing with the Superintendents in the regular employment of the Board, waiting their turn for years together for promotion to the limited posts of Deputy Secretaries in different disciplines in the Board.
The question whether teaching experience of Junior Lecturers deserves any preferential treatment for such appointments over the long drawn administrative experience of the Superintendents or irrespective of teaching experience on one hand and administrative experience on the other or irrespective of the fact whether the incumbent to be considered for promotion is on deputation from outside or belongs to the same department or, whether the length of service either with the Board or with the parent organisation alone can be taken into consideration for fixing up the ratio for such promotion is a question which requires an in-depth consideration of these and many other factors which may contribute to determine the eligibility for the limited scope of promotion to the post of Deputy Secretaries, and the Board would do well to appoint a Committee of Senior Officers well-versed in matters of personnel management with a specific reference to determine the ratio in which the Superintendents of the Board on the one hand and the deputationists to the Board on the other could be considered for promotion/appointment to the post of Deputy Secretaries for different disciplines in the Board.
This work could be entrusted even to the Board's own Standing Committee.
The powers and the functions of the Standing Committee as provided in Rule 4 of the Rules framed and amended as per G.O.
Ms. No. 598 Education (V) dated 19th May, 1978 and published in AP Gazette Part-I pages 554, 555, 556 dated 6th July, 1978 include the function of advising the Board on creation or sanction of posts of officers and staff of the Board of Intermediate Education and their conditions of service including their pay scales, allowances and remuneration, according to Clause (vii) of Rule 3 of the aforesaid rules.
The Standing Committee can also exercise such other powers or duties as may be conferred or imposed by the Board as provided in Clause (xii) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 of the said rules.
Such Committee should be appointed by Respondent No. 1 within two weeks from the date of receipt of this order, with a direction to the Committee to submit its recommendations to the Board as expeditiously as possible, but not later than six weeks from the date of its constitution.
Till then all proposals for promotion/appointment to the post of Deputy Secretaries in any discipline in the Board should be kept in abeyance.
41.
In any case, however, the Secretary of the Board has no authority or power to make appointment of Deputy Secretaries in any discipline of the Board, and is prohibited from determining any ratio for such appointments.
42.
The third important question which has cropped up for our consideration in this group of four writ petitions is whether in view of the fact that the proposed Regulations of 1980 which have still not been approved by the Government and consequently not yet notified could be provisionally followed for all practical purposes in accordance with the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Lalit Mohan Deb v. Union of India, AIR 1972 SC 995, that in the absence of statutory rules regulating promotion to selection grade posts the Government is competent to issue administrative instructions as long as those instructions are not inconsistent with the rules already framed, as also the ratio laid down in the case of Ramesh Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 1978 SC 327, that the process of rule-making is a protracted and complicated one involving consultation with various authorities and compliance with manifold formalities.
The exigencies of administration at times require immediate creation of service or posts and any procrastination in that behalf cannot but prove detrimental to the proper and efficient functioning of public departments.
In like situations, the authorities concerned should be seized of power to appoint or terminate administrative personnel under the general power of administration vested in them.
43.
It is, therefore, imperative for the Respondent No. 1 to follow the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in the above two cases.
However, suffice it to say for the time being that in the instant case since the rules laid down by the State Government under Andhra Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1971 by way of G.O.
Ms. No. 539, Education (V) dated 9th April, 1975 and published in Rules Supplement, AP Gazette 22nd May, 1975, pages 37 to 40, render sufficient machinery for implementing the scheme of the Act, it is necessary that the same should be followed by Respondent No. 1 for broad compliance so long as the draft regulations covering comprehensive provisions on administrative affairs already submitted to the Government receive the Government's approval and are notified in the Gazette.
44.
We can also not lose sight of the fact that the rules in question derive validity from the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India which confers power on the Governor of a State to make rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under Article 309 and any rules so made can have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act.
45.
Writ Petition Nos. 932/1995, 1232/1995, 5904/1995 and 19186/1995 are, therefore, disposed of with the following directions :  (1) The Respondent No. 1 may either appoint a Committee of Senior Officers well-versed in personnel management with a specific reference to determine the ratio between the Superintendents of the Board and the Deputationists to the Board for promotion/appointment for the post of Deputy Secretaries for different disciplines in the Board, within two weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of this order, or the Board may empower its own Standing Committee for the purpose as stated above; (2) The Committee so appointed or the Standing Committee of the Board as the case may be, shall submit its report to the Board within six weeks from the date of its constitution after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to the petitioner No. 1-Association; (3) The Board shall keep in abeyance the promotion/recruitment to the post of Deputy Secretaries till the report is submitted by such committee; (4) The Board of Intermediate Education, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad is directed not to resort to the exercise of filling up the posts of Deputy Secretaries according to the ratio laid down in its meeting held on 2791993; (5) The right of the said Board, however, to appoint Junior Lecturers from Junior Colleges on deputation basis is upheld, but their promotion shall be subject to the ratio which may be formulated by the Committee which may be appointed by the Board for this purpose in pursuance of the first direction hereinabove; (6) The Secretary of the Board shall have no power to make appointment of Deputy Secretary in any discipline and/or to determine any ratio for such appointment; (7) No costs.
Ordered accordingly.