GS Singhvi, J - Two questions which arise for adjudication in this writ petition are whether the nomination of respondent No. 4 under rule 10(1) for selection for the purpose of inclusion in Register A-II maintained under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) Class I Rules, 1976 is illegal, and whether the petitioner is entitled to be appointed to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch).
2.
In the year 1990, the Government of Punjab decided to make recruitment against 9 vacancies of PCS (Executive Branch) Class I from register A-II.
For this purpose, the names of the petitioner and others holding ministerial appointments in Class II and Class III services under the Government of Punjab were forwarded by the competent authorities.
The names of all such persons were forwarded by the Chief Secretary, Punjab, to the Punjab Public Service Commission along with the nomination rolls and service records.
The name of the petitioner was not included in the list forwarded to the Commission.
He, therefore, instituted CWP No. 67 of 1994 (Gurjit Singh v. State of Punjab and others).
That writ petition came to be decided on 1841994 along with five other writ petitions.
Vide its judgment in Narinder Pal Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) RSJ 1 : 1994(3) SCT 482 (P&H), a Division Bench of this Court allowed CWP No. 67 of 1994 and directed the respondents to forward the name of the petitioner to the Punjab Public Service Commission for necessary action.
Here it is important to mention that the petitioner had quoted the name of respondent No. 4 as one of the candidates whose name had been forwarded by the Minister of Medical Education and Research and pleaded that if Gurdeep Singh, respondent No. 4, could be nominated by the Minister for Medical Education and Research on the basis of his short tenure, there was no reason why he could not have been nominated by the Minister, Public Works Department because he had worked in that Department between 2261993 and 2671993.
3.
The Punjab Public Service Commission short listed the candidates whose names were forwarded by the Chief Secretary and called 38 eligible candidates for interview from 2791994 to 3091994.
On the basis of the evaluation of the record and performance of the eligible candidates who were interviewed by it, the Commission prepared a merit list of the following 9 candidates :  1.
Hari Krishan Lal  2.
Surinder Singh Sidhu  3.
Avtar Chand Sharma  4.
Jaspal Singh  5.
Gurdeep Singh  6.
Mukand Singh Sandhu  7.
Satish Kumar Singla  8.
Dhanwinder Pal  9.
Mrs. Ranghbir Kaur  The Government included the names of these 9 candidates in Register A-II and appointed them to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch).
4.
While the process of selection for preparation of the select list was going on, for which nominations were made in the year 1993, the Government submitted a requisition dated 2791994 to the Commission for appointment against three posts of PCS (Executive Branch) Class I, by the method of nominations.
5.
The petitioner has questioned the selection of respondent No. 4 on the ground that Shri Braham Mohindera, the then Minister for Medical Education and Research, could not have nominated respondent No. 4 because the respondent No. 4 was working under the Health and Family Welfare Department which was headed by S Harcharan Singh Brar.
According to the petitioner, Shri Braham Mohindra could have nominated an official working under him or in the offices subordinate to him and as the respondent No. 4 was not working in his office or in an office subordinate to him, the Hon'ble Minister for Medical Education and Research had no jurisdiction to nominate him for selection to the PCS (Executive Branch) under Rule 10 of the 1976 Rules.
He has also pleaded that the Punjab Public Service Commission committed a serious illegality by not recommending his name for recruitment to PCS (Executive Branch) Class I against one of the posts for which requisition was sent by the Government vide letter dated 2791994.
In support of this plea, the petitioner has relied on the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide circular dated 2231957 which casts a duty on the Public Service Commission to forward the names of the persons who are included in the merit list for the purpose of appointment against the vacancies which became available within six months of the preparation of the select list.
6.
In the separate replies filed by them, respondents Nos. 1 and 2 as well as respondents Nos. 3 and 4 have challenged the locus standi of the petitioner to question the selection of respondent No. 4 on the ground of delay and laches, waiver and acquiescence and the alleged illegality in his own nomination.
The respondents have stated that at the relevant point of time, the Department of Health and Family Welfare was headed by two ministers.
Shri Harcharan Singh Brar headed the Department of Health and Family Welfare except the work relating to Medical Education and Research which was under Shri Braham Mohindera.
This allocation had been done by the Governor of Punjab in accordance with Rule 3 of the Allocation of Business Rules, 1986.
However, there was only one Secretary, Shri GPS Sahi.
He was looking after the work of Health and Family Welfare including Medical Education and Research and all the Officers and Officials including the respondent No. 4 were subordinate to the Administrative Secretary.
Respondent No. 4 was working in the office of the Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare from 22121987 to 7101993 and, therefore, he could be nominated by Shri Braham Mohindra.
The respondent No. 4 has also pleaded that he had been dealing with the work relating to the Punjab Civil Medical Services doctors working in Medical Colleges and Hospitals and this work was under the charge of the Minister for Medical Education and Research.
He has stated that work relating to PCMS doctors with Service Nos. 2901 to 3800 was dealt with by him irrespective of the fact whether the doctors were working in the Medical Colleges which came under the Minister, Medical Education and Research or were working in the Medical Hospitals, the work relating to which came under the charge of the minister, Health and Family Welfare.
Respondent No. 4 has also pleaded that Shri HS Brar held the portfolio of Irrigation and Power during 1993 but he did not nominate any employee working under him or in an office subordinate to him.
He became Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 971993 but did not recommend the name of the employee for appointment to the PCS (Executive Branch).
Prior to his being made the Minister for Medical Education and Research, Shri Braham Mohindera held the portfolio of Social Welfare.
In that capacity he did not recommend anybody for appointment by nomination to the PCS (Executive Branch).
Therefore, as Minister of Medical Education and Research Shri Braham Mohindra was entitled to nominate the respondent No. 4.
The claim of the petitioner to be appointed against one of the three posts for which requisition was sent by the Government on 2791994 has been contested by the respondent on the ground that he did not qualify in the selection process.
The respondents have relied on the decision of this Court in Satish Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1994(2) RSJ 210 : 1993(2) SCT 668 (P&H) and Harjinder Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(2) RSJ 227 : 1995(2) SCT 257 (P&H).
7.
The petitioner has filed separate replications and has reiterated his plea that the nomination of respondent No. 4 is without jurisdiction inasmuch as he was not working in an office subordinate to the Minister, Medical Education and Research.
8.
Before we deal with the objections raised by the respondents to the locus standi and the two questions which arise for determination in this case, we deem it appropriate to reproduce Rules 8(2) and 10(1) to (4) of Rules, 1976.
The same read as under :-  "Rule 8 : Registers to be maintained : The following Registers of accepted candidates shall be maintained by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, namely :  (1) xx xx xx (2) Register A-II in which shall be entered the names of temporary members of Class II and members of Class III Service serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab and holding ministerial appointments accepted as candidates : RULE 10 :- Selection of candidates for Register A - II : (1) Each of the authorities specified in the first column of the table below may submit to the Government in Form I attached to these rules the nomination rolls of such number of persons as is specified in each case in the second column of the said table from amongst the temporary members of Class I Services and members of Class III Services, holding ministerial appointments and working in its office or in the offices subordinate to it : Nominating Authority Number of nominations 1.
Chief Minister 2 2.
Speaker, Punjab Vidhan Sabha 1 3.
Chief Justice High Court of Punjab and Haryana 2 4.
Ministers & Ministers of State 1 (each) 5.
Deputy Ministers 1 (each) 6.
Chief Parliamentary Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary 1 (each) 7.
Chief Secretary 5 8.
Financial Commissioners 1 (each) Provided that during the operation of a Proclamation issued under clause (i) of Article 356 of the Constitution of India in the State the Governor may nominate two persons from amongst the temporary members of Class II Service and members of Class III Service holding ministerial appointments and working in his office or in the office subordinate to him.
(2) No nomination roll in respect of a person shall be submitted under the provisions of sub-rule (1) unless such person :  (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed 10 year's continuous service under the Government.
(b) was under the age of forty-five year's on the first day of November immediately preceding the date of submission of names by the nominating authorities; and  (c) is a graduate of recognized University.
(3) The nomination rolls submitted under sub-rule (i) along with the service record of the candidates shall be forwarded to the Commission which shall consider the merits of each such candidate and recommend such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the Service.
(4) The names of persons recommended by the Commission under sub-rule (3) shall be entered in Register A-II in the order in which they are recommended by the Commission."
9.
Mrs. Charu Tuli and Mr. SS Saron argued that no writ should be issued in favour of the petitioner because (i) the petitioner is guilty of delay and laches; (ii) the petitioner must be deemed to have waived his right to challenge the selection of Respondent No. 4 because he participated in the process of selection knowing fully well that respondent No. 4 had been nominated by the Minister, Medical Education and Research; (iii) the decisions of CWP No. 67 of 1994 and CWP No. 1612 of 1995 (Devinder Sethi v. State of Punjab) must be treated as res judicata qua the petitioner.
Elaborating their objections, the learned counsel argued that the selection process which commenced in the year 1993 was finalised in the year 1994 and the writ petition has been filed after almost two years of the completion of the process or selection without any explanation for the long delay of two years.
Mr. Saron submitted that the petitioner must be held guilty of laches because he was fully aware of the fact that the respondent No. 4 had been nominated by the Minister, Medical Education and Research and in fact, he had indirectly challenged that nomination by filing Civil Misc.
Application in the writ petition filed by Devinder Sethi.
The learned counsel argued that in the peculiar facts of the case, the petitioner should be non-suited only on the ground of long lapse of time between the date of selection and the date of the filing of the writ petition.
They further argued that after having participated in the process of selection in which the candidature of respondent No. 4 was also considered, the petitioner has no right to challenge the eligibility of respondent No. 4 particularly when he, i.e., the petitioner, has not been found suitable by the Commission.
The learned counsel argued that it was open to the petitioner to question the eligibility of respondent No. 4 in CWP No. 67 of 1994 but he did not do so.
Instead, he tried to take advantage of the nomination of the respondent No. 4 by pleading that his case was similar to that of respondent No. 4.
Therefore, at this belated stage, he should not be allowed to question the nomination of respondent No. 4.
Mr. Saron further submitted that the petitioner had earlier made an attempt to get a declaration of the invalidity of nomination of respondent No. 4 by filing Misc. applications Nos. 2113, 7877 and 4665 of 1995 in CWP No. 1612 of 1995 (Devinder Singh Sethi v. State of Punjab) and as he has failed in that attempt, he should not be allowed to raise the same issue through this writ petition.
10.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner should not be non-suited on the ground of laches because he was vigorously pursuing his challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4.
He submitted that the petitioner had raised this issue in CWP No. 1612 of 1995 and immediately after the decision of that writ petition, he has filed the present writ petition and, therefore, he cannot be held guilty of delay and laches.
Shri Atma Ram also argued that the petitioner cannot be denied the relief on the ground of waiver and acquiescence because illegality in the nomination of respondent No. 4 is writ large on the face of the record.
He also argued that the petitioner cannot be denied the relief on the basis of the circular dated 23.9.1957, because such relief could be claimed by him independently and it has nothing to do with the illegality in the nomination of respondent No. 4.
11.
We have thoughtfully considered the rival contentions in the context of the objections raised by the respondents to the locus standi of the petitioner to question the nomination of respondent No. 4.
At the cost of repetition, we deem it appropriate to mention that in Para 16 of CWP No. 67 of 1994, the petitioner had made specific averment regarding respondent No. 4 by stating that Shri Braham Mohindra, Minister for Medical Education and Research had nominated him on 23.7.1973, although he had no occasion to see the work of respondent No. 4.
He had also quoted the examples of Mukand Singh Sandhu who was recommended by Shri Lakhbir Singh Randhawa; Tarlochan Singh Mankotia and Baljinder Singh Sodhi who were recommended by the Chief Secretary, Punjab.
The petitioner had sought support from the instances of the nominations of respondent No. 4, Mukand Singh Sandhu, Tarlochan Singh Mankotia and Baljinder Singh Sodhi to assert that his nomination by the Minister of State for Public Works was in order and his name ought to have been forwarded to the Public Service Commission.
In this context, it is interesting to note that when the nominations of eligible candidates were called for vide Annexure P-2, the petitioner was working as Senior Assistant in the Directorate of Lotteries under the Finance Department and the authorities competent to nominate him were the Finance Minister and the Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab.
However, they did not recommend the name of the petitioner.
On 2171993, the Minister of State for Public Works prepared a note for transfer of the petitioner from the Directorate of the State Lotteries to the Public Works Department.
On the basis of that note, order dated 2271993 was issued posting the petitioner in the Public Works Department upto 26.7.1993 on temporary basis.
However, the petitioner did not join the Public Works Department nor did he relinquish the charge from the State Lotteries Department.
Notwithstanding that, the petitioner got his name recommended by the Minister of State for Public Works on 2271993.
On that very day, he got the recommendation diarised in the PPS Branch of the Department of General Administration.
Subsequently, the Minister of State for Public Works realised his mistake in nominating the petitioner.
He, therefore, wrote a note on 2541994 withdrawing his nomination.
But, by virtue of the judgment dated 1841994 the petitioner could get his name forwarded to the Public Service Commission.
However, this much is clear that the petitioner did not challenge the nomination of respondent No. 4 when he filed CWP No. 67 of 1994.
Even thereafter the petitioner did not question the nomination of respondent No. 4 till the completion of the process of selection.
It was only when he filed Civil Misc.
Applications in CWP No. 1612 of 1995 that the petitioner raised challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4.
He field this petition on 1281996, i.e. almost two years after the finalisation of the selection by the Commission.
In our opinion the petitioner is clearly guilty of laches and that by itself is sufficient to reject his challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4.
12.
We also find merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that after having taken part in the process of selection, the petitioner must be deemed to have waived his right to challenge the nomination of respondent No. 4.
The petitioner not only knew of the fact that Shri Braham Mohindra, Minister of State for Public Works, had nominated respondent No. 4 but also knew of his right to challenge the nomination of respondent No. 4.
Instead of doing that, he successfully drew support from the nomination of respondent No. 4.
Having done that, the petitioner cannot turn around and question the nomination of respondent No. 4 in the petition filed after almost two years of preparation of the merit list.
13.
Although on the basis of the above conclusions the writ is liable to be dismissed, yet we deem it appropriate to deal with the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner in support of the two questions which arise for determination by the Court.
Re : Challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4 :  Rule 10(1) entitles the Chief Minister the Speaker, Punjab Vidhan Sabha, Chief Justice of High Court of Punjab and Haryana, Ministers and Minister of State etc. to nominate specified number of candidates holding ministerial appointments and working in their respective offices or in the offices subordinate to them.
The challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4 is founded on the plea that the said respondent was working as Senior Assistant in Health Department which was headed by Shri HS Brar and, therefore, Shri Braham Mohindra, Minister for Medical Education and Research had no authority to nominate him.
In this regard, it is important to bear in mind that the Governor of Punjab framed the Government of Punjab Allocation of Business Rules, 1986.
Rule 2 of these rules provides that the business of the State of Punjab shall be transacted in the Departments specified in the Schedule annexed to the rules and shall be classified and distributed among those Departments.
Rule 3 lays down that the Governor shall on the advice of the Chief Minister allot the Ministers and the Ministers of State, the business of the Government by assigning one or more Department to the charge of a Minister.
Proviso to this rule lays down that charge of one Department may be assigned to more than one Minister.
Under Rule 4, each Department of the Secretariat shall consist of the Secretary to Government who shall be the official head of the Department and of such other officers and officials subordinate to him as the State Government may determine.
Proviso to Rule 4 lays down that more than one Department may be placed under the charge of the same Secretary and the work of one Department must be distributed among two or more Secretaries.
Business relating to the Department of Health and Family Welfare contains as many as 13 items.
Of these, item No 6(d)(e)(i)(s)(p)(r) and item No. 7 relate to Medical Education and Research and Hospitals.
By notification dated 6th April, 1994, the Governor of Punjab framed Government of Punjab Allocation of Business Rules, 1994.
Under these rules, the Department of Health and Family Welfare has been bifurcated into two Departments.
This shows that till 1993, the Medical Education and Research constituted part and parcel of the Department of Health and Family Welfare even though two Ministers, namely, Shri HS Brar and Shri Braham Mohindra held charge of two separate wings.
It is the admitted position that the Department was headed by one Secretary, namely, Shri GPS Sahi.
It is also the admitted position that Shri HS Brar did not nominate any employee for the purpose of recruitment to the PCS (Executive Branch) either as Minister of Irrigation Department or as the Minister of Health and Family Welfare.
Likewise, Shri Braham Mohindra did not nominate any person while holding the portfolio of Social Welfare.
Respondent No. 4 was working in the office of the Secretary Department of Health.
Thus, he will be deemed to have been working in an office subordinate to both the Ministers.
We, therefore, do not find any infirmity in the nomination of respondent No. 4.
We are also satisfied that the work which was being done by respondent No. 4 and of which the details have been enumerated in para 6 of the reply related to medical education and research and Shri Braham Mohindra could legitimately nominate him for selection to PCS (Executive Branch) from Register A-II.
14.
We may also take notice of the fact that Devinder Singh Sethi had also challenged the nomination of respondent No. 4 in CWP No. 1612 of 1995.
In that case, the petitioner was impleaded as respondent No. 5 on the basis of application filed by him.
He, thereafter, moved Misc. application questioning the legality of the nomination of respondent No. 4.
However, this court did not feel satisfied with the challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4 and therefore, while dismissing the CWP No. 1612 of 1995, the court did not nullify the nomination of respondent No. 4.
In our opinion the dismissal of Civil Writ Petition No. 1612 of 19 should be treated as conclusive against the challenge to the nomination of respondent No. 4.
15.
Re : Whether the petitioner has the right to be appointed to PCS (Executive Branch Class I on the basis of the circular dated 2231957.
The claim of the petitioner that he has the right to be appointed in terms of the circular dated 2231957 on the premise that his name was included at Serial No. 10 in the merit list prepared by the Commission, now deserves to be examined.
The petitioner has asserted that respondents No. 1 and 2 should have considered his candidature for appointment against one of the three posts for which requisition was sent on 2791994.
In their replies the respondents No. 1 and 2 as well as the respondent No. 3 have contested the assertion of the petitioner that his name was included in the merit list prepared by the Commission.
Rather their categorical stand is that the petitioner did not qualify for inclusion in the merit list.
16.
The order passed by ML Koul, J in CWP No. 1612 of 1995 which is the foundation of the plea raised by the petitioner for issuance of mandamus to the respondents to appoint him against one of the three posts which became available subsequently is reproduced below for the purpose of reference.
The same reads thus :  "In order to resolve the controversy whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief by way of this CWP vide order of this court dated 971996, the merit list of the successful candidates was called for perusal.
Today the AAG Punjab produced a merit list under a sealed cover which was opened in the court.
It has been found that the name of the petitioner does not figure at Serial No. 10 as contended and proclaimed by him in the case.
Rather at No. 10 the name of Gurjit Singh is mentioned.
The name of the petitioner does occur in the list of candidates at Sr. 38, the name of the other intervener namely Gurjit Singh figure at Serial No. 10.
However, the selection list of the nine candidates has been approved and Gurdit Singh does not figure in that.
The name of Khushal Singh Thakur who wants to be made as an intervener in the proceedings does appear in the merit list at Serial No. 40.
Hence the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
The respondents are at liberty to appoint the candidates as per the select list."
In our opinion, from the order passed by ML Koul, J on 781996, it is not possible to infer that his Lordship has recorded a finding that the name of the petitioner has been included at Serial No. 10 in the merit list prepared by the Commission.
Reference to Serial No. 10 in the order passed by ML Koul, J is to the nomination list sent to the Commission.
In that list, the name of Devinder Singh Sethi was placed at Serial No. 38 and that of the petitioner at No. 10.
However, that cannot be equated with the final merit list prepared by the Commission.
It is, therefore, not possible to hold that the name of the petitioner came to be included at Serial No. 10 in the merit list prepared by the Commission.
Consequently the very foundation of the claim made by the petitioner on the basis of the Circular dated 27.3.57 must be termed as erroneous.
Even otherwise, we do not find any ground to hold that the petitioner acquired a right to be appointed against one of the three posts which became available in the year 1994.
The right of the petitioner to be considered for appointment was confined to the posts for which requisition was sent in the year 1993.
Against the posts which became available after initiation of the process of the selection in the year 1993 the Government could make recruitment after initiating the process of selection afresh.
The persons who may have been selected on the basis of the nominations made in the year 1992/93 could have been appointed against the existing post and not against the posts which occurred after the initiation of the process of selection.
This view of ours is based on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Hoshiar Singh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1993 SC 2606 : 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC); State of Bihar v. Madan Mohan, AIR 1994 SC 765 : 1994(1) SCT 530 (SC); Gujarat Deputy Executive Engineers Association v. State of Gujarat, 1994(3) SCC 559; Madan Lal v. State of J & K., AIR 1995 SC 1088 : 1995(2) SCT 880; Ashok Kumar v. Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board, 1996(1) SCC 283 : 1996(1) SCT 660 (SC) and Prem Singh v. State of Haryana,JT 1996(5) SC 219.
In these decisions, the Supreme Court has consistently held that recommendations in excess of the advertised posts cannot ordinarily be made and the waiting list prepared by the Commission/other selecting agencies can be utilized only for making appointment against the posts which have remained unfilled due to non-joining of the selected candidates.
Therefore, even if we were to assume that the name of the petitioner was included at number ten then he would be deemed to have been placed in the waiting list and on the basis of inclusion of his name in the waiting list, the petitioner can have no legitimate claim for appointment against the post which became available in the year 1994.
17.
The claim of the petitioner also deserves to be negatived on the basis of two decisions of this Court in Satish Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab (supra) and Rajinder Singh Sodhi v. State of Punjab, 1996(2) RSJ (sic).
In Satish Kumar Sharma's case, this Court held that the commission is under no obligation to recommend the name of a person beyond the number of vacancies intimated to it.
In the second case, the selection made by the Commission in the year 1983, which has also been impugned in this writ petition, has been upheld.
18.
We may also take cognizance of one of the settled propositions, namely, that a candidate does not acquire an absolute and indefeasible right to be appointed in the service merely on the basis of inclusion of his/her name in the waiting list.
It is always open to the employer not to make appointments even from the main select list.
In State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha, AIR 1973 SC 2216, Jatinder Kumar v. State of Punjab, AIR 1984 SC 1850 and Shankar Sen Dash v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 1612 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
194 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
555, it has been held that inclusion of the name in the select list by itself cannot lead to an automatic appointment and the candidate whose name is placed in the panel does not get a right to seek mandamus for his appointment.
Thus the petitioner, whose name could at best be treated as included in the waiting list has no right to be appointed against the posts which became available after the initiation of the process for recruitment.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.