VK Jhanji, J - In this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, prayer made is for quashing of award dated 15.1.1980 passed by the Labour Court, Jalandhar, so far as it has not awarded full back-wages to him.
2.
Petitioner was employed as Booking Clerk with the second respondent.
His services were terminated on 27-5-1977 without serving any notice, charge-sheet or holding any enquiry against him.
Being dis-satisfied with the order terminating his services, petitioner served notice of demand dated 11-6-1977 wherein he sought reinstatement with continuity of service and full back- wages.
According to the petitioner, second respondent did not accept the notice of demand served upon it.
Petitioner thereupon moved the Conciliation Authorities under the Industrial Disputes Act and called upon them to initiate the necessary conciliation proceedings.
When the efforts of the officers of the Labour Department to bring about conciliation between the parties failed to bear any fruit, the matter was referred to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Jalandhar.
The Labour Court, Jalandhar, on the issue, namely, whether termination of services of Harbans Lal Chhabra, workman, is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled, returned the finding that the respondent-management has failed to prove the charges on the basis of which petitioner was removed and consequently, termination of services of the petitioner was found not to be justified and in order.
As a result of this finding, petitioner was held entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service.
However, back-wages for the intervening period were not allowed solely on the ground that no 'genuine or sincere efforts' were made by him to seek employment elsewhere.
The award of the Labour Court so far as it has not awarded back-wages to the petitioner is being challenged in this petition.
3.
It has been contended by the counsel for the petitioner that the normal relief to be granted to a workman whose termination has been found to be illegal by the Labour Court exercising its powers under the Industrial Disputes Act is that there should be reinstatement with full back-wages.
He contended that to this rule, there is only one exception, namely, where the management has pleaded and proved that the workman was gainfully employed during the period of his forced unemployment.
He further contended that in the present case, there is no material on record to warrant departure from this well-established rule.
In answer to these submissions, counsel for the management has contended that the management in its written statement filed in response to the claim petition had clearly stated that in case the workman denies the fact of gainful employment after his removal from service, he should be directed to file an affidavit in support thereof.
He contended that the petitioner did not file the affidavit asked for by the management and therefore, in these circumstances it would be taken that he remained gainfully employed during this period.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel, l am of the view that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
Petitioner has been denied the relief of full back-wages solely on the ground that he did not make any sincere and genuine efforts to seek employment elsewhere.
Relief has not been denied to him on the ground that he had remained gainfully employed during the period of his forced unemployment.
As regards the contention of the counsel for the respondent-management that the petitioner would be taken to have remained gainfully employed as he has failed to file the affidavit to that effect, suffice it to say, at no stage the Labour Court called upon the petitioner to file the affidavit as asked by the management.
Rather while appearing as his own witness, petitioner denied the suggestion put by the management that he was gainfully employed elsewhere.
The statement was recorded on oath and so, the objection of the management that the petitioner purposely did not file the affidavit is of no consequence.
In this regard, reference may also be made to the categoric averment of the petitioner in para 8 of the writ petition in which he has stated that the management has failed to plead or lead any evidence to prove that the petitioner had been gainfully employed.
He averred that before the Labour Court, there was neither any pleading by the management nor any proof regarding the petitioner having remained gainfully employed during the period of his unemployment.
In reply to this, the management had an opportunity to state that the petitioner was gainfully employed or to give the particulars of the employer with whom he had remained employed during the period his services stood terminated.
This having not been stated in the written statement, the claim of the management that the petitioner remained gainfully employed during the said period cannot be sustained.
As regards the claim of the petitioner that he was entitled to full back-wages after the Labour Court had concluded that the order terminating his services was illegal, reference may be made to a judgment of the Apex Court in M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of the M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, AIR 1979 SC 75 wherein their Lordships of the Apex Court observed:  "Ordinarily, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated either by dismissal, discharge or retrenchment will be entitled to full back-wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
When the termination of the services was found to be neither proper nor justified, it would not only show that the workmen were always willing to serve but if they rendered services they would legitimately be entitled to the wage for the same.
If the workmen were always ready to work but they were kept away therefrom on account of invalid act of the employer, there is no justification for not awarding them full back-wages which were very legitimately due to them.''
In view of the settled law that the workman whose services had been illegally terminated would be entitled to back-wages except to the extent he remained gainfully employed during the period of his forced unemployment, I find no reason to deny the relief of back-wages to the petitioner when the management has failed to prove on record that he was gainfully employed during the period of his forced unemployment.
The judgement of Division Bench of Delhi High Court in MN Kumar v. M/s May and Baker Pvt Ltd and others, 1986 Labour Industrial Cases 1005, relied upon by counsel for respondent-management has no application to the facts of the present case.
In the case before the Delhi High Court, an enquiry into a fight between the workman and another employee of the company during working hours and in its precincts was found to be illegal for non-observance of rules of natural justice and the Labour Court came to hold that although the appellant was guilty of misconduct, there were extenuating circumstances which warranted a lenient punishment.
In the place of discharge from service, it awarded a lesser punishment invoking Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was in these circumstances, the award of the Labour Court was not interfered with for it was not without jurisdiction or perverse.
However, in the present case, on finding that the termination of the petitioner-workman was not justified and in order it was not within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to deny the relief of back-wages without recording a finding that he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
5.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The award of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the petitioner in addition to the relief of reinstatement with continuity of service is held entitled to full back-wages from the date of demand notice till the reinstatement.
No costs  Petition allowed.