Swatanter Kumar, J - Reply on behalf of the respondent has been filed in court today.
The same is taken on record.
Copy has been given to the counsel for the respondent.
2.
Affidavit/reply obviously does not meet all the contentions raised in the contempt petition.
The effort on the part of the respondents seems to be that the order of the Court has been complied with and, therefore, there was no need to meet the allegations made in the contempt petition specifically.
I do not think this approach as the correct one.
3.
As is clear from the petition that petitioner approached this Court by means of a petition under section 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act for disobedience of the order passed by the Letters Patent Bench in L.P.A. No. 348 of 1992 dated 881995.
Without going into the detailed facts of this case, it will be appropriate to note that every order passed in favour of the petitioner in spite of the fact that it was supported by various judgments of the Court was taken up before the Letters Patent Bench and then the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
All the judgments came in favour of the petitioner and they were granted relief.
The SLP preferred by the State was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide its order dated 1831996.
In spite of the fact that all the judgments of all the courts were pronounced against the State.
The State did not implement the directions of the court till today.
This contempt petition was filed and in reply to this petition, it is stated that vide Annexure R-1 annexed to the reply, the pay/salary of the petitioners have been fixed in the respective scales on the basis of the directions issued by the Letters Patent Bench.
Still the unfortunate part is that not a single penny was paid to the petitioner till date.
The petitioner has taken recourse to all possible lawful ways of having the order of the Court implemented but without much result.
What the respondents have done cannot be said to be proper compliance of the orders of the Court and there is no doubt to the fact that the petitioner has been denied what was due to him in accordance with the orders of the Court.
These actions are apparently and clearly violative of the principles governing administration of justice and certainly hamper proper dispensation of justice to the individual who has approached the Court and upon being successful has exhausted all legal remedies available to him before filing a petition for contempt.
4.
During the course of argument, Mr. Bhinder, learned State Counsel, stated that there is some kind of rivalry in the department which has resulted in delay in complying with the orders of the Court and timely compliance cannot be reported to the Court inspite of various judgments.
However, in the additional affidavit on behalf of Mr. Gupta, the unconditional and unqualified apology has been tendered in the following terms:-  ``In view thereof, it is apparent that the answering deponent has not in any way disobeyed the orders of this Hon'ble High Court.
The answering deponent holds all the courts in highest esteem and firmly believes in the Administration of Justice.
However, if the Hon'ble High Court feels that any act of omission has been done on the part of answering deponent which amounts to contempt of court the answering deponent tenders his unqualified apology.''
Mr. Gupta, who is also present in Court, has submitted that he has taken over in the department just a few weeks earlier and is trying his best to look into the matter and have the compliance of the orders of the Court at the earliest.
5.
The present case is one of not complying repeatedly with the various orders of the Court within the stipulated period.
This appears to be a clear case of violation of orders of Court.
But it is not necessary that every such case must result in conviction of the contemner in such proceedings.
The power of punishment under this Act has to be exercised sparingly and in consonance with the settled principles laid down by the Supreme Court for exercise of this judicial discretion vested in the courts.
Two underlying features of this Act are ensure implementation of orders of Courts and ensure that such violation is not repeated.
Punishment is not the ultimate end of such proceedings.
What is more important is that Court should be able to ensure re-occurrence of such disobedience in future.
I think it will be more appropriate in the present case to take a larger prospective in the present case in view of the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of S Mulgaokar, 1978(3) SCC 339, where the Court held as follows :-  ``The contempt power, though jurisdictionally large, is discretionary in its unsheathed exercise.
Every commission of contempt need not erupt in indignant committal or demand punishment, because Judges are judicious, their valour non-violent and their wisdom goes into action when played upon by a volley of values, the least of which is personal protection.''
It has been assured by the respondents that every effort would be made to ensure timely compliance of the orders of the Court.
Though I have held that it is a clear case of contempt, but keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, I find that apology tendered on behalf of Mr. Gupta, who is present in Court, is bona fide and sincere, which is accepted.
Accordingly, the rule is discharged.
6.
However, it is a fit case where this Court must award costs to the petitioners.
Petitioners have made all possible efforts by making appropriate representations and inspite of the fact that all the judgments of the concerned courts were in their favour, the petitioners are certainly entitled to costs which are assessed to Rs. 5, 000/-.
These costs shall be paid by the State first, but shall be debited from the salary of the erring officers, who are responsible to cause un-necessary delay.
As prayed, the State is directed to hold enquiry into the entire matter and whatever and whichever officers irrespective of the status are found guilty/liable to pay the costs by the disciplinary authority shall pay the same in addition to such other disciplinary action that the authorities would like to take, in accordance with law.
7.
The arrears in accordance with Annexure R-1 shall be paid to the petitioners within a period of three months from today.
It is further directed that both the parties shall comply with the directions without prejudice to the rights and contentions raised and obviously with such clarification as the parties may receive in furtherance of the directions of the court.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.