GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for issue of a mandamus directing the respondents to revise the pay scale of the petitioners from Rs. 350-500 to Rs. 420-700 with effect from 141979 and Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 111986 and to pay them arrears.
2.
Initially this petition was allowed by a learned single Judge on March 19, 1991 and the L.P.A. No. 1337 of 1994 filed by the respondents was dismissed by a Division Bench.
However, in the Special Leave Petition No. 294 of 1992 filed by the State Government in the Supreme Court, their Lordships reversed the decision of the learned single Judge and the Division Bench and directed the High Court to decide the writ petition afresh.
This is how the writ petition has been posted for rehearing and fresh decision by this Court.
3.
Before dealing with the contentions of the learned counsel, it will be appropriate to set out some facts.
The petitioners are holding the post of Diesel Pump Attendants (for the sake of brevity described as `DPAs').
Majority of the petitioners have passed matriculation and they hold ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade.
Pay scale of the DPAs was Rs. 90-140 as on 141973.
It was revised to Rs. 350-500 with effect from 141979 and then to Rs. 775- 1025 with effect from 111986.
Petitioners have claimed that they are more qualified than Battery Attendants who are merely matriculates and even though their duties are more onerous than those of the Battery Attendants, they have been given lower pay scale as compared to the Battery Attendants.
According to the petitioners, Battery Attendants were fixed in the pay scale of 140-250 prior to 141979.
Their pay scale was revised to Rs. 420-700 with effect from 141979 and then to Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 111986 but similar benefit has not been given to DPAs and in this manner they have been discriminated.
An alternative plea raised by the petitioners is that in terms of the Memo No. 6/23/3PR (FD)-8B dated 26th July, 1991 issued by the Finance Department all persons working on technical posts for which minimum educational qualifications are prescribed as matric with ITI certificate/polytechnic have been given the grade of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 151990 and, therefore, at least with effect from that date the petitioners should be paid salary in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
4.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents.
In the written statement dated 1121992 filed by them the respondents have pleaded that the petitioners were recruited as DPAs (pay scale of Rs. 350-500 in the Transport Department) and the minimum qualification prescribed for the DPAs was Matric.
As against this Battery Attendants were recruited in Haryana Roadways with the basic qualification of ITI certificate.
The respondents have also pleaded that the duties of DPAs are to fill diesel in the vehicles and to maintain the registers of supply and sale of diesel whereas the duties of Battery Attendants are technical in nature requiring them to keep batteries in order before placing the same in the vehicles.
The respondents have also stated that pay scales of two posts were never the same and the post of Battery Attendant always carried higher pay scale.
After amendment of the writ petition the respondents filed another written statement.
While reiterating the stand taken by them earlier the respondents have further stated in the second written statement that in one or two requisitions sent the qualification of DPAs was mentioned as Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade on the basis of draft recruitment rules but the same were never acted upon and no recruitment was made against such requisitions sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board in the year 1983.
Later on the Government clarified the position vide letter No. 26/9/84/ST dated 411984 that the qualifications for the post of DPA should be only Matric.
Annexure R-2 has been filed along with this written statement to show that the pay scale of Battery Attendant was always higher than that of DPA and the duties of the holders of two posts are also different.
5.
In the rejoinder filed by them, the petitioners have relied upon the provisions contained in the Haryana Transport Department (State Service Class-III) Rules, 1983 to support their assertion that qualification prescribed for the post of Diesel Pump Attendant is Matric with ITI and these were the qualifications mentioned in the requisition sent by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Rewari to the Employment Exchange, Rewari vide Memo No. 1188 dated 1041983.
The petitioners have placed on record Annexure P-4 which, according to the petitioners, was filed by the respondents before the Supreme Court along with the Special Leave Petition.
They have also produced a copy of the requisition sent to the Employment Exchange, Rewari showing that the qualifications for the post of Diesel Pump Attendant were specified as Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade.
6.
During the course of hearing, this Court passed an order on August 2, 1996 directing the Government counsel to produce the original record relating to the recruitment to the posts of Diesel Pump Attendants including the requisitions sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board and/or advertisement issued by the Board.
On 5th August, 1996, the learned Assistant Advocate General made a statement that the document produced as Annexure P-4 along with the rejoinder and which was also enclosed as Annexure R-1 with the original written statement dated 1121992 was not filed before the Supreme Court along with the SLP No. 254 of 1992.
Learned Assistant Advocate General also stated that the Executive Officer who had verified the contents of the reply dated 1121992 did so without looking to the records of the Government.
She also stated that there does not exist any decision of the competent authority prescribing the qualification of Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade for the post of DPA and if any appointment has been made at the level of General Manager, the same has been made in violation of prescribed qualifications.
She also stated that the draft rules of 1983 were never acted upon by the Government.
She prayed for grant of time to file supplementary affidavit to clarify the position.
Counsel appearing for the petitioners opposed this request but at the same time he made a request for grant of time to produce copy of the memo of Special Leave Petition to show that Annexure P-4/R-1 was produced by the State before the Supreme court.
The Court granted permission to both the parties to file affidavits and to produce documents.
7.
Thereafter the counsel for the petitioners filed Civil Miscellaneous No. 16707 of 1996.
Along with this CM the petitioner No. 1 filed an additional affidavit and also a copy of the Special Leave Petition which the State of Haryana had filed before the Supreme Court for challenging the previous decisions of the writ petition.
Copy of the advertisement issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board was also filed along with the Civil Miscellaneous application to show that the minimum qualification for appointment to the posts of DPAs was Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade.
8.
The main question which arises for adjudication by the court is whether the petitioners are entitled to be paid salary in the pay scale of Rs. 420-700 with effect from 141979 and the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 111986 by being treated at par with Battery Attendants.
9.
Argument of Shri SD Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners is that the qualification prescribed for the post of DPA is higher than that of Battery Attendant and the duties discharged by the holders of the posts of DPAs is much more onerous than the Battery Attendants and, therefore, grant of lower pay scale to the DPAs as compared to Battery Attendants should be declared as arbitrary, unreasonable, oppressive and unjustified.
Learned counsel argued that the pay scales of the DPAs should have been fixed with due regard to the fact that minimum qualification for recruitment of DPAs is Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade but the respondents have prescribed pay scale for DPAs which are lower than that of Battery Attendants and in this manner the petitioners have been discriminated.
Another facet of the arguments of Shri Sharma is that even if DPAs are not treated superior to Battery Attendants, the respondents must treat them at par and give similar pay scales because it is an admitted position that the post of DPA can be filled only by appointing a person who is Matriculate and who has passed ITI certificate whereas a Battery Attendant can be appointed only with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade.
Shri Sharma vehemently argued that after having produced a statement showing the qualification of DPAS as Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade before the Supreme Court, the respondents cannot now contend that the qualification prescribed for DPA is only Matric.
Learned counsel laid stress on the fact that the requisition sent to the Employment Exchange and the Subordinate Services Selection Board as well as the draft rules of 1983, Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade has been prescribed as the minimum qualification for recruitment of DPAs.
On the other hand learned Assistant Advocate General argued that the rules of 1983 were never finalised and given effect to by the State and, therefore, the qualification prescribed in the draft rules cannot be relied upon for the purpose of holding that Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade be treated as the prescribed qualification.
She argued that even if one or the other General Manager of Haryana Roadways may have sent requisition for the posts of DPAs indicating that qualification required was Matric with ITI certificate, the petitioners cannot take advantage of the same because as far as the Government is concerned the position was made clear vide letter dated 441984 written by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of Haryana to the Transport Controller, Haryana.
Ms. Bahri pointed out that the pay scale of the post of Battery Attendant was higher than that of DPA even prior to 1.2.1969 and the disparity in the pay scales of two posts has been retained when revised pay scales were made effective from 121969 141973, 31.3.1979, 141979, 31121985 and 111986 and the petitioners are not entitled to be given pay scale at par with Battery Attendants.
She argued that duties of the holders of two posts are also different and the Court should not substitute its opinion for the one formed by the Government regarding the nature of duties performed by DPAs and Battery Attendants.
She produced original records to show the qualifications incorporated in the requisition sent to the Employment Exchange.
10.
After having perused the record of the writ petition as well as the records produced before the Court by the learned Assistant Advocate General, I am satisfied that the statement Annexure P-4/R-1 which, according to the petitioners, was produced before the Supreme Court by the respondents had in fact not been produced before the Apex Court.
The memo of Special Leave Petition filed before this Court shows that the document produced by the petitioners as Annexure P-4 had not been filed before the Apex Court as Annexure-`A' to the Special Leave Petition.
In the certified copy which was produced by the counsel for the petitioners during the course of hearing there is no reference to Annexure `A'.
The photostat copy produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General shows that portion making reference to Annexure `A' has been scored off from para (c) of the memo of Special Leave Petition.
Therefore, is it not possible for me to hold that the respondents had produced Annexure P-4/R-1 before the Supreme Court showing that qualification for the post of DPA as Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade and the respondents are estopped from changing their stand before the High Court.
In this context, it is necessary to mention that in one of the earliest requisitions sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission vide letter No. 4797/E-A2 dated 631967 for recruitment of 7 Diesel Pump Attendants, no mention was made to the minimum qualifications but in response to letter No. 2334-A(2)-HPSC-67/2431 dated 31st March, 1967 written by the Commissioner to the Government, it was clarified that knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard is the necessary qualification.
After receipt of this letter from the Government, the Commission made its recommendations for appointment of DPAs vide letter No. RG.80/67/122/PA dated 721968.
In the requisitions sent to the Employment Exchange/Soldier Board by the Office of the Transport Commissioner/State Transport Controller on 2231983, 1841984, 1171985 and 2371985 the qualification indicated was Matric with a further stipulation that preference will be given to experienced persons.
It also appears from the record that in the requisition sent by the State Transport Controller, to the Subordinate Services Selection Board for recruitment of 20 DPAs, qualification was specified as Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade.
On receipt of the requisition from the State Transport Controller, the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board wrote letter dated 251983 and enquired from the State Transport Controller whether the qualification had been approved by the Government.
Vide letter dated 951983, the Secretary of the Board indicated that in the past the qualification of the employees had been indicated as Matric wheeas in the requisition it was shown as Matric with ITI certificate.
In reply to the letter dated 251983, the State Transport Controller wrote to the Board that qualification had been mentioned in the requisition as per the draft rules and in the earlier communication the qualification had been mentioned as per the then existing rules.
On receipt of this communication, the Secretary of the Board wrote letter dated 1871983 and expressed the Board's inability to approve the ad hoc appointments of the employees who were Matric pass.
Vide letter dated 1611984, the State Transport Controller requested the Financial Commissioner and Secretary Transport, Haryana to approve the qualification indicated in the draft rules of 1983.
In reply tot his letter, the Financial Commissioner and Secretary wrote to the State Transport Controller vide letter dated 441984 that in Government's opinion the qualification of Matric is adequate and no other qualification is required for the post of DPA.
Thereafter the Transport Commissioner wrote letter dated 1651985 to the Board that the Government has approved Matric as the qualification for appointment of the DPAs.
Subsequently, a requisition was sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board vide Memo No. 3056/AEI/E-II20 dated 20th January, 1986.
In this requisition Matric has been shown as the required qualification.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board also communicated to the Transport Commissioner vide letter dated 1041986 that Matric or equivalent qualification is approved for the purpose of appointment to the post of DPA and accordingly advertisement was being issued by the Board.
11.
In view of the various requisitions sent to the Employment Exchange/Soliders Board and the Subordinate Services Selection Board and the correspondence exchanged between the State Transport Controller, Transport Commissioner and the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary to the Government as well as the Board, it is clear that the Government did not prescribe Matric with ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade as the qualification for recruitment to the post of DPA and even though this was the qualification incorporated in the draft rules framed in the year 1983, the same were never given effect to or acted upon by the respondent Government.
Therefore, even if one or the other General Manager of the Haryana Roadways may have sent requisition to the Employment Exchange indicating the minimum qualification for recruitment of DPAs as Matric with ITI certificate, it is not possible for me to hold that the Government had prescribed the qualification of Matric with ITI certificate for recruitment to the post of DPA.
12.
Argument of the learned counsel that higher pay scale should be given to the Diesel Pump Attendants as against the Battery Attendants is based on the premise that the qualification prescribed for the post of DPA is higher than that of Battery Attendant view of my finding that the qualification for the post of DPA, as prescribed/approved by the Government, is Matric only, the petitioners are not entitled to be paid salary in the pay scale higher than that of Battery Attendant.
13.
I also do not find any substance in the argument of Shri SD Sharma that the Diesel Pump Attendants should be treated at par with the Battery Attendants in the matter of grant of pay scale.
At the cost of repetition it deserves to be mentioned that the disparity in the pay scales of the two posts has been in existence prior to 121969 The post of Battery Attendant always carried higher pay scale as compared to the post of DPA.
The material produced before the Court to show that the duties of the two posts are similar is extremely scanty.
The petitioners have made a bald statement that their duties are more onerous as compared to the Battery Attendants.
The respondents have stated that duties of the Battery Attendants are technical in nature and they are more burdensome as compared to the Diesel Pump Attendants.
On the basis of such material, it is not possible for me to hold that there is a substantial similarity in the duties performed by the petitioners on the one hand and the Battery Attendants on the other hand and, therefore, principle of equal pay for equal work embodied in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India should be enforced by directing the respondents to give pay scale to the petitioners at par with the Battery Attendants.
14.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that even if the petitioners are not entitled to be given the pay scale at par with Battery Attendants, they should at least be given the benefit of the decision of the Government as reflected in the circular dated 26th July, 1991 Annexure P-1 now deserves to be considered.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that in the absence of any decision by the Government to prescribe the qualification of Diesel Pump Attendants as Matric with ITI certificate the Court should not issue a mandamus for grant of the pay scale of Rs. 1200- 2040 to the petitioners.
15.
Though learned Assistant Advocate General may be right in contending that as per the plain language used in the circular letter dated 26th July, 1991, holders of only those technical posts are entitled to the revised pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 for which minimum educational qualification prescribed is Matric with ITI certificate/Polytechnic but to me it appears to be quite illogical that persons possessing similar qualifications and discharging almost similar duties are not paid similar wages.
In my opinion, it is appropriate to direct the Government to consider the propriety and desirability of giving the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 to those petitioners who are Matric and who have passed ITI certificate in Motor Mechanic Trade.
The Government may appoint a committee to go into the issue and then decide whether or not it will be appropriate to extend the benefit of revised pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 to the eligible petitioners with effect from 151990 in terms of circular letter dated 26th July, 1991.
In the result the writ petition is dismissed subject to the direction for consideration of the cases of those petitioners who possess the qualification of Matric and ITI certificate for grant of pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 151990.
The Government is directed to take a decision in the matter within three months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.