.
Dalveer Bhandari, J - The petitioner was appointed in the Clerical Cadre in the State Bank of Travencore on provisional basis.
He was offered appointment on probation and the probation period was to last for six months from the date of joining, which, according to clause (2) of the terms and conditions could be further extended for a period of three months.
2.
It is mentioned in the said letter of appointment that confirmation in the bank service at the end of probationary period "will be subject to your work and conduct being satisfactory and your gaining the standard of efficiency which the bank expects in this service.
It is also clearly mentioned that "Notwithstanding anything contained in this memo, your services are liable to be terminated at the sole discretion of the bank, even before the expiry of probation period without assigning any reasons, but with one month's notice or on payment of a month's salary and allowances in lieu of notice".
3.
On 29.2.1992, the petitioner has been discharged from the service after 5 months of probation period with a cheque of Rs. 177850 in lieu of a month's notice which is admittedly less by Rs. 5430 than the last drawn salary Rs. 183280.
4.
It may be pertinent to mention that the petitioner had filed a writ petition in this High Court which was registered as writ petition No. 1277/92.
In the said writ petition, the petitioner prayed that the operation of the order dated 2421992 by which his services were terminated w.e.f.
131992 be stayed.
The said writ petition came up for the preliminary hearing on 31392 before a Bench consisting of DP Wadhawa and RL Gupta, JJ The order passed on 3131992 in this writ petition is reproduced as under:  "Present: Mr. RK Goel for the petitioner.
CW 1277 & 1927/92 After some hearing, Mr. Goel wishes to withdraw the writ petition.
Dismissed as withdrawn.
DP Wadhawa, J RL Gupta, J" 5.
It seems that it is one of those cases where the court was not inclined to entertain the petition.
Therefore, after making submissions, counsel appearing for the petitioner thought it proper to withdraw the petition.
Therefore, the same was dismissed as withdrawn.
In the order of the court, it was specifically mentioned that the writ petition was withdrawn after some hearing.
Another aspect of this matter is that no liberty was granted to the petitioner for again approaching this court by filing a subsequent petition.
6.
In the present writ petition the petitioner has indicated in para 19 of the petition that in the earlier petition, the number has been mentioned as CWP 6129/92 but in fact after this court summoned the original file, it was discovered that the correct number was CWP 1277/92.
It was submitted that because some important points/grounds could not be included therefore, the petitioner moved this petition.
The petitioner who had appeared in person, and was not having much legal experience, therefore, the same was withdrawn.
From the order by which the writ petition was disposed of, it is clear that Mr. RK Goyal, Advocate appeared for the petitioner and after some hearing he withdrew the petition.
7.
It is also mentioned that on the first day of hearing, the petitioner requested the court to allow withdrawal of the said civil writ petition, for filing the matter before the Labour Court.
Accordingly, the same was dismissed as withdrawn on 26.3.1992.
In the said order of the Division Bench, it is not mentioned that the petitioner had withdrawn the petition in order to approach the Labour Court.
To say the least, the petitioner has not approached the court after disclosing full and correct particulars.
However, this court in the subsequent petition filed by the petitioner, where identical relief has been claimed, issued notice.
The application of interim relief was dismissed on 991994.
The respondent had filed a counter-affidavit justifying the discharge/termination of the petitioner from service.
In the counter-affidavit, it is mentioned that the quality of services rendered by the petitioner was found far below the required standards of efficiency, and hence, the petitioner was not continued in service.
In the counter-affidavit, reliance has been placed on the letter dated 7.2.1992 which was sent to the petitioner by the Branch Manager.
The relevant portion of the letter reads as under".
"We recall the oral advice and suggestions we gave to you regarding the quality of your work and the need of improvement for attaining the standard of efficiency we expected for service in the Bank.
We have been carefully observing your performance and work and we regret to point out to you that there is no impact on you of the advice and suggestions given by us and your work still continues to be unsatisfactory and the standard of your efficiency to our disappointment, has further deteriorated.
In the circumstances, you are again advised in your own interest, to improve the quality of your work so as to attain the standard of efficiency we expect for service in the Bank.
We shall be closely watching your performance to know the efforts you make to attain the expected standard of efficiency."
8.
It is mentioned in the counter-affidavit that there was no improvement either in this quality of work or efficiency and on the whole, he was not found suitable for the post he was not regularised.
9.
It is also mentioned in the counter-affidavit that in order to hide his shortcomings, the petitioner has made all kinds of wrong and false allegations against the respondent.
In the counter affidavit it is denied that the petitioner was at any point of time assigned double seat.
It is a normal routine that when a co-employee goes on leave, in order to see that the work of that Branch does not suffer, another employee usually takes over some part of the burden so that the urgent work is not neglected.
Similarly, at some point of time, even if the petitioner was handling some extra work does not imply that his standard of work was exemplary.
The reason of discharge or termination was that despite several warnings, there was no improvement in the quality of his work.
10.
It is also submitted that the Assistant Labour Commissioner found that since the service of the petitioner was dispensed with by the management in accordance with the conditions stipulated in para 2 of the appointment letter, the industrial dispute does no subsist.
It is also submitted that the said decision was arrived at by the learned Assistant Labour Commissioner after appreciation of all the facts and records and the order passed by the Assistant Labour Commissioner is a well considered order.
It is also submitted that the said order of the Assistant Labour Commissioner is consistent with the several orders which have been passed by various High Courts in similar facts and circumstances.
11.
It is also mentioned in the counter-affidavit that the Industrial Dispute Act is primarily meant for the protection of the workers against harassing managements.
This Act should not provide protection to inefficient and unwilling workers.
The petitioner's service was dispensed with, because despite several warnings, the quality of his work did not improve.
The petitioner was on probation and his work was not found upto the requisite standard, therefore, he was not confirmed.
The act of non-consfirmation does not come within the meaning of Industrial Disputes.
12.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner was on probation for a period of six months and the management legally could not terminate his services before the expiry of six months, except on the ground of misconduct.
The learned counsel placed reliance on Express Newspapers v. Labour Court, Madurai, AIR 1964 SC 806 in support of his submissions.
13.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on The Management of the Express Newspapers (Pvt) Ltd. Madurai v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Madurai and another, AIR 1964 SC 806.
In this case, their lordships of the Supreme Court held in para 12 as under:  "There can, in our opinion, be no doubt about the position in law that an employee appointed on probation for six months continues as a probationer even after the period of six months if at the end of the period his services had either not been terminated or he is confirmed.
It appears clear to us that without anything more an appointment on probation for six months gives the employer no right to terminate the service of an employee before six months had expired - except on the ground of misconduct or other sufficient reasons in which case even the service of a permanent employee could be terminated."
14.
Mr. Goel, the learned counsel for the petitioner also placed reliance on Syed Azam Hussaini v. Andhra Bank Limited, 1995(2) SCT 347 (SC) : 1995 Supp.
(1) SCC 557.
In this case, the court has held that in absence of any material having been placed by the respondent Bank to show that the work of the appellant was not satisfactory and his service was terminated for that reason.
The workman admittedly completed 240 days continuously in service, therefore, the Court held that such retrenchment could be done only in accordance with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Facts of this case have no application to the case in hand.
15.
Mr. Goel has also placed reliance on Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd, v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1896.
The majority view in this case was that the or of order of termination or the language in which it is couched is not conclusive.
The Court will lift the veil to see the true nature of the order.
It may be relevant to mention that in this case, the Court was not dealing with the probationers, therefore, this case also has no application to this case.
16.
Mr. Goel also placed reliance on Management Utkal, Machinery Ltd v. Workmen, Miss Shanti Patnaik, 1966(2) SCR 434.
In this case, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Could held that in the absence of any standing order, the unsatisfactory work on an employee may be treated as misconduct.
When the management discharges, the responsibility over alleged unsatisfactory work, it should be taken that discharge tentamounts to punishment for the alleged misconduct.
It this was so, the management was justified in discharging the respondent without holding a proper enquiry.
In this case, the Court has taken the view that even before the Labour Court, no evidence was adduced by the management to show that the work of the respondent was unsatisfactory.
In these circumstances discharge of the respondent was mala fide and he was entitled to compensation.
17.
In Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, 1958 SCR 828, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has summasrised the position of permanent employee and a temporary employee.
Regarding temporary employee it is mentioned that an employment to a temporary post for a certain specified period also gives the servant so appointed, a right to hold the post for the entire period of his tenure and his tenure, cannot be put to an end during that period, unless he is by way of punishment dismissed or removed from service.
18.
The judgment in The State of Punjab and another v. Sukh Raj Bahadur, AIR 1968 SC 1089 was also cited by the learned counsel for the respondent Bank to demonstrate that the services of a temporary servant or a probationer can be terminated under the rules of his employment and such termination without anything more would not attract the operation of Article 311 of the Constitution  19.
In Oil and Natural Gas Commisison and others v. Dr. Md S Iskander Ali, AIR 1980 SC 1242 the Court laid down as under:  "If the appointing authority considered it expedient to terminate the services of the probationer it could not be said that the order of termination attracted the provisions of Article 311, when the appointing authority had the right to terminate the service without assigning any reason.
In such a case even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency might be the motive or the inducing factor which influenced the employer to terminate the services of the employee a power which the employer undoubtedly possessed, even so as under the terms of appointment of the employee such a power flowed from the contract of service, termination of service could not be termed as penalty or punishment."
20.
In Governing Council of Kidwai Memoral Institute of Oncology, Bangalore v. Dr. Pandurang Godwalkar and another, 1993(1) SCT 267 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 392 the Court has taken the view that termination of service of probationer after preliminary enquiry taking into consideration overall performance and some actions or inactions do not amount to removal from service as punishment.
The principle of tearing of veil should be applicable where the Court is satisfied that there is a direct nexus between the charge so levelled and the action taken.
If the decision is taken to terminate the services of the an employee during the period of probation, after taking into consideration the overall performance and some action or inaction on the part of the such employee then it cannot be said that it amounts to his removal from service as punishment.
It need not be said that the appointing authority at the stage of confirmation or while examining the question as to whether the service of such employee be terminated during the continuance of the period of probation is entitled to look into any complaint made in respect of such employee while discharging the duties for the purpose of making assessment of the performance of the such employee.
21.
In M. Venugopal v. Divisional Manager Life, Insurance Corporation of India, Machilipatnam AP and another, 1994(1) SCT 858 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 323 the Court has taken the view that under general law, the service of the probationer can be terminated while taking over all assessment of performance during the period of probation and no notice can be given before termination of service.
22.
In The State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) : (1991)1 SCC 691 the Court held as under:  "A temporary government servant has no right to hold the post.
Whenever, the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary government servant.
If the services of a temporary government servant is terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of service, it will not visit him with any evil consequences."
23.
In Union of India and others v. Arun Kumar Roy, 1986(1) SCC 675, the Court was dealing with the termination of probationer where the payment of one month salary in lieu of notice was not given.
The Court has taken the view that it is not pre-requisite for termination under Rule 5(1)(b) of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965.
Such payment need not be given simultaneously with the order of termnation but can be made after service of the order.
24.
In view of the aforesaid pronouncements of the Supreme Court the legal position seems to be clear that for an employee who is on probation for a period of six months, the management cannot terminate his services before the expiry of six months, except on the grounds of misconduct.
If this principle is made applicable to the facts of the instant case, then the conclusion would be that the management was not justified in terminating the service of the petitioner.
The petition, in these circumstances has to be ordinarily allowed and consequently the petitioner must be reinstated and given back wages.
There has to be a departure from the settled principle because of peculiar and rather usual facts of this case.
In the instant case the petitioner had earlier filed a petition in this court (C.W.P.
No. 1277/92) with identical relief which was dismissed as withdrawn after some hearing.
The petitioner filed the subsequent petition without fully disclosing the correct facts.
The petitioner has to suffer for this serious lapse to some extent.
25.
Their Lordships of the Superme Court in a recent case Syhed Azam Hussai (supra) directed payment of Rs. 75,000/- to the petitioner where the employee has put in more than 240 days.
In the present case ends of justice shall meet if the respondent Bank is directed to pay Rs. 50,000/- to the petitioner within one month in lieu of reistantment and back wages.
In my opinion this would be an adequate amount for such compensation.
26.
The amount of shortfall of Rs. 5430 shall be paid to the petitioner with 18% interest from the date when it became due within one month.
27.
The petition is accordingly disposed of.