Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were appointed as JBT teachers in various schools run by the District Boards/Local Bodies in District Ferozepur.
Their services were provincialised w.e.f.
October 1, 1957.
Some time later, the rules called `The Punjab Educational Service (Provincialised Cadre Class III) Rules, 1961' were promulgated.
These rules embody the conditions of service governing the members of the provincialised cadre.
The petitioners claim that their seniority has to be determined inter alia under the provisions of Rule 9 on the basis of ``the length of continuous service whether temporary, officiating or permanent in equated posts as on the Ist of October, 1957.''
The seniority of the petitioners was actually fixed in accordance with these rules and further promotions were accordingly made.
Certain JBT teachers belonging to the State Cadre which is distinct and different from the provincialised cadre filed CWP No. 2638 of 1977.
This writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court with direction that the seniority should be fixed in accordance with the provisions governing the members of the State Cadre viz. the Punjab Educational Service Cadre III (Schools Cadre) Rules, 1955.
Thereafter, certain teachers who belonged to the provincialised cadre filed CWP No. 2240 of 1978.
They also placed reliance on the provisions of the 1955 Rules.
No reply was filed by the respondents in the writ petition no June 1, 1978, the Bench disposed of the writ petition with the following order:-  ``Heard.
Same order as was made on 2.11.1977 in CWP No. 2638 of 1977 except the reference therein to Mr. Sayal shall be read as that to Mr. IS Tiwana.''
In this writ petition, the fact that the members of the provincialised cadre were governed by the provisions of the 1961 rules was not disclosed.
2.
In pursuance of the order passed by the Bench of June 1, 1978, the department framed a tentative seniority list of the members of the provincialised cadre.
It was circulated vide endorsement dated February 11, 1982.
Objections were invited.
The petitioners filed objections against the tentative seniority list.
They claimed that they were governed by the provisions of 1961 rules.
Copy of the objections filed by one of the petitioners has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
Vide letter dated March 18, 1982, four out of the petitioners were called upon to disclose their dates of confirmation.
Thereafter, vide letter dated April 21, 1982, the petitioners were informed that their representation against tentative seniority list had been rejected in view of the fact that according to the decision of the High Court, the seniority list had to be prepared in accordance with the orders of the High Court.
Aggrieved by the rejections of the objections, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
Their whole claim is that the seniority has to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the 1961 rules and that the provisions of the 1955 rules are not applicable to them.
The petitioners claim that their objections have been wrongly rejected by the department without passing any speaking order.
Consequently, the petitioners pray that the seniority list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 and the order by which the objections filed by them have been rejected, be set aside.
They further pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to determine their inter se seniority in accordance with the provisions of the 1961 rules.
3.
On behalf of the department, a short written statement has been filed by the Deputy District Education Officer, Ferozepur.
It has been admitted that the provisions of 1955 Rules are not applicable to the petitioners.
It has been further admitted that the petitioners in CWP No. 2638 of 1977 belonged to the Government schools and their service conditions were governed by the provisions of 1955 rules.
However, the petitioners in CWP No. 2240 of 1978 were governed by the provisions of 1961 Rules as they were the members of the provincialised cadre.
It has been stated that the seniority list was prepared in pursuance of the judgment in CWP No. 2240 of 1973.
4.
Initially, the writ petition has been filed only against the official respondents viz. the State, the Director of Public Instructions and the Deputy District Education Officer, Ferozepur.
However, subsequently, it appears that the writ petition was amended.
The petitioners in CWP No. 2240 of 1982 were impleaded as respondent Nos. 4 to 25.
Out of them, respondent No. 4 has filed a written statement.
The factual position has not been disputed.
In fact, in reply to paras 11 and 12, it has been stated that ``the respondent Nos. 4 to 25 are entitled for the fixation of their seniority according to their continuous length of service.''
Still further, it has been pointed out that SLP No. 6783 of 1978 had been filed by the State of Punjab in the Supreme Court of India against the judgment delivered by the Division Bench in CWP No. 2240 of 1978.
Since the matter was pending in the Supreme Court, the case could not be decided by this Court.
It has also been stated that in the representation at Annexure P2, the petitioners had also claimed the fixation of seniority of the basis on date of confirmation.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Mr. Vinod Sharma, counsel for the petitioners submits that the conditions of service governing the members of the provincialised cadre are laid down in the 1961 Rules.
Their seniority has to be determined under these rules.
The petitioners in CWP No. 2240 of 1978 had wrongly relied upon the provisions of 1955 Rules.
The full facts had not been disclosed to this Court.
The fact that they were governed by the 1961 Rules was intentionally withheld from the court.
The State had also been remiss in not pointing out this infirmity to this Court while the writ petition was being heard.
On this basis, a wrong order was obtained.
Since the present petitioners were not parties in that case, they were not bound by the decision given by the Bench.
Consequently, they are entitled to claim that their seniority be determined in accordance with the provisions governing them.
Mr. Dhillon, counsel for the State of Punjab has frankly admitted the position contended for on behalf of the petitioners.
6.
On behalf of respondent Nos. 4 to 25, Mr. Mukand Gupta has put in appearance.
He very frankly concedes that he is not aware of the present position of the Special Leave Petition which was pending in the Supreme Court.
However, the learned counsel is not in a position to even contend that the provisions of 1955 rules govern the members of the provincialised cadre.
7.
The question that arises for consideration is - Are the members of the provincialised cadre governed by the provisions of the 1955 rules or those of the 1961 rules ?
8.
The position is not only apparent from the provisions of the rules but has even been judicially settled by the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in The State of Punjab v. Jagdish Singh, AIR 1963 SC 913.
It has been clearly held that the members of the provincialised cadre are governed by the provisions of 1961 rules and that the said rules are not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
9.
In view of the authoritative pronouncement of law by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Joginder Singh's case, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that their seniority has to be determined in accordance with the provisions of 1961 Rules has to be accepted.
The petitioners in CWP No. 2240 of 1978 had wrongly withheld the correct information from the Court.
In any event, since the petitioners were not parties in that case, they will not be governed by order passed therein.
Whatever be the final decision in that case will govern the petitioners of CWP No. 2240 of 1978.
So far as others like the petitioners are concerned, their seniority would be determined under the provisions of 1961 rules which admittedly govern them.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of, however, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.