GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for issue of a mandamus to the respondents to promote the petitioner as Executive Engineer, Public Works Department with retrospective effect and to grant him the consequential benefits.
2.
After being released from the army as Emergency Commissioned Officer, the petitioner was appointed as Assistant Engineer (Class-II post) in the Public Works Department of the Government of Haryana on the basis of his selection by the Haryana Public Service Commission against the vacancies reserved for ex- Emergency Commissioned Officers/ex-servicemen.
After joining the service, the petitioner made representations for grant of benefit of military service in accordance with the provisions contained in the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965.
3.
Similar representations were made by other ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers.
As the Government did not accept their request, the petitioner and others filed writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed.
However, in the appeal filed in the Apex Court, their Lordships accepted the claim of the petitioners and other similarly situated persons for grant of military service benefits (vide Ex-Captain KC Arora v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(2) SLR 97).
It appears from the record that several miscellaneous applications were filed before the Apex Court for issue of directions and also for review of the main order.
On 2971985, their Lordships reiterated the earlier order and directed the respondents to give the benefit of military service to the petitioners.
However, on April 10, 1986, the Supreme Court reviewed its earlier order and clarified that the credit of military service rendered upto the date of lifting of emergency will only be admissible to the ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers and they are not entitled to the benefit of entire military service.
4.
It further appears from the record that on the basis of the order passed by the Apex Court in the first instance directing the Government to give benefit of military service to the petitioner and other similarly situated persons, the Government fixed the seniority of the petitioner above one Shri RK Jain.
It is stated that his case was considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and although his name was approved by the Screening Committee as well as the Haryana Public Service Commission but the order promoting the petitioner was not issued by the Government.
5.
In the meantime, Shri IS Goel filed writ (sic) appointment of the petitioner in Class-II service and the Government's decision to screen his case for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
Similar challenge was made to the promotion accorded to other ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers.
A Full Bench of this Court allowed the writ petition but in appeal their Lordships of the Supreme Court reversed the same vide AS Parmar and others v. State of Haryana, 1984(1) SLR 454.
This was followed by notification dated 14th January, 1985 issued by the Governor of Haryana for amending Punjab Service of Engineers P.W.D.
Class-I (B & R Branch) Rules, 1960.
BM Sharma and some others filed writ petitions questioning the constitutional validity of the said amendment.
A Division Bench of this Court struck down the notification dated 14th January, 1985 vide its decision in BM Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1987(5) SLR 531.
The High Court gave direction to the respondents to re-fix the seniority of BM Sharma and other similarly situated persons.
6.
After the decision of the Division Bench in BM Sharma's case (supra), a meeting of the Screening Committee is said to have been held on 11101985 to consider the case of the petitioner and others for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer but on account of the pendency of departmental enquiries which had been initiated against the petitioner in the years 1984 and 1986, the respondent No. 1 did not promote the petitioner.
7.
The petitioner has challenged the action or the Government in withholding his promotion from a date his junior Shri RK Jain was promoted on the ground of violation of the provisions of `1960 Rules', patent arbitrariness and mala fide.
Petitioner's case is that Shri RK Jain was promoted as Executive Engineer in the year 1975 and being senior to Shri RK Jain, he has a right to be given retrospective promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and denial thereof if wholly arbitrary and unjustified.
Another plea raised by the petitioner is that the disciplinary enquiries initiated against him in the years 1984 and 1986 could not have been considered by the respondents to ignore his claim for promotion as in the year 1975, 1979 and thereafter.
Yet another ground of challenge is that the Government has ignored his case at the time of promotion because of mala fide intention of the officials of the department who felt greatly annoyed due to the filing of the writ petition and contempt petitions by the petitioner.
8.
Respondents have objected the entertainability of the writ petition by stating that so called junior persons have not been impleaded as respondents.
They have also stated that in the light of the judgment in BM Sharma's case (supra) a meeting of the Screening Committee was held on 7111987 to consider the suitability of ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers for promotion.
The petitioner who had passed departmental examination in May 1976 was considered for promotion with effect from 9.2.1979 because no vacancy was available between May 1976 to 821979 but due to pendency of disciplinary enquiries against the petitioner, the Screening Committee did not recommend his name for promotion.
Respondents have stated that the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for promotion in the year 1975 because he had not passed the departmental test as required by Rule 15 of `1960 Rules' and after the petitioner had passed departmental test in the year 1976, no person junior to him was promoted upto 821979.
The respondents have denied the allegation of mala fide by stating that nobody was prejudiced against the petitioner due to his filing the writ petition or contempt proceedings.
9.
The record of the meeting of the Screening Committee produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General shows that in its meeting held on 27111987 for considering the candidature of eligible persons as on 821979 a decision was taken by the Screening Committee to defer the consideration of petitioner's case till the final decision on the show cause notice dated 2641987 issued to the petitioner for removal from service.
This position was repeated while considering the cases of eligible persons for promotion as Executive Engineers on 191980.
These proceedings of the Screening Committee were forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission which concurred with the recommendation of the Committee to defer the consideration of the candidature of the petitioner till the decision of the show cause notice issued to him.
10.
The following three inter-related issues which require adjudication by the Court are :-  (i) Whether the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion as Executive Engineer with effect from the year 1975 when his alleged junior Shri RK Jain was promoted; (ii) Whether the petitioner has a right to be considered for promotion as Executive Engineer as in the year 1976; and (iii) Whether the respondents have acted arbitrarily in superseding the petitioner while considering his case of promotion as on 821979 and 191980 on the basis of the departmental enquiries initiated in the years 1984 and 1986.
11.
The respondents have contested the petitioner's claim for promotion with effect from the date of promotion of Shri RK Jain on the ground that the petitioner was not eligible for promotion in the year 1975 because he had not passed the departmental examination prescribed in Rule 15 of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1960.
The applicability of these rules has not been disputed by the petitioner.
Rather he has founded his claim for retrospective promotion on these very rules.
Rule 8 of these rules provides for appointment by promotion.
Sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 contemplates meeting of the Committee at regular intervals not exceeding one year in the ordinary circumstances.
Sub- rule (4) envisages preparation of the list of suitable officer by the committee.
Criteria for promotion is merit and suitability.
Sub-rule (6) envisages review of the select list every year.
In terms of Sub-rule (8) select list is to be forwarded to the Commission and it is the duty of the Commission to consider and approve the list unless it considers necessary to make any change in the list received from the Government.
Appointment to the service can be made by the Government from the list in the order in which the names have been placed by the Commission.
Rule 15 requires that the officials appointed to the service shall pass such departmental examination and within such period as may be prescribed by the Government.
`Proviso to Rule' 15(1) empowers the Government to prescribe any other test or examination passing of which may be made necessary for promotion or appointment to any rank in the service.
For the purpose of ready reference, it will be useful to reproduce Rule 15:-  ``15.
Departmental Examination: (1) Officers appointed to the service unless they have not already done so, shall pass such departmental examination and within such period as may be prescribed by Government; Provided that Government in addition to such departmental examination may from time to time prescribe any other test or examination to be passed before an officer can be considered eligible for promotion or appointment to any rank in the Service; Provided further that Government may, for any sufficient cause extend the period within which any member is required to pass the departmental examination.
(2) If an officer fails to pass the departmental examination within the prescribed period or within the extended period, if any, he shall not earn his future grade increments till such time as he passes it when the increments shall be released retrospectively; Provided that he shall not be entitled to get any arrears of the released grade increments for the period during which he could not pass the examination.''
12.
From the plain language used in Rule 15, it is clear that passing of departmental examination or any other test which may be prescribed by the Government is necessary before a person can be considered for promotion to the higher post.
It is an admitted position that the petitioner had not passed departmental examination till May, 1976.
Therefore, his claim for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer with effect from the year 1975 cannot but be termed as premature and untenable.
13.
However, there is substance in the grievance made by the petitioner that the Screening Committee did not consider his case fairly and ignored his candidature on the basis of extraneous factors.
The record of the Screening Committee shows that while taking the decision to defer consideration of the petitioner's case, the committee relied on the show cause notice dated 2641987.
It is thus clear that even though the consideration was made on 821979 and 191980, the committee took into consideration the adverse material which came into existence during the subsequent years.
In my opinion, such consideration cannot be termed as fair and equitable.
The committee should have confined its consideration to the record of eligible persons as it was available on 821979 or on 191980.
Adverse as well as favourable reports or other records which came into existence after those dates could not have been looked into by the Screening Committee while examining the merit and suitability of the petitioner.
Even if the petitioner's record may have shown improvements in the subsequent years, the same could not have been looked into by the Screening Committee while adjudging the merit of the petitioner.
14.
It may have been necessary for me to examine the impact of aforementioned illegality committed by the Screening Committee but in view of the fact that the punishments awarded to the petitioner in the three different enquiries held against him have been quashed in Civil Writ Petition No. 14084 of 1990 decided on 8101996, Civil Writ Petition No. 17585 of 1991 decided on 2091996 and Civil Writ Petition No. 17593 of 1991 decided on 8101996, it is not necessary to deal with the matter in detail.
As a consequence of the setting aside of the orders of punishment, the petitioner has acquired a legal right to be re-considered for promotion as on 821979 and on all the subsequent dates when persons junior to him were considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
15.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Deferment of the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer as on 821979 etc. is declared illegal and quashed.
The respondent-Government is directed to re-consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer as on 821979 and on all subsequent dates when persons junior to him were considered for such promotion.
The Screening Committee/Departmental Selection Committee shall consider the record of the petitioner as it was on 821979 or other relevant date of consideration.
If on the basis of such consideration the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, then he should be given promotion with retrospective effect.
In that event the petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
Appropriate exercise for re-consideration of the case of the petitioner shall be undertaken and completed within four months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.