Arun Kumar Dutta J - By this Writ Application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India the Writ Petitioner Rampada Sinha (hereinafter referred to as Petitioner) has prayed the Court for issue of ``a Writ and/or direction in the nature of Mandamus commanding and directing the respondents each one of them their agents servants subordinates and assigns to forthwith cancel withdraw and/or rescind the purported notices dated 8th October 1986 and 7th of October 1987 contained in Annexures ``C'' and ``J'' hereof and to refrain from giving any effect and/or further effect and/or taking any step or further steps in terms thereof and/or thereunder and to act in accordance with law further directing them not to give any effect or further effect and/or take any step or further step in terms thereof or seek to retire him (petitioner) before completion of the age of 60 years along with the other reliefs prayed for therein for the reasons stated and on the grounds made out therein.
2.
It is contended by the petitioner that as there was a steady decline of demand with consequential fall in production of Messrs Sen Raleigh Industries of India Limited at Kanyapur and the said company continued to incur losses the management of the said Sen Raleigh Limited along with all its associates and subsidiary units was taken over by the Central Government under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act 1951 in the month of September 1975.
By an Ordinance promulgated by the President of India the undertakings of Sen-Raleigh Limited were taken over by the Central Government under the Hind Cycles Limited and Sen-Raleigh Limited (Nationalisation) Ordinance 1980.
The said Ordinance was replaced by the Hind Cycles Ltd and Sen Raleigh Ltd (Nationalisation) Act 1980.
The service condition of the employees of Sen Raleigh Ltd whose service were transferred to and contained in the Cycle Corporation of India Ltd (for short Corporation) was protected by Section 13(1) of the said Act.
By a Notification issued under Section 6 of the said Act the undertakings of Sen Raleigh Ltd were transfered to and vested in the said Corporation with effect from 25101980.
3.
The petitioner who was undisputedly born on 1111929 was appointed as Personnel Manager of the said Corporation on probation for a period of one year on 2041982.
His services were confirmed with effect from 1.7.1983 on successful completion of his probationary period.
He was informed by the Secretary of the Corporation by the impugned letter dated 8.10.1986 that the date of his retirement falls on 1.11.1987 (obviously on his attaining 58 years of age).
The petitioner had thereafter requested the Secretary of the Corporation by his letter dated 16101986 for not giving effect to the aforesaid letter dated 16101986 for the reasons stated therein.
The Secretary of the Corporation in his reply thereto by his letter dated 521987 had informed the petitioner that the officers recruited by the Corporation are governed by the rules of the Public Sector Undertakings where the retirement age is 58 years.
The petitioner had thereupon made a prayer to the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Corporation by his letter dated 1781987 requesting him to quash the aforesaid letter of the Secretary dated 521987 and allow him (petitioner) to continue in service.
But his request was not acceded to.
Hence the instant Writ Application.
4.
It is contended by the Writ Petitioner of the Corporation asking him (petitioner) to retire on 1.11.1987 on his attaining the age of 58 years is discriminatory arbitrary illegal and whimsical inasmuch as the other officers of the company had retired on attaining the age of 60 years.
Instances of such officers were sought to be given by the petitioner by Annexures `G' `H' and `I' to the Writ Petition and in Paragraph 6 of his Supplementary Affidavit affirmed on 14.7.1995.
It is also contended in ground V to the Writ Application that the action that the action of the Corporation was mala fide and vindictive which had resulted in violation of his Constitutional rights guaranteed under Articles 14 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
5.
The writ petition is resisted by the Respondent-Corporation by filing Affidavit-in-Opposition.
The petitioner's allegation that the issue of the impugned letter dated 8.10.1986 being annexure `C' to the Writ Application was discriminatory arbitrary illegal whimsical mala fide and vindictive is denied by the Respondent-Corporation in their Affidavit-in- Opposition and Supplementary Affidavit filed in the matter.
And having regard to the materials on record the petitioner could not substantiate that any employee of the Corporation appointed after the nationalisation had retired at an age beyond 58 years.
It appears from the documents annexed to the Affidavit-in-Opposition and the Supplementary Affidavit filed by the Respondent-Corporation that one A.B.
Mukherjee Secretary and TR Ahuja General Manager of the Corporation who were appointed temporarily on ad hoc basis in view of the necessity of the Corporation after their retirement on attaining 58 years of the age.
The same could hardly amount to a discriminatory practice on the part of the Respondent-Corporation.
6.
Upon hearing the submissions of the learned advocates for both sides and perusal of the materials on record it appears that there are admittedly the following two retirement ages for the two categories of employees of the Corporation :  (i) 60 years for those employees appointed before nationalisation whose services were transferred to the Corporation upon nationalisation; and (ii) 58 years for those employees who were appointed after the date of nationalisation and vesting on 25101980 under the aforesaid Nationalisation Act.
7.
The aforesaid fact does not seem to be in dispute and is also corroborated by the Annexures `D' and `E' to the Supplementary Affidavit filed by the Respondent-Corporation affirmed on 781995.
8.
The question which at once emerges for consideration is whether the aforesaid two retirement ages one at 60 years and the other at 58 years for the aforesaid two stages of employees of the Corporation one appointed prior to the nationalisation and the other appointed after the nationalisation is discriminatory and hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In line with the decision of the Supreme Court of India in the Life Insurance Corporation v. SS Srivastava, AIR 1987 SC 1527 in the facts and circumstances therein it also seems to me in the facts and circumstances of the instant case before us that there is no similarity between those recruited by the Sen Raleigh Company Limited before the nationalisation and those recruited by the Corporation after the nationalisation.
The fixation of the petitioner's age of retirement at 58 years appointed after the nationalisation in such circumstances could not therefore be challenged by him.
And keeping another decision of the Supreme Court in BS Yadav v. Chief Manager Central Bank of India, 1987(2) Lab LN 423 in mind classification of the aforesaid two categories of employees of the Corporation fixing 60 years of age for retirement for those recruited prior to the nationalisation and for 58 years for those recruited subsequent to the nationalisation (on 25101980) in the facts and circumstances of the instant case cannot be held to be invalid and unconstitutional as the same satisfies the tests of valid classification laid down under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
The next question cropping up for consideration is whether the fixation of 58 years as the age of retirement in the case of the employees who entered the service of the Corporation after the nationalisation is unreasonable or arbitrary.
As observed by the Supreme Court in the decision in Life Insurance Corporation of India's case (supra) at Paragraph 24 thereof the Court while dealing with this question can take judicial notice of the different ages of retirement prevailing in the several services of India.
In almost all the Public Sector Corporations Central Services and State Services 58 years age is considered to be a reasonable age at which officers can be directed to retire from their service.
So the determination of 58 years as the age of superannuation by itself cannot be considered to be arbitrary.
10.
The Respondent-Corporation is stated to be consistently following the retirement age in respect of its employees appointed after the nationalisation at 58 years in line with the retirement age of the employees in the Public Sector undertaking as appearing from the Annexures `A' and `B' to the Affidavit-in-Opposition affirmed on 9121987 and the Annexures `E' to `G' to the Supplementary Affidavit and Annexure `A' to the Affidavit-in-Opposition affirmed on 8121995.
The action of the Respondent- Corporation asking the petitioner to retire on 1.11.1987 on his attaining the age of 58 years could not therefore be termed to be discriminatory arbitrary or illegal.
11.
The learned advocate for the petitioner had referred to the decision in Mahinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner, AIR 1978 SC 851 in support of his contention.
But the said decision does not seem to be applicable to the facts and circumstances herein as the Corporation being a Public Sector Undertaking appears to be following the retirement age applicable to the employees in the Public Sector Undertakings.
The Annexures `C' and `J' to the Writ Application which are under challenge in the Writ Application are neither required to contain any reason thereof.
There is no dispute in the instant case before us that the petitioner had attained the age of 58 years on 1.11.1987.
12.
In view of the discussion above the petitioner's contention that the action of the Corporation asking him to retire on 1.11.1987 on his attaining the age of 58 years cannot clearly be held to be discriminatory arbitrary whimsical and unreasonable as sadly contended by him.
13.
The petitioner had feebly sought to make out a case of mala fide by making a bald allegation.
No specific case of mala fide appears to have been made out by him.
The requisite particulars to make out a case for mala fide are also wanting in the writ application.
As held by the Supreme Court in EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555 we must not overlook that the burden of establishing mala fide is very heavy on the person who alleges it.
The allegations of mala fide are often more easily made than proved; and the very seriousness of such allegations demands proof of a high order of credibility which is remarkably wanting in the instant case.
14.
That being so the petitioner's prayer for directing the Respondent- Corporation to withdraw/cancel/rescind the impugned letters dated 8.10.1986 and 7.10.1986 being Annexures `C' and `J' to the writ application could not clearly be entertained.
15.
That apart the petitioner has admittedly joined the Corporation in terms of the appointment letter dated 2041982 being Annexure `A' to the writ application after the nationalisation was protected by Section 13(1) of the Nationalisation in terms thereof.
In terms of the said letter the petitioner was offered the appointment as Personnel Manager at an initial basic pay of Rs. 2075/- only per month also clearly indicating therein that the ``other allowances and benefits are as per Company's Rules''.
It is contended by the learned Advocate for the respondent that service conditions of the employees of the Sen-Raleigh Company Ltd whose services were transferred to the Corporation after the nationalisation Act (sic).
As already indicated above the Annexures `D' and `E' to the Supplementary Affidavit affirmed on behalf of the Respondent-Corporation on 781985 would clearly show that the retirement age of the members of all categories of the employees of Sen-Raleigh & Co Ltd was fixed at 60 years in terms of the Circular dated 14111961.
The employees of the said company whose services were transferred to the Corporation were to be governed by the standing orders service conditions relating to leave gratuity superannuation and other matters which would have been applicable to them in the said companies prior to the nationalisation until the same were changed in terms of the subsequent Circular dated 29101980.
It was further indicated in said Circular dated 29101980 that pending switching over the service conditions of the Public Sector Undertakings in all respects the Corporation would follow their retirement age in respect of persons appointed after nationalisation (on 25101980) fixing their retirement age at 58 years.
There is nothing in the Annexure `A' to the writ application the offer letter to the petitioner that he was to retire on his attaining the age of 60 years.
Per contrary it has been clearly indicated therein that the other allowances and benefits (obviously including retirement benefits) would be as per the Company's Rules.
In the absence of any material on record to show that the petitioner appointed after the nationalisation was to retire on his attaining the age of 60 years he could not be said to have acquired a legal right to retire on his attaining the age of 60 years as claimed by him.
There is nothing either on record to indicate that there was any corresponding legal duty cast upon the Respondent-Corporation to allow him (petitioner) to continue in service till he attained the age of 60 years.
The petitioner has sought for issue of a writ of Mandamus in terms of the prayers made in the writ application.
But Mandamus lies to secure the enforcement of a public or statutory duty by the authority concerned.
As already indicated above the petitioner could not be said to have derived any legal right to obtained a writ of Mandamus as prayed for.
As noted there must exist a legal right in the petitioner and corresponding legal duty cast upon the respondent for enforcing the same by means of Mandamus.
The petitioner cannot certainly seek the relief prayed for merely on the doctrine of legitimate expectation that he could continue in service till attaining the age of 60 years enjoyed by the employees of the company appointed prior to the nationalisation.
16.
It would also be pertinent to note the conduct of the petitioner in filing the writ application.
By the impugned letter dated 8.10.1986 being Annexure `C' to the writ application the petitioner was advised that his date of retirement falls on 1.11.1987 (on his attaining the age of 58 years) more than a year before his retirement in terms thereof.
His representation thereagainst dated 16101986 being Annexure `D' to the Writ Application was disposed of and he was informed by the Respondent- Corporation by letter dated 521987 being Annexure `E' to the writ application that he having been recruited by the Corporation after the nationalisation would naturally be governed by the Rules of Public Sector Undertakings where the retirement age is 58 years.
Despite the receipt of the aforesaid letter dated 521987 in time he (petitioner) had long been sleeping over the matter till 1681987.
On 1781987 he appears to have made another prayer before the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Corporation for quashing of the Order/letter of the Secretary dated 521987 (vide Annexure `F' to the writ application).
He did not seek any relief in the matter before any competent Forum even though he was informed by the aforesaid letter of the Corporation dated 521987 that his retirement age is 58 years.
He moved the instant writ application on 30101987 only two days prior to his retirement on 1.11.1987 with coming deliberation with the ulterior objects of continuing in service on the basis of an interim order sought for from the Court.
His purpose was achieved by the interim order passed by the Court on 30101987.
The said interim order was slightly modified by the subsequent order dated 18111987.
On an application filed by the Respondent-Corporation for vacation/modification of the interim order passed in the matter the Court by order dated 27111987 had directed that the matter would be heard on Friday next.
`` In the meantime the petitioner will be entitled to his salary but he will not attend the office until further orders of the Court'' which order still stands.
The petitioner accordingly went on receiving his salary etc. till attaining the age of 60 years without rendering any service to the Respondent-Corporation by virtue of the aforesaid interim order even though the question as to whether he would retire on his attaining the age of 58 years or 60 years was yet to be decided in the writ application.
The aforesaid delay in filing the instant writ application without issuing any explanation therefor would at once seem to give the clearest and conclusive indication that he was only in fact (sic) upon continuing in service or receiving salary till attaining the age of 60 years on the strength of interm order sought from the Court.
It was accordingly submitted by learned Advocate for the Respondent-Corporation that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed and the petitioner should be directed to return the amount received by him by virtue of the interim order passed in the matter as claimed in the Supplementary Affidavit filed by them or give them the liberty to appropriate his retiral benefit to the satisfaction of the claim and take steps for recovery of the balance from the petitioner.
It was contended by the Respondent-Corporation that they would not have paid salary to the petitioner month by month since after he had attained the age of 58 years in the absence of the aforesaid interim orders more particularly the interim order passed on 27111987 without rendering any service whatsoever.
The said contention on the petitioner cannot be lightly discarded for the reasons I shall presently discuss.
17.
As held by the Gujarat High Court in Soni Virajlal v. Soni Jadavji, AIR 1972 Gujarat 148 the basic fundamentals of the administration of justice are simple.
No man should suffer because of the mistake of the Court.
No man should suffer a wrong by technical-procedure of irregularities.
Rules or procedures are the hand-maids of justice and not the mistress of the justice.
Ex debito justiae ?
We must do justice to him.
If a man has been wronged so long as it lies within the human machinery of administration of justice that wrong must be remedied.
This is peculiar fact of this case which require emphasis.
18.
It is also a well settled position in law that an act of the Court should not injure any of the suitors.
The Privy Council in the well known decision of Alexander Rodger v. Computdir D' Escompte De Paris, 1871(3) PC 465 observed :-  ``One of the first and highest duties of all Courts is to take care that the act of the Court does not injury to any of the suitors and when the expression act of the Court is used it does not mean merely the act of the primary Court or any intermediate Court of appeal but the act of the Court as a whole from the lowest Court which entertains jurisdiction over the matter up to the highest Court which finally disposes of the case.
It is the duty of the aggregate of those Tribunals if I may use the expression to take care that no act of the Court in the course of the whole of proceedings does an injury to the suitors in Courts.''
19.
The Supreme Court has also observed in Union Carbide Corporation v. Union of India, AIR 1992 SC 248 at paragraph 76 thereof that there is always an inherent jurisdiction to order restitution a fortiorari where a party has acted on the faith of an order of the Court.
A litigant should not go back with the impression that the judicial-process so operated as to weaken his position and whatever it did on the faith of the Court's order operated to its disadvantage.
It is the duty of the Court to ensure that no litigant goes back with a feeling that he was prejudiced by an act which did on the faith of the Court's order.
Both on principle and authority it becomes the duty of the Court as much moral as it is legal to order refund and restitution.
20.
In view of the discussions above and in the light of the aforesaid judicial pronouncements the writ petition should clearly fail as it must and the Respondent-Corporation would be entitled to an Order for restoration refund and/or adjustment of the amount already paid to the petitioner since after he has attained the age of 58 years on the strength of the aforesaid interim orders passed by the Court which had been complied with by them (Respondent-Corporation) on the faith of Court's aforesaid Orders.
It would also be pertinent to note in this context that they had also filed application for vacating the interim order passed by the Court and had also filed an appeal against the order dated 691991 passed by the Court directing payment of retiral benefit the petitioner claiming that the Corporation is entitled to adjust petitioner's retiral benefits towards their claim and on their appeal the said order dated 691991 for payment of retiral to the petitioner was set aside.
21.
In the result the writ application be dismissed.
The Respondent- Corporation shall be at liberty to appropriate the petitioner's retiral benefit to the satisfaction of their lawful claims and may as well take steps for recovery of the balance if any according to law.
22.
In the facts said and circumstances of the matter I direct the parties to bear their respective costs of this hearing.
Application dismissed.