GS Singhvi, J - In this second round of litigation between the parties, the only issue which falls for determination by this Court is whether the Labour Court has rightly held the reference made by the Government to be not maintainable on the basis of the decision rendered by the High Court in M/s. Escorts Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana, 1983 Lab.
I.C.
223.
2.
In order to decide the abovementioned issue, it is necessary to give the factual background of the case.
The petitioner was engaged as Tongsman in the service of respondent No. 2 w.e.f.
6111978.
He raised an industrial dispute by alleging that the employer has unlawfully terminated his service by refusing entry in the factory premises w.e.f.
9111985.
The petitioner's claim was contested by the respondent No. 2 on the ground that he had absented from duty w.e.f.
9111985 and as such, his name was struck off from the Muster Roll w.e.f.
18111985.
By its award dated 111992, the Labour Court, Gurgaon held that termination of the service of the petitioner was unlawful and unjustified and he was entitled to be reinstated in service with continuity of service and full back wages.
Aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court, the respondent No. 2 filed C.W.P.
No. 7806 of 1992 which came to be disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on 241993, which passed the following order:-  "In view of judgment of the Division Bench in 1983(1) ILR P&H 494, we set aside the award of the Labour Court and direct the Labour Court to give a specific finding as to whether or not a hearing was granted to the petitioners before reference was made and on the finding returned the effect thereof in the circumstances of the case.
The parties are directed to appear before the Labour Court on 10th May, 1993."
3.
Now, the Labour Court-II, Faridabad has passed the impugned award dated 28.11.1984 and declared that the reference made by the Government is bad in law because opportunity of hearing was not given to the employer by the Government before it referred the dispute to the Labour Court.
4.
It is borne out from the record of the case that on a demand made by the workman, the Conciliat Officer has issued notice to the parties and fixed the date of hearing as 1611987.
The respondent No. 2 did not appear before the Conciliation Officer, who submitted failure report to the Government and the Government made reference of the dispute under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act').
5.
Perusal of the impugned award shows that the Labour Court has rejected the theory of dispatch of letter dated 711987 (Exhibit PX) only on the ground that the stamps register does not contain any entry regarding actual posting of letter dated 711987 to the employer.
While recording this finding, the Labour Court has ignored the testimony of Manjit Singh who made a categorical statement that letter dated 711987 was sent to the workman as well as to M/s Partap Steel Rolling Mills, Ballabgarh vide dispatch No. 594 dated 711987.
6.
Argument of Shri Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that finding of the Labour Court on the issue of opportunity of hearing to the respondent No. 2 is perverse and, therefore, the conclusion recorded by the Labour Court that reference made by the Government is bad in law is liable to be set aside.
Second argument of Shri Jain is that even if opportunity of hearing was not given to be respondent No. 2, the reference of the dispute cannot be treated as bad in law because the nature of the power exercised by the Government is not quasi-judicial or judicial but is purely administrative and in the ordinary circumstances the Government is under an obligation to make a reference of every industrial dispute.
On the other hand, Shri Mutneja argued that finding recorded by the Labour Court on the issue of maintainability of the reference is a finding of fact and there is no reason why this Court should interfere with such a finding.
Shri Muteneja placed reliance on the decision of the Division Bench in M/s Escorts Ltd's case (supra) in support of his argument that the principles of natural justice are applicable to the exercise of power by the Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act and as no opportunity of hearing was given to the respondent No. 2, the reference made by it to the Labour Court was without jurisdiction.
7.
Perusal of statement of Manjit Singh (recorded on 9111993 and 121994) together with the statement of Shri JP Srivastava shows that while Manjit Singh is categorical in his statement that as per the entries made in the dispatch register for period between 111987 to 1121987, Exhibit-PX No. ID/FD/916/95 dated 711987 had been sent to the workmen and to the Manager of M/s Partap Steel Rolling Mills, Ballabagarh vide dispatch No. 594 dated 711987 and that the dispatch register is used in day-to-day work, Shri JP Srivastava has stated that there is no entry regarding dispatch of letter No. 594 dated 711987 in the stamps register.
In his cross-examination, Shri JP Srivastava stated that dispatch No. 595 was shown in the register but it has not been mentioned against it as to what it has been sent.
He admitted that in the stamps register, all the letters are not mentioned in serial number because local dak is delivered by hand and only those letters are registered on which stamps are affixed.
He also admitted that letters dispatched on 711987 vide dispatch numbers 595, 592, 593, 594, 538, 605, 6304 and 501 do not indicate the addresses of the addressees.
He further admitted that 2/3 lines in the dispatch register are vacant.
Shri Srivastava finally stated that he could not say that letter through dispatch No. 594 dated 711987 was sent to M/s. Partap Steel Rolling Mills Ltd.
He went on to say that there is no entry in the register in this regard.
In our opinion, the statement of the despatch (sic) Manjit Singh should have been sufficient for holding that letter No. 594 was sent to the Manager of M/s. Partap Steal Rolling Mills Ltd. and mere absence of entry to this effect in the stamps register cannot lead to an inference that what Manjit Singh was stating on oath was not correct.
Dispatch register maintained in the favour of the Labour Commissioner, Haryana is public document and in the absence of any cogent evidence to discard the entries made in the dispatch register, the above Court was not justified in holding that letter dated 711987 was not dispatched to respondent No. 2 To us, it is a clear case of misreading of evidence by the learned Presiding Officer and, therefore, the finding recorded by him on the issue of maintainability of reference is perverse.
Consequently, the award passed by the Labour Court is liable to be declared as erroneous.
8.
The decision of this Court in M/s Escorts Ltd Industrial Tribunal, Haryana (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the Labour Court-II, Faridabad, to support its conclusion on the issue of maintainability of reference has no bearing on the facts of this case.
That was a case in which the Government had refused to make reference of the dispute raised by the workman and conveyed its decision vide letter dated 741976.
Thereafter, the workman requested the Government to reconsider the matter.
On his application, the Government referred the dispute for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal, Haryana vide its letter dated 25.7.1978.
The employer challenged the reference made by the Government on the ground that opportunity of hearing was not afforded to it.
This Court held that the principles of natural justice are attracted in a case where an earlier application for reference is rejected by the Government, but subsequently it decides to make reference.
The Division Bench held that in such a situation it is imperative for the Government to give an opportunity of hearing to the employer and also to record reasons why it was making reference after it had declined the request of the workman on an earlier occasion.
In this case, the fact situation is altogether different.
The Government did not decline to make reference of the dispute raised by the petitioner.
Rather, in the first instance itself the Government decided to make a reference of the dispute and the only question which was required to be examined by the Labour Court was whether the notice of the date of hearing i.e. 1611987 was given to the respondent No. 2 or not.
On facts, we have found that letter dated 711987 had in fact been dispatched to the respondent No. 2 and, therefore, the employer did have an opportunity to represent its case before the Labour Commissioner.
Therefore, on the basis of the decision in M/s Escorts Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana (supra), the reference made by the Government could not have been declared as bad in law.
9.
Moreover, the judgment of this Court in M/s Escorts Ltd's case (supra), can no longer be regarded as good law.
C.W.P.
No. 2885 of 1984 Sultan Singh v. State of Haryana and another, was dismissed by this court on 681984 by placing reliance on the judgment of the Division Bench in M/s Escorts Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana (supra).
Sultan Singh appealed against the decision of the Division Bench.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court considered the question whether opportunity of hearing is required to be given to the employer before the appropriate Government makes reference in the first instance and in cases where the Government had earlier declined to make reference.
In Sultan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1996(2) SCT 491(SC) : 1996(2) SCC 66 the Supreme Court held:-  "A conjoint reading, therefore, would yield to the conclusion that on making an application for reference, it would be open to the State Government to form an opinion whether industrial dispute exists or is apprehended and then either to make a reference to the appropriate authorities or refuse to make the reference.
Only on rejection thereof, the order needs to be communicated to the applicant.
Nonetheless the order is only an administrative order and not a quasi-judicial order.
When it rejects, it records reasons as indicated in sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act.
The appropriate Government is entitled to go into the question whether an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended.
It would be only a subjective satisfaction on the basis of the material on record.
Being an administrative order no lis is involved.
Thereby there is no need to issue any notice to the employer nor to hear the employers before making a reference or refusing to make a reference.
Sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act does not enjoin the appropriate Government to record reasons for making reference under Section 10(1).
It enjoins to record reasons only when it refuses to make a reference.
The need for hearing is obviated, if it is considered on second occasion as even then if it makes reference, it does not cease to be an administrative order and so is not incumbent upon the State Government to record reasons therein.
Therefore, it is not necessary to issue notice to the employer not to consider his objections nor to hear him before making a reference.
Accordingly, we are of the view that the High Court was wholly wrong in its conclusion that before making reference on second application it was incumbent upon the State Government to give notice to the employer and to give an opportunity to the employer and record reasons for making reference.
The previous decision of that Court relied on in the case at hand was wrongly decided."
10.
From the above decision of the Apex Court, it is clear that the Government is not required to hear the employer when it decides to make a reference of an industrial dispute.
The Government is also not required to hear the employer where on an earlier occasion reference has been declined by it.
11.
In view of the pronouncement of the Apex Court, the decision of this Court in M/s Escorts Ltd's case (supra) on which the Division Bench placed reliance while deciding the case of Sultan Singh must also be deemed to have been overruled by the Supreme Court.
Therefore, the decision in M/s Escort Ltd. (supra) can no longer be relied upon by the parties to challenge the reference made by the Government on the ground that opportunity of hearing was not given to the employer before making the reference.
12.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Award passed by the Labour Court is set aside.
Labour Court-II, Faridabad is directed to decide the case afresh after hearing both the parties on the merits of the dispute.
Keeping in view of the fact that the matter has already remained pending for the last nine years, we direct the Labour Court- II, Faridabad to decide the reference afresh within a period of six months.
Both the parties are directed to appear before the Labour Court-II, Faridabad on 1691996.
13.
A copy of this order be sent to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court-II, Faridabad, for compliance.
Petition allowed.