RL Anand, J - The Sonepat Central Cooperative Bank Ltd (hereinafter called 'the Bank') through its Managing Director has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for setting aside of the award dated 1651985 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak (respondent No. 1), alleging that it was illegal and without jurisdiction and it has been averred by the Bank that Balbir Singh deceased (respondent No. 2), now represented by his widow Smt. Dhanpati and his son Rajbir Singh had been working with some Primary Cooperative Credit and Service Societies before the constitution of the Haryana State Central Cooperative Banks Staff Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1975, framed under section 84-A of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
Balbir Singh allegedly did not fulfil the requisite qualifications for the post of the Secretary and, therefore, he was not brought on the common cadre rules.
Apprehending termination from the said Society, said Balbir Singh filed C.W.P.
No. 519 of 1976 in the High Court, which was dismissed on 1721983.
After the dismissal of the writ petition, another Secretary was appointed in his place and the employer Society was directed to remove respondent No. 2 from the service of the Society.
Said Balbir Singh preferred a reference under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
He served a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, which was suitably replied by the Bank vide Annexure P2.
The reference was disposed of by respondent No. 1 i.e. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak, and in the meanwhile the old Act, i.e. the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 was repealed and the new Act of 1984 came into existence.
According to the provisions of Section 102 of the new Act, if any dispute touching the constitution, establishment, management or the business of a Cooperative Society arises among the members, past members and persons claiming through a member, past member or deceased member, and the Society, including the matter of termination, was supposed to be referred to the Arbitrator in the light of the said provisions and the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been taken away by virtue of Section 128 of the New Act.
In spite of the fact that the above provisions were brought to the notice of respondent No. 1, he gave the award against the petitioner.
The petitioner alleges that Balbir Singh deceased was never the employee of the petitioner-Bank and, therefore, the question of terminating his services by the petitioner did not arise.
Resultantly, respondent No. 2, could not be granted any relief against the petitioner-Bank.
2.
The case in nutshell of the petitioner-Bank is that Balbir Singh was never brought on the Common Cadre Rules and under Rule 96 of the said Rules, therefore, the question of terminating his services at the hands of the petitioner did not arise.
There was no legal evidence before the Labour Court to the effect that the petitioner-Bank became the employer of Balbir Singh- respondent, who was the employee of the Sheikhpur Khas Cooperative Agricultural Service Society.
3.
With the above allegations, the petitioner-Bank has prayed that the award dated 1651985 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak, be quashed and set aside.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondent No. 2 Balbir Singh deceased contested the writ petition and he supported the award.
5.
Before I deal with the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties I would like to reproduce certain facts culminating in the award passed by the Labour Court.
Balbir Singh deceased raised an industrial dispute regarding the termination of his services from the Bank and the Society and the matter was referred by the State Government to the Labour Court under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as to whether the termination of the services of the deceased Balbir Singh was justified in any manner or not.
The case set up by the deceased was that he was in the employment of the Bank on the post of a Secretary and that in the year 1975 the Bank framed the Common Cadre Rules under the directions of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, and these rules were made applicable to all the Secretaries of the Cooperative Credit and Service Societies, which were the members of the Central Cooperative Bank and, therefore, Balbir Singh came under the administrative Control of Sonepat Central Cooperative Bank Ltd (petitioner herein) and that the Managing Director of the Bank vide letter dated 651983 directed the President of the Society to relieve Balbir Singh deceased of his charge and that in compliance with the said directions, his services were terminated on 1621984 without compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The reference was contested by the Bank and the Society, which took the preliminary objection that the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the reference in view of Section 128 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984 and that the dispute referred to the Labour Court was not covered under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
On merits it was the stand of the Bank and the Society that Balbir Singh was not the employee of the Bank and so the Common Cadre Rules were not made applicable to him, and further the candidatere of Balbir Singh was rejected by the Screening Committee constituted under Rule 96 of the said Rules.
Balbir Singh gave challenge to the vires of the said Rules in the High Court by filing the writ petition, which was dismissed on 1721983.
It was also the stand of the Bank and the Society that Balbir Singh remained gainfully employed.
Therefore, no relief could be granted to him.
On the above pleadings of the parties, the Labour Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try this reference because the dispute is not covered under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ?
OPR.
2.
Whether the reference is bad in law ?
OPR 3.
Whether the petitioner remained gainfully employed after termination of his services ?
OPR 4.
Whether the petitioner has been employed with respondent No. 1 ?
OPA.
5.
Whether the termination of services of Sh. Balbir Singh is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief is he entitled ?
The parties led oral and documentary evidence before the Labour Court and it was held on issue No. 1 that the Bank could not give directions to respondent's No. 2 but terminated his services without paying him the retrenchment compensation or one month pay in lieu of notice and since the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act have not been complied with, therefore, the directions given by the Bank to the Society for terminating the service of Balbir Singh were illegal and void ab initio.
It was also held under issue No. 4 that all the employees of the Society came under the administrative control of the Bank; so it was immaterial whether the workman was employed with the Society or with the Bank as a Secretary.
Resultantly, the reference was allowed and Balbir Singh was ordered to be reinstated into service with continuity of service and full backwages.
6.
During the pendency of the present writ petition, Balbir Singh died and vide order dated 14.2.1996 and the legal heirs of Balbir Singh were ordered to be brought on the record as respondents.
7.
I have heard Shri SS Dalal, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, and Shri Tribhuawan Singh, Advocate, on behalf of the respondents, and with their assistance have gone through the record of this writ petition.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that Balbir Singh, who was the Secretary of the Sheikhpura Khas Cooperative Credit and Service Society Limited, Sheikhpura (Sonepat) (for short 'the Society'), never became the Secretary of the Bank and for that reason the Labour Court could not pass any award against the present petitioner.
Mr. Dalal also submitted that Balbir Singh never fulfilled the requisite qualifications.
The Bank framed the Common Cadre Rules, 1975.
Challenge was given to these rules and these rules were held intra vires of the Constitution in Giani Hari Singh and Gurdas Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1977 P.L.J.
458.
So much so, Balbir Singh deceased also gave challenge to the said rules in C.W.P.
No. 519 of 1976 by impleading the Bank and Society aforesaid as respondents and his writ was dismissed on 1721983 in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as The Baparli Coop.
Agricultural Service Society v. State of Haryana and others, 1976 CLJ 364.
In these circumstances, the Labour Court took an erroneous view when it granted the relief to Balbir Singh regarding reinstatement into service against the present petitioner (Bank), as submitted by counsel.
9.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that as the control of the deceased vested with the Bank, which gave directions to the Society for terminating the services of respondent No. 2 Balbir Singh deceased and that no retrenchment compensation, as required under Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, has been given to him nor one month's pay in lieu of the notice period has been given, therefore, the Labour Court was justified in holding that the services of Balbir Singh deceased were illegally terminated.
10.
The admitted facts are that earlier Balbir Singh deceased was serving as a Secretary with the Society, the control of which vested in the Bank.
No doubt Balbir Singh was not fulfilling the requisite qualifications of the Secretary as per the service conditions laid down by the Bank under the Common Cadre Rules, to which challenge was given by him and it was held that the Common Cadre Rules were intra vires of the Constitution of India and that the Bank had the right to prescribe the qualifications for the post of Secretary and other posts, yet it is an admitted fact that the control of the erstwhile employees of the Society vested in the Bank, which issued directions to the Society vide letter dated 651983 for relieving Balbir Singh.
In other words, the services of Balbir Singh were terminated at the behest of the Bank by the President of the Society.
It is an admitted fact that no retrenchment compensation was granted to Balbir Singh nor one month's pay was given to him in lieu of notice.
In these circumstances, the retrenchment of Balbir Singh was void.
As the administrative control of the services of the members of the Society vested in the Bank, therefore, the Bank cannot shirk from its responsibility for payment of retrenchment compensation.
The Labour Court rightly came to the conclusion that Balbir Singh deceased, though did not fulfil the requisite qualifications as laid down under Rule 96 of the Rules for the post of the Secretary, yet the Bank could not give directions to the President of the Society to terminate his services without payment of retrenchment compensation.
Further it is also admitted by Shri RS Yadav, Managing Director of the Bank that with the coming into force of the Haryana State Central Cooperative Banks' Staff Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1975, all the employees working in the Cooperative Credit Societies, which were members of the Central Cooperative Bank, came under the administrative control of the said Bank.
In other words, the Bank became the employer for all intents and purposes.
It was the Bank who could initiate disciplinary action against such transferred employees.
The Society had lost its control with the inforcement of Common Cadre Rules, 1975.
The services of Balbir Singh were terminated after the enforcement of the said rules and, therefore, it was obligatory on the part of the Bank to pay the retrenchment compensation.
11.
Resultantly, I do not see any infirmity in the impugned award dated 1651985 passed by the Labour Court and also do not see any merit in the present writ petition, which is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.