RL Anand, J - Though Shri P.P.
Gupta, the then Assistant District Attorney, Kurukshetra, plaintiff-respondent, is no longer in service of the State of Haryana, yet the rights of the parties and question of law are required to be determined in the present appeal, which has been filed by the State of Haryana through the Director of Prosecution and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1321989 passed by the Court of District Judge, Kurukshetra, who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 12.11.1988 passed by the Court of Sub Judge 2nd Class, Kurukshetra, and dismissed the first appeal filed by the State of Haryana, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
2.
The pleadings of the parties can be summarised in the following manner :-  Shri P.P Gupta while working as Prosecuting Sub Inspector on 27.4.1969 was taken as Assistant District Attorney with effect from 1.4.1974.
He crossed efficiency bar in the old scale by the order of the Director, Prosecution, Haryana, and in the new scale under the decree of the Civil Court dated 22.2.1986 passed in Civil Suit filed by him.
Vide decree dated 22.2.1986, it was directed that the case of selection grade and promotion of the plaintiff be decided afresh.
In spite of the directions, the State did not consider the case of the plaintiff for the grant of selection grade and promotion.
The plaintiff issued notice under Section 80 CPC on 361987 and finally filed the present suit on 1251988, praying for a decree of declaration in his favour to the effect that the order dated 26.7.1982 withholding the selection grade with effect from 131981 and the order withholding promotion due to him with effect from 4121984 were null and void, ineffective, non est and not binding upon him as those orders were against the rules and that the plaintiff was entitled to the selection grade with effect from 131981 with interest upto the alleged due date of promotion, i.e., 4121984.
3.
The stand of the defendant-State was that the plaintiff was allowed to cross the efficiency bar on 1.4.1979 in the old scale of Rs. 350-25-500-EB-30-650 vide order dated 16.11.1979 after taking into consideration his annual confidential reports.
The pay scale of the post of ADA was revised with effect from 1.4.1979 to Rs. 700-30-850/900-40-1100- EB-50-1250.
On 141980 the plaintiff again became due to cross the efficiency bar in the revised scale.
Thereafter he filed a civil suit in which it was held that in view of the Finance Department instructions dated 2821980 providing that the crossing of efficiency bar will not be necessary in the new scale of an employee who had already crossed the efficiency bar in the old scale and there was only one efficiency bar under both the pay scales.
It was also held in the judgment that the issue of selection grade and promotion were separate from efficiency bar and the Government was competent to decide the point of selection grade and promotion separately.
The selection grade and the promotion of the plaintiff have been withheld after considering the matter afresh and that the crossing of the efficiency bar does not confer any automatic right on the plaintiff for the grant of selection grade and for considering him for promotion.
There were adverse remarks in the A.C.Rs.
of the plaintiff and by allowing the plaintiff to cross the efficiency bar, those adverse entries are not washed off automatically for the purpose of consideration of selection grade and promotion.
It was also pleaded by the State that the annual confidential report of the plaintiff for the year 1971-72 was not good.
His integrity was reported not upto the mark.
Similarly in the A.C.Rs.
of 1980-81, 1981-82 and 1982-83 the plaintiff was rated as just average in the matter of integrity.
There was a complaint of corruption against him and inquiry was held by the Deputy Commissioner, Faridabad, who returned findings against the plaintiff that his reputation was not above board and in the light of the above adverse entries and the report, the plaintiff was not considered suitable for the release of selection grade and promotion to the post of Deputy District Attorney.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the selection grade of the plaintiff withheld illegally ?
2.
Whether the promotion of the plaintiff withheld illegally 3.
Whether the plaintiff is not entitled to promotion and selection grade on the basis of adverse entry prior to crossing of efficiency bar ?
4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
5.
What is the effect of crossing of efficiency bar from 141980 on selection grade and promotion of the plaintiff ?
6.
Relief.
The parties led evidence in support of their case and on the conclusion of the trial it was held by the Courts below that crossing of efficiency bar though does not wipe off the previous adverse entries, yet the plaintiff is entitled to the release of the selection grade and was also entitled to be promoted as claimed by him, because either the adverse entries were conveyed very late to him or the average rating of the plaintiff was not qualified to withhold his promotion and there was no basis for the reporting authority to declare the plaintiff as a man of doubtful integrity and the reporting authority while giving the annual confidential reports violated the standing instructions of the Government and did not act according to law.
Resultantly, the appeal of the State was also dismissed vide the impugned judgment dated 1321989.
5.
The State has again come in the present R.S.A.
which is being disposed of with the help of Shri Azad Singh, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, who appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Shri RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, who appeared on behalf of the respondent, and this Court has gone through the record of the case with their assistance.
6.
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied upon a Full Bench authority of the Orissa High Court reported in S.S.S.
Venkatrao v. State of Orissa and other, 1974(2) S.L.R.
899, wherein it was held that crossing of efficiency bar does not wipe off the earlier adverse entries for the purpose of consideration of promotion of an employee and such adverse entries can be relied upon for consideration of the claim for promotion and operative part of the judgment is as follows :-  " "Efficiency bar" has not been defined.
Rule 78 of the Orissa Service Code lays down that where an efficiency bar is prescribed in a time scale, the increment next above the bar shall not be given to a Government servant without the specific sanction of the authority empowered to withhold increments.
It would thus be seen that an order allowing to cross the EB is to take into consideration the only factor whether the officer would get the next increment at that stage.
The considerations weighing with the authority empowered to allow crossing of EB are of a very limited nature.
Even if an officer's calibre is quite ordinary but no serious defects are notice in him, he may be allowed to cross the EB and that is what is exactly done in practice.
The consideration when a question of inter se promotion comes is altogether different.
There may not be anything adverse against an officer in particular but on a comparison of merits the officer below him may be much more superior to him in performance.
It would be extremely unreasonable to say that merely because an officer has been allowed to cross the EB all adverse entries prior to that stage are not to be taken into consideration for other purposes.
The personality of an officer cannot be disintegrated.
Character roll reflects the developments in his official career.
Ordinarily, superior authorities at the time of considering promotion place greater weight on the performance of the officer near-about the time of promotion.
This does not, however, mean that the earlier character rolls can be ignored."
7.
On the contrary the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent submitted that the crossing of efficiency bar prima facie suggests that the earlier adverse entries, if any, were not taken into consideration and nothing wrong was found with the work and conduct of the employee and for that reason the Government allowed the employee-plaintiff to cross the efficiency bar.
Even for the purpose of releasing the selection grade and for the purpose of considering the case of the plaintiff for promotion, no adverse entry of such a nature was standing in his way so as to debar him from the benefit of selection grade and considering him for promotion.
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, this Court is of the view that the appellant-State has no case.
There is no quarrel with the proposition of law as laid down in the Full Bench authority of the Orissa High Court and relied upon by the learned Assistant Advocate General.
This aspect was also taken note of both by the trial Court and by the first appellate Court and after taking into consideration all the aspects now being relied upon by the defendant-appellant, the Courts below decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent and granted the declaration as prayed for by him.
It is an admitted case of the parties that earlier the plaintiff was allowed to cross the efficiency bar in the old scale under the orders of the Director of Prosecution and subsequently in the new pay scale vide judgment and decree dated 22101986 vide judgment and decree of the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Kurukshetra, and that judgment was affirmed by the Court of District Judge, Kurukshetra vide judgment dated 8121986 (Exhibit P5).
9.
The selection grade to the plaintiff was due on 991981 and in this manner his A.C.R.
for the period 1980-81, i.e., with effect from 141980 to 991981 was most relevant, which can be looked into of course in the light of the previous entries.
It is a settled law that an adverse entry, which has been recorded against the employee should be communicated to him as early as possible, so that such an affected employee may make a representation satisfying to the authorities that the recording of adverse A.C.R.
was not justified or borne out from the record, but it appears that the A.C.R.
of 1980-81 was conveyed to the plaintiff on 1381982 after a lapse of 16 months.
Similarly, the A.C.R.
of 1981-82 (Exhibit D9) was conveyed to the plaintiff on 1381982.
The A.C.R.
for the period 1982-83 (Exhibit D-4) was conveyed to the plaintiff on 591984 i.e., after a lapse of 17 months.
Even the A.C.R.
for the period 1981-82 was conveyed to him after a lapse of 4 months.
The relevant instructions, which have been issued by the State Government are contained in the letter dated 2.3.1971 and it has been clearly stipulated therein that the confidential reports should be recorded without delay and further in the event of heavy delay occurring in isolated cases, it should be possible for the higher authorities to discard to the extent necessary such reports as had been written after a lapse of very long time and as were tainted with suspicious features on one ground or the other.
The assessment of the record as a whole of the officer concerned would thus not be affected unduly by such a report.
As I have stated above, the adverse reports for the years 1980-81, 1981-82 and 1982-83 were delayed in their communication, giving a valuable right to the plaintiff; such adverse entries could not be taken into consideration for depriving the plaintiff of the benefits of releasing of selection grade and further his name could not be rejected for consideration for promotion on the basis of stale entries.
Even otherwise, the alleged adverse entries are not adverse remarks in the view of this Court.
'Average integrity' cannot be equated with 'integrity doubtful'.
It cannot be lost sight of fact that most of the employees of a particular Government hold average intelligence with moderate integrity, but such employees cannot be termed as 'dead wood'.
In the A.C.R.
of 1980-81 (Exhibit D8) against the column of 'Hardworking and Honesty' the plaintiff has been rated as 'Just Average'.
Against the column of 'Reputation for Honesty' has been again rated 'Just Average'.
There were no remarks by the reporting authority that the plaintiff should not be considered for promotion or that the benefit of selection grade should not be conferred upon him.
Similarly in the relevant column of the ACR for the year 1981-82 (Exhibit P9) the plaintiff was rated as Average in the matter of hardwork and honesty.
For the first time in the ACR of 1982-83 (Exhibit D14) adverse remarks "Honesty is not above board.
He pulls on in the work and man of average intelligence" have been recorded.
Even in this report no basis is discernible on the premises of which the reporting authority formed an opinion about the honesty of the plaintiff and recording of such remarks are against the standing instructions dated 4101956 of the Government.
In para No. 4 of the instructions it has been mentioned that a special mention should invariably be made regarding the integrity of the officer to which the Government attached greatest importance.
It should be clearly stated if the officer is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt and this opinion should generally be fortified by reasons, which may be in the possession of the reporting officer.
Any ill-considered remarks in this respect may do a lot of mischief and harm.
On the other hand the reporting officer must be quite honest and frank and discuss an officer's worth from the point of view of his integrity openly and frankly in the column "Defects, if any" or elsewhere.
It has been specifically mentioned in these instructions that non-committal remarks like "no complaints" should be avoided and that the reporting officers should give a definite opinion about the integrity of their subordinates while writing the annual confidential reports.
A glance at Exhibits D8 and D9 would show that in the columns of 'Defect, if any' the only remark is that the plaintiff required improvement in handwriting and the column of "Defect, if any" relating to the ACR for the year 1982-83 is silent.
If the above three relevant A.C.Rs.
are scrutinised in the light of the instructions, there is no hesitation on the part of this Court to hold that there was practically no complaint of dishonesty or corruption against the plaintiff and his honesty could not be doubted so as to deprive him of the benefit of selection grade and for consideration of his case for promotion.
No doubt promotion cannot be claimed as a matter of right and the releasing of selection grade is not an automatic right which vests in the employee, but equally it is true that a judicious/quasi-judicious approach is supposed to be required on the part of the employer while recording sensitive remarks against the columns of integrity, efficiency and honesty.
The plaintiff was rated just average in the matter of work and honesty in the years 1980-81 (Ex. D8) and 1981-82 (Ex. D9) and the word 'Just Average' have to be rated and understood distinctly from the words 'Below Average' and 'Integrity Doubtful'.
Even these remarks 'Just Average/Average' have not been awarded in the light of the instructions of the Government itself.
The only A.C.R.
(Ex. D7) for the period 141971 to 3131972 cannot be availed of by the State because against the column of Honesty it has been mentioned "Although no specific instance, his reputation is not upto the mark."
No basis has been disclosed while commenting upon the reputation of the employee.
Such stale and unfounded A.C.Rs.
could not stand in the way of the plaintiff for the determination of his case for the release of the selection grade and for consideration for promotion.
10.
Learned counsel appearing for the State of Haryana finally took the assistance of the letter (Ex. D10) dated 17.9.1956 issued from the office of the Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab, and letter dated 2861961 (Ex. D11) of the Government of Punjab, wherein it has been mentioned that an officer known to be dishonest cannot be promoted and that unsuitable officers/officials would not be considered fit for promotion.
These letters, in my opinion, are only the guidelines.
There is no quarrel about the laudable ideas and the policies in these letters, but before depriving an employee of his rights, such as release of selection grade, which necessarily entails monetary benefits and right to be considered for promotion, reasonable basis/premises must be made out, which are totally lacking, as I have just depicted above, from the four A.C.Rs., which are alleged to be adverse against the plaintiff.
In my view, the above A.C.Rs.
would not stand in the way of the plaintiff in the release of the selection grade and also for the consideration of his case for promotion.
11.
Further it was urged before me that the Courts below fell in error while giving a declaration straightaway that the plaintiff was entitled to promotion with effect from 4121984 with all benefits.
Shri RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, appearing for the respondent has tried to justify this declaration by urging that since the plaintiff obtained an earlier decree from the Civil Court for the release of the efficiency bar, and that the said decree was passed in the year 1986, therefore, the declaration given by the Courts below was according to law.
I am not in agreement with the submission raised by the learned counsel for the respondent because of the settled law that no employee has the right for promotion straightaway.
At the most he can claim the right of consideration for promotion.
12.
Resultantly, while dismissing the appeal of the State I modify the judgments and decrees of the Courts below and grant a decree for declaration to the effect that the order dated 26.7.1982 withholding selection grade is null and void and not binding upon the plaintiff and that he is entitled to the selection grade with effect from 991981 with interest upto the date when the plaintiff was in service, and further the order dated 4121984 is null and void and the plaintiff is entitled to be considered for promotion with effect from 4121984 on the basis of his service record, with all the benefits upto the date of his remaining in service.
It is clarified that in all other respects the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are affirmed.
13.
In view of the divided success in this appeal, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.