GS Singhvi, J - The only point which calls for determination in this case is whether the petitioner has a right to be considered for regularisation of his services w.e.f.
30th September, 1988, in accordance with the policy decision contained in the letter of the Chief Secretary dated April 6, 1990 (Annexure P-2).
2.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner was appointed in service as Junior Engineer on 17121985 after his name was sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
On the basis of instructions issued by the Governor of Haryana vide notification dated 2821991, services of the petitioner came to be regularised w.e.f.
31.12.1990 vide order Annexure P-1 dated 1021993 issued by the Director, Development & Panchayats Department, Haryana.
The petitioner made representation for regularisation of his services w.e.f.
September 30, 1988 on the basis of the instructions contained in the letter dated April 6, 1990 and as the respondents did not accept his request, he moved this court with a prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued to the respondents to regularise his services w.e.f.
September 30, 1988 in terms of the instructions contained in Annexure P2.
3.
Prayer of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents on the ground that the instructions contained in the letter dated April 6, 1990, were not notified by the government and even though these may have been placed before the Supreme Court, no right can be claimed by the petitioner on the basis of those instructions.
The respondents have pleaded that case of the petitioner was considered for regularisation of services in accordance with the instructions notified by the Governor of Haryana on 2821991 and on being found suitable he has already been regularised w.e.f.
December 31, 1990 and the petitioner has no right to be regularised from an earlier date.
4.
We have gone through the decision of the Apex Court in State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, (1992) 4 SCC 18 : 1992(3) SCT 201(SC).
5.
Perusal of para 38 of the said decision shows that during the pendency of the Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court, the Government of Haryana had framed policy for regularisation of services of ad hoc, daily wage, temporary, casual and workcharge employees and the same was produced before the Supreme Court along with the letter of the Chief Secretary dated April 6, 1990.
This is the same letter which has been placed on the record of the writ petition as Annexure P2.
6.
In para 36 of the judgment, their Lordships took notice of the letter dated April 6, 1990 in the context of the direction given by the High Court for regularisation of all employees who fall within the category of 'workman' on completion of one year service.
Their Lordships disapproved the direction given by the High Court and observed :-  "While we agree that persons belonging to these categories continuing over a number of years have a right to claim regularisation and the authorities are under an obligation to consider their case for regularisation in a fair manner, keeping in view the principles enunciated by this Court, the blanket direction given cannot be sustained.
We need not, however, pursue this discussion in view of he orders of the Government of Haryana contained in the letter dated April 6, 1990 which provide for regularisation of these persons on completion of ten years.
We shall presently notice the contents of the said letter."
(Emphasis ours).
7.
It would also be appropriate to make reference to para 52 of the judgment in which their Lordships observed that the orders issued by the Governments of Punjab and Haryana providing for regularisation of ad hoc/temporary employees who have put in two years/one year of service are quite generous and leave no room for any legitimate grievance by any one.
8.
In para 54 of the decision, their Lordships have given direction that the instructions contained in the letter April 6, 1990 should be adopted by the Statutory/Public Corporations, functioning under the control of the Government of Haryana.
The direction given by the Supreme Court in this regard reads thus :-  "In short, the Statutory/Public Corporations in Haryana will follow the orders contained in the letter dated April 6, 1990 referred to above, as supplemented by the orders in the notification dated February 28, 1991......" 9.
In view of the above quoted observations made by the Supreme Court, it is more than clear that the Scheme formulated by the Government in pursuance of the interim orders passed by the Apex Court was not only placed before the Apex Court but was taken note of by the Supreme Court and directed to be implemented in respect of the different categories of employees.
This being the position, we cannot accept the submission of the learned Assistant Advocate General that the instructions contained in the letter of the Chief Secretary do not confer any right upon the petitioner to be considered for regularisation of his services w.e.f.
September 30, 1988.
10.
We are also of the opinion that the view taken by the Division Bench in CWP No. 4137/95 Ajit Singh v. Chief Secretary, Haryana (decided on August 4, 1995) regarding the right of the writ petitioner to be considered for regularisation in accordance with the instructions contained in letter dated 641990 is correct and does not warrant departure by us.
11.
There is one more aspect which we must consider to examine the correctness of the arguments of the learned Assistant Advocate General that the instructions attached with the letter dated 641990 should not be enforced.
In terms of the directions given by the Apex Court the work-charge and daily wages employees will have to be regularised on completion of 10 years service as contemplated by these instructions.
Similarly the employees of Statutory/Public Corporations in Haryana will get the benefit of these instructions.
Thus an anomalous situation would arise, inasmuch as some persons will get the benefit of the instructions while others will not.
This would logically result in hostile discrimination and violation of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, we are unable to accept the submission of the learned Assistant Advocate General that the instructions placed before the Apex Court along with the letter dated 641990 should not be ordered to be implemented.
12.
Argument of the learned Assistant Advocate General that the instructions contained in the notification dated February 28, 1991 should prevail vis-a- vis instructions attached with the letter dated 641990 because they cover the same field and, therefore, regularisation of the service of the petitioner should not be ordered w.e.f.
30th September, 1988 is also without force.
Persual of the notification dated February 28, 1991 shows that some of the posts which fell within the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board were taken out of its purview by the Governor so that there may be no objection to the regularisation of ad hoc employees without the recommendations of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
These instructions have a very limited scope as compared to the instructions attached with letter dated 641990 which deal with all categories of employees, namely, ad hoc, temporary, daily wage, work-charge and causal.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the two sets of instructions occupy the same field and, therefore, notification issued under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India should prevail over the instructions attached with the letter dated 641990.
Therefore, the benefit which is available to the petitioner under those instructions cannot be denied on the ground that by virtue of notification dated 2821991 the date of regularisation has been fixed as 31st December, 1990.
13.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of his services in terms of the instructions attached with the letter dated 641990.
An appropriate order be passed within two months of the submission of certified copy of this order after making an exercise to adjudge the suitability of the petitioner in terms of instructions.