JK Mehra, J - By this decision I will be disposing of two writ petitions being C.W.P.
No. 22/95 and C.W.P.
No. 115/95, both challenging different findings of the impugned award.
One writ has been filed by the Management challenging findings on the first and second term of reference and the other filed by the workmen challenging the findings on the third term of reference.
2.
This writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 115/95 arose out of the decision of Industrial Tribunal-II, Delhi relating to a dispute referred to the said Tribunal by the appropriate Government for adjudication seeking quashing of the impugned Award dated 17th November, 1994 pertaining to terms of reference No. 1 and 2.
The petitioner has also challenged the terms of reference covered by the order of reference vide notification No. F.24(1558)/94-Lab.
29734-39 dated 3rd June 1994.
The terms of reference in the present case are as under :  1) Whether the workmen are entitled to increase in wages @ Rs. 263/- P.M. in terms of the settlement dated 5.3.91 and if so, to what relief are they entitled and what directions are necessary in this respect ?
2) Whether the workmen shown in Annexure A are entitled to wages for the lock-out period w.e.f.
20.3.94 and if so, what directions are necessary in this respect ?
3) Whether the transfer of S/Shri Raghbir Singh, Birbal, Hans Raj, Sunder Vir, Pyare Lal, Dharm Pal, Man Chand, Kishan Lal, Asha Ram, Sudhir Kumar, Mithai Lal, Sukhu Ram, Ram Garib, Dhan Singh, Attar Singh.
Prabhu and Ram Pher is legal and/or justified and if not to what relief are they entitled and what directions are necessary in this respect ?
The first of reference relates to a settlement which is alleged to have been reached on 5th March 1991 between the management and the workmen whereunder increase in wages of Rs. 263/- per month was provided for while the second term of reference pertains to workmen shown in Annexure-A to the order of reference who are alleged to have been locked out w.e.f.
20th March 1994.
3.
The contentions of the petitioner-management in short are as under :  The memorandum of understanding dated 5th March 1991 did not amount to a settlement as contemplated under Section 2(b) read with Section 18 of the Industrial disputes Act read with Rule 58 of the Central Rules and for that reason the said document cannot be enforced as a settlement.
Counsel for the management has relied upon inter alia following judgments :  i) Workmen of Delhi Cloth and General Mills v. Management of M/s. Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd,reported as 1970(2) SCR 886, at 882, 895 and 896. ii) International Airport Authorities, reported as 1991 LLR 481 (DB Delhi).
iii) The Management, The Co-operative Store Ltd v. Ved Prakash Bhambri, reported as 1988 (36) DLT 185 (Delhi).
iv) Om Prakash Sikka v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, reported as 1983(46) FLR 172.
4.
In the case of Workmen of M/s Delhi Cloth and General Mills v. Management of M/s Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd, reported as 1970(2) SCR 886, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held :  "(2) Rule 58(4) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957 made under Section 38 of the Industrial Dispute Act has full force of law of which judicial notice can be taken.
This rule must be fully complied with if the settlement is to have a binding effect on all workmen."
[896-A] This judgment was followed in Om Prakash Sikka v. Presiding Officer, (supra) where this Court has also held that compliance with the Rule 58(4) was mandatory and same view was also held in another case of The Management of Cooperative Stores Ltd v. Ved Prakash Bhambri reported as (36) 1988 DLT 185 where it was reiterated that Rule 58 and Form H of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 1957 have to be strictly followed before the settlement could be considered as valid.
In this case even though there was no plea still the Court found the Tribunal was right in taking note of the fact that the mandatory requirement of Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules had not been complied with and that non-compliance affected the validity of the settlement.
In this case also Court had followed the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of DCM (supra) which is to the effect that the plain reading of the Rule and Form shows that the settlement has to be in compliance with the statutory provisions and the Hon'ble Supreme Court in that case had held the settlement to be invalid though it was arrived at in the course of the conciliation proceedings as the settlement was not entered into with the concurrence of conciliation officer and the provisions of Rule 58(4) had not been complied with.
This settlement was held to be invalid.
5.
On his attention being drawn to the case of Workmen of M/s Hindustan Lever Ltd, and others v. Management of M/s. Hindustan Lever Ltd, reported as 1984 Labour Court and Industrial Cases 276, Mr. Birbal pointed out that the case of Hindustan Lever was altogether different since the understanding reached by exchange of letters had been consistently followed for the last 25 years and the Management has got some of the references of workers rejected in the light of such understandings and for that reason the Supreme Court had observed that the plea of estoppel will apply against the management whereas there was no such situation prevailing in the present case.
Mr. Raj Birbal also argued in the alternative that assuming the memorandum of understanding to be amounting to a settlement the document itself nowhere provided for an increase of a sum of Rs. 263/- per month.
He has referred to para 5 quoted hereinbelow of the alleged settlement which provided that even if the base of 1960 = 100 of the cost of living index number is changed by Delhi Administration even then the management shall not change the base and shall pay @85 paise per point increase in index number when payable.
"5.
The Delhi Administration has made the base 1960 = 100 and in future if the Administration stops the above base, even then the Management will give D.A.
on the basis of 1960 = 100 series @ 085 paise per point."
6.
It is not disputed before me that there is no change in the base of 1960 being 100 so far.
Since the base had remained static the computation is being carried on in terms thereof and there was no question of any increase in wages as per the settlement as alleged.
It has also not been disputed before me by either party that any increase in the cost of living index number over the wages that were being drawn at the time of the alleged settlement was being compensated (by adequate neutralisation factor of increase in dearness allowance by computing such amount @ 085 paise per point increase in the cost of living index.
It appears that by computing the amounts of DA based on the aforesaid agreement the total amount of such difference in DA comes to Rs. 263/- for a month and that I am told has already been and is being paid to the workers.
The settlement has been carefully perused and there is no provision made therein for any payment other than the neutralisation by increase in DA which is to be computed in terms of the clause 5 quoted above.
In that view of the matter I hold that the workers are entitled to the payments mentioned in the settlement in terms of clause 5 quoted hereinabove, which amount incidently coincides with the amount mentioned in the first term of reference, and is payable by way of DA under the said settlement.
No other amount is payable under the said settlement.
I further clarify that even though the said settlement may not qualify to be a settlement under the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, the management will continue to be bound to honour this as an agreement as it has already been acted upon by both the parties and its existence was never disputed.
Therefore, both parties are estopped from challenging the same at this late stage.
A reference be made, in this connection, to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Hindustan Levers Ltd and others v. Management of Hindustan Lever Ltd, reported as 1984 Lab.
I.C.
274.
7.
The real controversy has been raging between the parties on the second term of reference.
8.
On the second term of reference the contention of the petitioner is that the appropriate Government by framing the terms of the reference in the present form has resorted to adjudication and in fact has tried to prevent an investigation as to whether it was a case of lock-out or strike.
This the appropriate Government could not do.
9.
According to Mr. Raj Birbal instead of framing the term of reference to read "as to whether the workmen shown in Annexure-A had gone on a strike or whether there was a lock-out by the Management, if so, whether the act of the workmen or the management as the case may be was justified and to what relief, if any, the workmen are entitled."
In support he has cited the order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 14th January 1991 in Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 17068/90 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court had directed the Delhi Administration under such circumstances to refer the dispute for adjudication and had stated that ".... the Delhi Administration should refer for adjudication as required under Section 10 (1)(D) read with section 12(5) of the Act, the dispute as to whether there was lock-out and in case it was so, it was legal and justified" for adjudication.
10.
According to Mr. Raj Birbal there was clearly a dispute on the question as to whether there is any lock-out or whether the workmen had resorted to strike.
From the correspondence and the award it does appear that it all started as a strike.
I have been taken through the record of the Conciliation Officer where plenty of correspondence is available on the labour office record showing that the management right from the very beginning had been alleging that the workmen had resorted to unjustified strike.
In fact he drew my attention to the relevant page where the draft terms of reference were being prepared in the draft failure report dated 31st May 1994 wherein the term of reference originally drafted reads "whether the workmen shown in Annexure-A are entitled to wages for the non- employment.....", the words non-employment have been deleted and substituted by the word lock-out.
Even if the appropriate Government had retained the expression as it was originally drafted, it was open to the Tribunal to adjudicate as to whether this non-employment had resulted from strike or lock-out and whether such strike/lock-out was legal and justified.
But by such amendment as has been carried out in the office of the Labour Commissioner which could have been on the advice of somebody, the entire context has been changed and in fact, it was narrowed down the scope of the references drastically.
The administration has proceeded to do what only the adjudicator could do and that too, after hearing both the parties and recording evidence.
Another peculiar fact which has been alleged in this case is the political interference alleged by the management in favour of the workmen as a consequence whereof the 2nd term of reference was framed.
The final conciliation proceedings appear to have been held at the residence of the Labour Minister for National Capital Territory of Delhi.
It is, however, not possible for me to conclude either way in this connection.
But I agree with Mr. Birbal that the term of reference has been framed in a manner which pre- judges the main issue, i.e., whether there was a strike or a lock-out and whether the same was legal and justified and refers only a narrow question of the entitlement of wages for the lock-out period w.e.f.
20th March 1994.
In the face of such correspondence available on the record of the labour office such a term of reference could not have been framed and in doing so the appropriate Government has really done what it was not competent to do, i.e., to adjudicate upon the question as to whether there was a strike or a lock out and whether it was legal and/or justified.
This matter stands concluded by a Full Bench judgment of this Court, which is binding on appropriate Government, in the case of ITDC reported in 1982 LIC 1309 (1328 and 1329).
This Full Bench judgment of this Court has been followed by Full Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court in the case of Village Papers, reported as 1993 (1) LLJ 480.
In the case ITDC also the real dispute between the parties was whether there was a lock-out or a closure in the establishment and the government referred the dispute by assuming that there was a lock-out, the Full Bench of this court held that such order of reference was liable to be interfered with as the Labour Court could not travel beyond the term of reference and decided the question as to whether there was a lock-out.
The Full Bench observed that :  "It is settled law that the jurisdiction of the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal in industrial disputes is limited to the points specifically referred for its adjudication and the matter incidental thereto and it is not permissible to go beyond the terms of the reference.
An Industrial Adjudicator constituted under the Act is not vested with any inherent power of jurisdiction.
It exercises such jurisdiction and power only upon and under order of reference limited to its term.
It cannot travel beyond the term of reference except for ancillary matters.
Making of an order of reference is undoubtedly an administrative function, but even that is amenable to judicial review in the proceedings under Article 226 under certain facts and circumstances.
An order of reference is open to judicial review if it is shown that the appropriate Government has not applied its mind to the material before it or has not taken into consideration certain vital facts which it ought to have taken into consideration.
The whole of the correspondence between the management and the Labour Commissioner, the Union for the workmen and the Labour Commissioner and the notices displayed by the management (the substances of which has been reproduced above) were before the Secretary (Labour), Delhi Administration when it passed the order of reference dated April 27, 1981.
We are of the view that the existence of lock-out itself being the real dispute between the management and its workmen, the term of reference proceeds on the assumption that there was lock-out with effect from January 1, 1981."
11.
In the present case from the term of the reference it is clear that the issue of "whether it was a lock-out or strike" had not been referred for adjudication even though there were letters on the record of the Labour Commissioner written in the month of March and May to the effect that workers were not reporting for work.
I have no doubt in my mind that the appropriate Government had not referred the real dispute in the absence whereof there could be no award on the question, "whether it was case of a strike or a lock-out ?"
The appropriate Government clearly failed to exercise its jurisdiction properly in proceeding to frame the second term of reference in the manner it has done.
12.
In response to the argument as to why the Management did not come to this Court immediately on the reference being made to have the omission rectified, Mr. Raj Birbal drew my attention to law laid down in the case of DP Maheshwari v. Delhi Administration reported as 1983(4) SCC 293 and which has been followed by this Court in Taj Services Ltd v. Delhi Administration, reported as 1989 (58) FLR 911 (Delhi).
Mr. Vohra has contended that the Management should have come to this Court at the earliest opportunity and before waiting for the entire proceeding to be over the question as to whether the reference could be challenged at the very outset by claiming a preliminary issue is no longer in doubt.
In view of the decision in the same Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court which have delivered the judgment in the case of DP Maheshwari (supra) while dealing with the case of Hindustan Levers which is reported in the following years as 1984 Labour and Industrial Cases 276(289).
The subsequent decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein the said case of Hindustan Levers in paragraph 25 the Hon'ble Supreme Court had observed as under :  "In industrial adjudication, issues are of two types : (i) those referred by the Government for adjudication and set out in the order of reference, and (ii) incidental issues which are sometimes the issues of law or issues of mixed law and fact.
The Tribunal may as well frame preliminary issues if the point on which the parties are at variance, as reflected in the preliminary issue, would go to the root of the matter."
13.
The matter has been set at rest in a recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of National Council for Cement and Building Materials v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) SCT 485 (SC).
arising out of SLP (C) No. 27302/95 decided on 15th February 1996 wherein the position of law as laid down in the case of DP Maheshwari has been reaffirmed and restored.
Since there was no reference there could also be no pleading and consequently no issue or finding whether there was a strike or lock-out and whether strike or the lock-out is illegal and unjustified.
The position that wages or any part thereof for strike or lock-out period can be granted only if there is a finding that the strike or lock-out is illegal and unjustified is also not disputed.
A reference may be made to the following judgments which reflect the consistent view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court :  i) India Marine Service (Private) Ltd. v. Their Workmen, reported as 1963(1) LLJ 122 (SC).
ii) Northern Dooars Tea Co Ltd v. Workment, of Dem Dima Tea Estate, reported as 1964(1) LLJ 436 (SC).
iii) Management M/s Pradip Lamp Work's case, reported as 1970(2) SCR 880 (SC).
iv) The Statesman Ltd. v. Their Workmen, reported as 1976(1) LLJ 484 (SC).
14.
Mr. Birbal in the light of the aforesaid cases decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court has agreed that in those cases the Hon'ble Supreme Court awarded only 50% of the wages.
He in particular referred to the case of the Statesman Ltd where the facts were somewhat similar to the present case that is what started as a strike resulted in a lock-out where the management did not allow the workers to resume work even after they expressed their desire to return to work.
Even though there was nothing wrong in the term of reference in that case the Hon'ble Supreme Court awarded 50% of the wages.
Similarly in the case of India Marine Services (P) Ltd. 50% of the wages was awarded.
In the present case, I am informed that in fact workers are currently being paid their wages except for a short period i.e. June 1995 to 4th August, 1995.
15.
From the detailed arguments advanced by both parties it is difficult to absolve workmen of entire blame for the non-employment.
16.
I have already held hereinabove that the appropriate Government had failed to exercise its jurisdiction in not referring the real dispute for adjudication and to that extent there clearly appeared to be non-application of mind.
I had also sent for the record of the Appropriate Government and found that in the original record the issue which was sought to be referred the term of reference originally proposed mentioned "non-employment" which was deleted and the term "Lock-out" was written.
The term "non-employment" would have had much wider scope and would have enabled the Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the question as to whether non- employment was the result of strike or a lock-out and whether such strike or lock-out was legal and/or justified.
The appropriate government clearly exceeded its jurisdiction in adjudicating upon the cause of such a non- employment being the result of lock-out and thereby confining the term of reference only to wages for lock-out period.
17.
The contentions of the management have been rebutted by Mr. Vohra who alleges that the judgments of Shambhu Nath Goel v. Bank of Baroda, reported as 1978(1) LLJ 488 and Avon Services' case reported as 1979(1).
LLJ 1 as also Bombay Union of Journalists' case reported as 1964(1) LLJ 351 are not exactly applicable and he states that in any event appropriate government cannot be precluded from expressing its prima facie view.
The only reference made in opposition to other cases cited by Mr. Birbal is that those are not relevant in view of the fact that the management had accepted settlement which had been acted upon.
The thrust of his argument has mainly been that the management was represented before the labour authorities and did not place its case before the said authorities.
18.
Mr. Vohra has gone to the extent of contending that since the management had not properly presented its case before the appropriate Government, it by its own conduct is now estopped from raising the plea that the real dispute has not been referred.
I am unable to agree with Mr. Vohra as there can be no estoppel against law.
He has also pointed out that Labour Inspector had visited the establishment of the management and submitted his report wherefrom, in spite of the management's letter, it becomes clear that it was a case of a lock-out.
Mr. Vohra has contended that High Court is not sitting in appeal over the decision of the appropriate Government.
No doubt he is right that this Court is not sitting in appeal over the decisions of the appropriate Government, but if the appropriate Government has failed to exercise its jurisdiction which was vested in it, or has exercised jurisdiction, which is not vested in it, this Court has jurisdiction to examine that question and to pass appropriate orders.
19.
Mr. Vohra has next contended that no prejudice has resulted to the management as the Industrial Tribunal had framed an issue and both the parties had led their respective evidence to show whether it was a case of lock-out or strike and after looking into the evidence the Tribunal came to the finding in favour of the workmen and against the management and it held that the management did declare a lock out after the workmen had gone on strike.
According to Mr. Vohra in the light of this itself the judgment of Full Bench in the case of ITDC reported as 1982 LIC 1309 is not applicable.
Another reason why according to Mr. Vohra the judgment of Full Bench cannot be applied is because it had failed to consider the effect of judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of C.P. Barthy v. State of Madras, reported as AIR 1953 SC 58.
However, Mr. Vohra has not dealt with subsequent pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court referred to hereinabove wherein their Lordships have clearly laid down that appropriate Government has no jurisdiction to adjudicate or decide any issue.
There the appropriate Government had come to a finding that the person before them was not covered by the definition of the term "workman".
According to Hon'ble Supreme Court, this amounted to adjudication which the appropriate Government could not do and they struck down the decision of the appropriate Government and ordered a reference.
Mr. Vohra has not adverted to distinguish this authority.
His other contention is that the petitioner had ample opportunity to go to the appropriate Government and have a corrigendum issued to get the term of reference corrected.
Mr. Vohra contended that in the Full Bench decision of this court in the case of ITDC was rendered on the Court being approached at the stage of a preliminary issue.
Such a thing could not be done in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of DP Maheshwari v. SBI (supra) and C.A.
No. 3519/96 arising out of SLP (C) No. 27302/95 (supra).
Mr. Vohra further contended, which in my opinion is without justification or merit, that it was for the management to prove that the lock out was justified.
I find that there is no term of reference requiring the determination of this fact.
In the absence thereof it was for the party claiming the wages to have proved lack of justification on the part of the management which would have enabled the Tribunal to Award the wages after examining the merits or the lack of the claim for wages for the period of the alleged lock out.
20.
Assuming everything to be in favour of workmen, still I find that the impugned Award for payment of wages during the period of alleged lock-out could not be sustained as there is no finding returned by the Tribunal that the lock-out was illegal and unjustified.
in the absence of such a finding no wages could be awarded.
21.
In the writ petition filed by the workers the decision of the Tribunal on the third term of reference has been challenged.
It is not disputed before me that the job is transferable from one establishment to the other and all that they have done is to post them to the new factory site.
Mr. Vohra contended since there is no work available, this transfer is mala fide and could not be justified while Mr. Birbal has pointed out that the factory is coming up over there and work is going to be made available.
In any event, I have not been able to find anything wrong with the impugned award on this term of reference.
The employer has transferred in exercise of its powers under the contract of employment to transfer in Delhi, these workers from one establishment to the other.
Even though the employer is unable to furnish adequate work to his employees, unless and until the term of employment provide for such contingency the employer has to pay wages and is liable to pay wages so long as the employees are reporting for work and are available for the job.
The management in the course of the hearing was directed to make certain ad hoc deposits towards payment of wages for the period subsequent to the award and they have made two deposits.
It is directed that out of the amount deposited the workers be paid their wages and if there is any balance left after payment of the wages the parties may move the Court for appropriate directions regarding the disposal of such amount.
I find no merit in the second writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
The writ petition No. 115/95 is hereby allowed in terms set out hereinabove.
Rule nisi is made absolute in the above terms and the Award of the Tribunal on the 1st term is modified as above and on the 2nd term of reference is hereby set aside.
In the circumstances of the case the parties are left to bear their own costs.
A copy of this judgment be placed on the file of C.W.P.
No. 22/95.