THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner joined the Transport Department of Punjab on June 10, 1974, as Motor Vehicles Inspector.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Extra Assistant Transport Controller (Technical) and he was reverted as Motor Vehicle Inspector on June 4, 1987, and posted as such at Bathinda.
Without joining at the place of posting, he applied for three months'leave originally on medical grounds.
This leave of three months initially applied for, was sanctioned by the Competent Authority.
Thereafter, he sent an application on September 24, 1987, for extension of leave again on medical grounds.
Then the petitioner was directed to appear before the Chief Medical Officer, Ludhiana, by letter dated October 26, 1987.
Civil Surgeon, Ludhiana who examined the petitioner on November 12, 1987, found him fit to resume duties.
Accordingly, a communication was sent to the petitioner on December 29, 1987, intimating him that the leave applied for by him in continuation of the earlier leave sanctioned, had been rejected and he was directed to report for duty immediately failing which disciplinary action would be taken against him.
In spite of this letter, he did not resume the duty through he was asked to join the duty repeatedly by the department.
On the other hand, the petitioner sought for constitution of a Medical Board for his medical examination.
Accordingly, on the request of the petitioner, Medical Board was constituted by the Director of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, and vide his letter dated February 11, 1988, the petitioner was directed to appear before the Standing Medical Board in the office of the Civil Surgeon, Faridkot, either on February 19, 1988, or on February 26, 1988, for his examination by the Medical Board.
In spite of his request being acceded to by the department for constituting the Medical Board, the petitioner never appeared before the Medical Board at Faridkot.
Thereafter, a charge sheet was issued to him on March 14, 1988.
The same was returned with an endorsement that he was not found at the given address.
Thereafter, also the petitioner was asked to resume his duties but he did not join duty.
Then, Enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct enquiry against the conduct of the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer sent notice to the petitioner at the address given by him but the said registered notice was also returned with an endorsement that he was not found at the given address.
Thereafter an ex- parte enquiry was held and the Enquiry Officer found him guilty of wilful absence from duty.
Basing on the report of the Enquiry Officer, the Disciplinary Authority, namely, the State Transport Commissioner, Punjab, by his order dated October 3, 1989, dismissed the petitioner from service.
The said order was also sent to the petitioner but the same was also returned unserved.
Therefore, the same was published in the newspaper namely, The Tribune dated December 27, 1989.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed an appeal to the Secretary, Transport, Punjab, on January 30, 1990.
The said appeal was dismissed by the Appellate Authority on October 29, 1990.
2.
The petitioner thereupon filed this Writ Petition invoking the Certiorarial jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing the orders of the Transport Commissioner dated October 3, 1989, (Annexure P-1) as confirmed by the Secretary, Transport Department, Punjab, dated October 29, 1990, (Annexure P-2).
3.
This Writ Petition came up for admission before the Division Bench of this Court, which issued Notice of Motion.
Thereafter, after hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondents, the Division Bench of this Court by its order dated July 22, 1991, allowed the writ petition and quashed the impugned order of dismissal on the ground that the enquiry report had not been communicated to the petitioner and, therefore, the order of dismissal was liable to be set aside in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Mohd Ramzan Khan reported in 1991(1) SCC 588.
Thereafter, the State of Punjab filed a Civil Appeal No. 352 of 1994, in the Supreme Court.
The Apex Court took the view that as the order of dismissal was passed before November 20, 1990, the decision of Mohd, Ramzan's case (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the case, in view of the decision of the Constitution Bench in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar reported in 1993(6) JT 1.
Therefore, the Apex Court set aside the order of this Court dated July 22, 1991, and remanded the matter to this Court for disposal in accordance with law after considering other points raised in the writ petition.
Thus, the matter has come up for final hearing now.
4.
It is pertinent to observe that the Supreme Court in its order dated January 13, 1994, observed as follows:-  "Inasmuch as it appears that other points were raised in the writ petition (though it does not appear from the judgment that they were argued as such) we are inclined, in the facts and circumstances of this case, to give an opportunity to the respondent to urge the other points raised in the writ petition, if he so chooses, before the High Court."
Thus, it is clear that this court is directed by the Supreme Court to consider the points raised by the petitioner in the writ petition other than the point that he was not supplied the copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner had raised the following contentions.
Firstly, that charge-sheet was not supplied to the petitioner, and without supplying the charge-sheet and without obtaining his explanation to the charges, the appointing an Enquiry Officer to conduct enquiry is bad in view of Rule 8(4) and (5) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Secondly, that the petitioner was not intimated that Enquiry Officer had been appointed and he was not given any opportunity to appear before the Enquiry Officer and participate in the enquiry.
Third contention is that his request of constituting a Medical Board was not properly considered insamuch as the Medical Board was constituted at Faridkot when the petitioner was residing at Ludhiana and his headquarter happened to be at Chandigarh.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the constitution of the Medical Board at Faridkot and directing the petitioner to appear before the Medical Board at Faridkot amounts to negation of opportunity to prove that he was not medically fit to resume duty.
It is further contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that before passing an order of dismissal, the Public Service Commission was not consulted as required under Regulation 5(a) of the Punjab Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1955, and, therefore, the order of dismissal is bad.
6.
It is also contended by the learned counsel that it was not established that the petitioner wilfully absented himself from resuming duty.
7.
It is also contended that the petitioner was not supplied the report of the Enquiry Officer though in the order of dismissal, the Transport Commissioner has stated that the order of dismissal is in continuation of the enquiry report.
8.
The last submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted in view of the orders of the Apex Court while remanding the matter.
If the petitioner is entitled to a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer, in spite of the decision of the Supreme Court in Karunakaran's case (supra) holding that the decision in Mohd.
Ramzan's case is operative prospectively he should have urged this point before the Supreme Court, while remanding the matter back to this Court, it is not open to the petitioner to contend that he is entitled to the copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that he was not supplied the charge sheet but it is clearly averred in the written statement that charge sheet was issued on March 14, 1988, and the same was sent by registered post but the same was returned with an endorsement that he was not found at the given address.
It is not disputed that the petitioner has given his address at Village and Post Office Beghowal, district Ludhiana.
The letters had been sent to the petitioner by the department at the said address.
Even in the writ petition, the petitioner has given his address as Village and Post Office Beghowal, District Ludhiana.
Therefore, when the department sent the registered letters at the address available with it, it cannot be said that no communication was sent to the petitioner in regard to the charge sheet on March 13, 1988.
The record shows that the charge sheet dated March 14, 1988, was sent to the petitioner at the given address and it was returned with an endorsement that he was not available at the given address.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that it is not open to the petitioner to contend that the charge sheet was not supplied to him.
10.
The petitioner also contended that the appointment of Enquiry Officer is bad in view of Rule 8(4) and (5) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, but in view of the fact that charge sheet had been sent to the petitioner by registered post at his given address, it cannot be said that there is any violation of Rules 8(4) and (5) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
This contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, fails.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that Medical Board at Ludhiana should have been constituted and according for him the constitution of the Medical Board at Faridkot amounts to depriving him of an opportunity to prove that he was not medically fit to resume the duty.
The petitioner has not placed before me any communication sent by him requesting the constitution of the Medical Board at a particular place.
In fact, on an earlier occasion, i.e. in November, 1987, the petitioner was directed to appear before the Civil Surgeon, Ludhiana, on November 10, 1987.
The petitioner accordingly appeared before the Civil Surgeon, Ludhiana, and the Chief Medical Officer, Ludhiana, who was a Civil Surgeon, opined that the petitioner was found fit to resume his duties.
Therefore, there is no question of constituting any Medical Board at Ludhiana as the Civil Surgeon at Ludhiana had already come to the conclusion that the petitioner was found fit to resume duty.
Therefore, the department is right in not constituting the same person who was working at Ludhiana as Civil Surgeon as the Medical Board to examine the petitioner.
It is only in the interest of the petitioner himself that Medical Board had been constituted at Faridkot and the petitioner was admittedly intimated of the same and he was asked to appear before the Medical Board on February 19, 1988, or February 26, 1988, but he did not appear before the Medical Board on any of these dates.
When the petitioner having knowledge of the constitution of the Medical Board at Faridkot chose not to appear, he has to blame himself.
He has no right to say that the Medical Board has to be constituted at a particular place of his choice.
No rule has been brought to my notice that the Medical Board of the choice of the petitioner or delinquent official has to be constituted.
I do not, therefore, find any merit in this contention of the learned counsel.
11.
The learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the Punjab Public Service Commission was not consulted, therefore, the order of dismissal is bad in view of Rule 5 of the Punjab Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1955.
Rule 5(c) reads as follows:-  "5.
It shall not be necessary to consult the Commission: (c) "on any order proposed to be made by the Punjab Government on appeal other than an order enhancing the penalty to that for which consultation with the Commission would have been necessary in case the enhanced penalty had been imposed in an original order appealed against is one of - (i) censure; (ii) suspension for not more than one year; (iii) withholding of increments or promotion including stoppage at an efficiency bar, for not more than one year with non-continuing effect."
The learned counsel for the petitioner had relied on Rule 5(c) of the Punjab Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1955.
The reading of Rule 5(c) in my opinion does not apply at all.
According to Rule 5(c), it shall not be necessary to consult the Commission on any order proposed to be made by the Punjab Government on appeal other than the order enhancing the penalty to that for which consultation with the Commission would have been necessary in case enhanced penalty has been imposed in an original order or appealed against the order of censure or suspension for not more than one year or withholding of increments of promotion including the stoppage of increment etc.
Therefore, Rule 5(c) is applicable only in case Appellate Authority, namely, the State of Punjab, wants to enhance the penalty imposed by the original Authority in which case only consultation under this rule is required.
If the Appellate Authority is merely confirming the order of the Original Authority, no consultation is required under Rule 5(c).
Further, it may also be mentioned that the petitioner was not appointed through the media of Service Commission.
His post does not fall within the category for which appointments have to be made through the Punjab Public Service Commission.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that it was not necessary to consult the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The learned counsel further argued that simply because the petitioner was absent, he could not be dismissed from service.
He relied upon a decision of the Calcutta High Court in Deputy Inspector Gen. Central Industrial Security Force Eastern Zone v. Shiv Kumar Ray reported as 1995(2) SCT 662.
But it has not been held in that case that absence from duty does not amount to misconduct.
What has been held in that case is that penalty must be imposed proportionate to the gravity of misconduct and that the dismissing authority should have considered the matter compassionately because of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case disclosed in defence.
Thus, it is clear that it cannot be said that there is any hard and fast rule that in case of absence from duty, no penalty of dismissal can be awarded.
Each case depends on its own facts and that the quantum of punishment will depend on the nature of the misconduct.
The other decision cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner in Shamsher Bahadur Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in 1993(2) SLR 736 is also to the same effect.
Therefore, it is to be seen from the facts of the present case whether there is any extenuating circumstance to reduce the punishment of dismissal from service the conduct of petitioner deserves any sympathy from this Court.
The petitioner was appointed as Motor Vehicles Inspector in 1974.
Later in the year 1985, he was promoted as Extra Assistant Transport Controller (Technical) in his own pay-scale as Motor Vehicles Inspector on a specific condition that he will not claim promotion on the basis of the orders issued in 1985 appointing him as Extra Assistant Transport Controller and that he will not claim seniority or financial benefits.
He was working at the time at Patiala.
Thereafter, he was transferred and posted as Motor Vehicles Inspector at Bathinda.
He did not join the duty at Bathinda.
Even according to the petitioner, he felt his posting as Motor Vehicles Inspector, Bathinda, a punishment itself though he was not actually promoted as Extra-Assistant Transport Controller (Technical).
Instead of joining at Bathinda i.e. at his new place of posting, he applied three months' leave initially on medical grounds.
Thereafter, he applied for extension of leave.
Then he was asked to appear before the Civil Surgeon.
Ludhiana, who reported that he was fit to resume duty.
Therefore, the ground for applying leave on medical illness was no longer available to him but the petitioner insisted on constituting the Medical Board to further examine him.
At the instance of the petitioner, the Medical Board at Faridkot was constituted and he was directed to appear before the Medical Board at Faridkot either on February 19, 1988, or on February 26, 1988, but the petitioner did not care to appear before the Medical Board.
Thereafter, a charge-sheet was sent to him at the address given by him.
The registered letters were returned with an endorsement that the petitioner was not available.
This is not the case of the petitioner that he left the village.
Therefore, the only irresistible conclusion one can arrive at is that the petitioner was avoiding service of the registered notice sent to the petitioner, to gain time to his own advantage.
Thereafter, Enquiry Officer was appointed.
Even then he did not participate in the enquiry though according to the petitioner, he did not receive any communication in regard to the enquiry.
It is pertinent to note that the petitioner himself had written a letter on August 18, 1988, to the Transport Commissioner wherein he categorically stated that it is a pre- requisite to serve the charge sheet first before appointing the Enquiry Officer and that the Enquiry Officer has been appointed without communicating the charge sheet to him.
This letter of the petitioner dated August 18, 1988, clearly shows that the petitioner had knowledge of appointment of Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner cannot escape from this conclusion which can be based on his letter itself.
A reading of the letter clearly shows that the petitioner was trying to avoid his joining at Bathinda.
Therefore, it is a clear case of wilful disobedience and not only wilful absence from duty but wilful disobedience of orders of transfer.
There cannot be any doubt that orders of transfer are incidents of service.
When a person has been transferred and posted at a place and when his extension of leave is refused, he has no other option except to join the duty and if he does not join the duty, he has to face the consequences.
In this case, after considering the entire record, I am of the opinion that the petitioner deserves the punishment of dismissal.
I do not find any grounds warranting interference with the orders of dismissal.
12.
Writ Petition is, therefore, liable to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed but without costs.