Paritosh K Mukherjee, J - The present writ petition was moved on behalf of 27 petitioners, inter alia, praying for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay the petitioners salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2100-4000 on the post of Manager/Officer (Junior Management Cadre Scale -I), which is being given to other 195 Regional Rural Banks (hereinafter referred to as the RRBs) Officers and Managers of Nationalised Scheduled Commercial Bank, and, also the arrears of salary which have become due by this time.
2.
At the time writ petition was moved Hon'ble BM Lal, J did not pass any order of stay on July 20, 1991 and the writ petition has now come up for final hearing.
3.
Sri V.K.
Singh is appearing for the Union of India.
No counter affidavit has been filed, although Hon'ble RB Mehrotra, J on 7.5.1992 passed the direction for filing the counter-affidavit.
4.
The facts as stated in the instant writ petition are as follows :-  The petitioners who are 27 in number were employed in RRBs established under the provisions of Regional Rural Bank Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The said Bank was established with a view to develop the rural economy by providing funds for the development of agriculture, trade, commerce and Industry and other productive activities in the rural areas.
The loans are disbursed to small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers, artisans and small entreprenuers, and, for matters connected therewith, and, incidental thereto.
Each Rural Bank has been sponsored by some Bank.
Sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act also provided that it shall be the duty of the sponsoring commercial Bank to aid and assist the Regional Banks sponsored by it by subscribing its share capital.
5.
Khetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Mainpuri, under which present petitioners are working, is also one of the RRB incorporated under Section 3 of the Act, and is sponsored by Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Bank Limited, Lucknow.
It is stated that, in all, 196 RRBs have been incorporated in the country.
Out of 196, 165 RRBs have been incorporated by some or the other nationalised Scheduled commercial Banks.
Kshetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Mainpuri is the only Bank which is sponsored by the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Bank Ltd, Lucknow.
All other Rural Banks have been sponsored by the nationalised Banks.
6.
According to the present petitioners, the Regional Rural Banks were performing the same duties and functions which were entrusted to the commercial Banks engaged in the rural areas of the country, However, there was great dissimilarity and inequality in the pay scales of employees and officers of the RRBs and those of other commercial Banks.
7.
Writ petitions were filed in the Hon'ble Supreme Court by employees and Officers of the various RRBs claiming parity with the employees of the nationalised Banks in respect of pay, salary, other allowances as well as other benefits.
Writ Petitions No. 7149-50 of 1982 and 132 of 1984 were filed before Hon'ble Supreme Court, which were contested by the Central Government.
However, on 1101987 Apex Court passed following orders :-  "We are happy to know that the Central Government had agreed to appoint a National Industrial Tribunal to decide the question relating to pay, salary, other allowances and other benefits payable to the employees of the Regional Rural Banks constituted under the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also agreed that a reference may be made to the proposed Tribunal.
In view of the above, it is not necessary to pronounce upon the question of law raised in these writ petitions before us.
We leave all the contentions open.
The Central Government shall refer the dispute to the Tribunal, preferably to a retired Chief Justice of a High Court, within four weeks from today.
We hope that the Tribunal will pronounce its award as expeditiously as possible.
These writ petitions are disposed of accordingly."
8.
In terms of the aforesaid order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, Central Government appointed a National Industrial Tribunal, consisting of Mr. Justice J Obul Reddy, Retired Chief Justice of High Court of Andhra Pradesh as Chairman, for considering all the disputes regarding grant of pay, salary and other allowances and other benefits payable to the employees of the RRBs.
9.
The tribunal adverted to all the questions raised before it and passed an award with the following findings on 30.4.1988:-  "While considering the question as to whether RRBs achieved the social objective of developing rural economy and raising rural poor from above poverty line as envisaged in the preamble of the RRBs Act.
The Tribunal reported a finding in the affirmative.
The Tribunal held the RRBs have given a boost to economy in the rural areas.
It held that RRBs have improved a lot, the economic conditions of the borrowers in the rural sector and more important is of the neglected sectors which have now become bank conscience."
"With regard to points Nos. 4 and 5 framed by the Tribunal for determination, the findings were recorded in affirmative.
The Tribunal held that commercial banks an RRBs carried on the same and similar banking business and they participate in the development of rural economy as instrumentalities of the State.
The Tribunal further held that duties and functions of the officers and the other employees of the RRBs are the same as those of the Officers and other employees of the rural branches of commercial banks/sponsor banks."
"The Tribunal held that the only comporable post to which RRBs can be equated are the posts in commercial banks."
10.
In essence, the Tribunal has accepted the claim of the present petitioners and held that they are entitled to the pay scales which are given to the employees of the Commercial Banks.
11.
A perusal of the award reveals that in paragraph 4428, the Tribunal held that "equation of posts and the consequent fixation of the new scales of pay, allowances and other benefits for officers and other employees of the RRBS, at par with the officers and other employees of comparable level in corresponding posts in sponsor banks and their fitment into the new scales of pay, it is a matter which has to be decided by the Central Government in consultation with such authorities, as it may consider necessary."
12.
In view of aforesaid recommendations made in paragraph 4428, the Central Government referred the matter to the Equation Committee and Equation Committee submitted a report on Jan 8, 1891.
The report of the Equation Committee is annexure-6 to the writ petition.
It has wrongly come to the conclusion that petitioners being Branch Managers are entitled to the pay scale of Assistant Manager of Rs. 910-2280 on the plea that since the the Banks, where petitioners were previously employed, have been sponsored by Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Bank Limited, Lucknow and not by other nationalised bank; since the Kshetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Manipuri, is the only Bank, which is sponsored by the Uttar Pradesh Cooperative Bank Limited, Lucknow and all other rural banks have been sponsored by the nationalised banks.
13.
This distinction has not been made by the Equation Committee on the basis of performing equal job which is in gross violation of catena of decisions of Supreme Court, such as R Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 : (1982 Lab IC 806) Union of India v. RG.
Kashikar, AIR 1986 SC 431: (1986 Lab IC 445), Surinder Singh v. Engineer in Chief, CPWD, AIR 1986 SC 584 : (1986 Lab IC 551) etc.  14.
Sri SP Gupta, assisted by Sri Ashok Bhushan, argued the case on behalf of the petitioners.
In the forefront, he relied upon a decision rendered by Bench consisting of Hon'ble KN Singh, J, Hon'ble ND Ojha, J (as their Lordships then were) in Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers Union v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 95(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1173 wherein the Supreme Court has observed as follows (at.
p. 1176 of AIR):-  "Equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by the Constitution as a fundamental right but in view of the Directive Principles of State Police as contained in Art. 39(d) of the Constitution "Equal pay for equal work" has assumed the status of fundamental right in service in jurisprudence having regard to the constitutional mandate of equality in Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Equal pay for equal work and providing security of service by regularising casual employment within a reasonable period has been accepted by this Court as a constitutional goal to our socialistic pattern.
It has ceased to be a judge made law as it is the part of the constitutional philosophy which ensures a welfare socialistic pattern of a state providing equal opportunity to all and equal pay for equal work for similarly placed employees of the State.
This Court has zealously enforced the fundamental right of equal pay for equal work in effectuating the constitutional goal of equality and social justice in a number of decisions.
See: Randhir Singh v. Union of India (1982 Lab IC 806) (SC), Daily Rated Causal Labour Employed under P&T Department v. Union of India (1988 Lab IC 37) (SC), Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, (1986 (1) SCC 637), Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in- Chief, CPWD (1986 Lab IC 551) (SC), RD.
Gupta v. Lt.
Governor, Delhi Administration, (1987 Lab IC 1670) (SC), Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, (1987 Lab IC 1662) (SC), Jaipal v. State of Haryana, (AIR 1988 SC 1504), Dharwad District PWD Literate Daily Wage Employment Association v. State of Karnataka, (1990 (2) SCC 396).
Therefore, the principle of equal pay for equal work even in an establishment which is an instrumentality of a State is applicable to its full vigour."
15.
Mr. SP Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner next contended that by impugned order passed by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affair, Banking Division, New Delhi, dated Feb 22, 1991, (Annexure -7 to the writ petition), the Ministry of Finance informed the Managing Director, Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Bank, Lucknow as well as, Chairman, Kshetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Mainpuri, about implementation of recommendations of National Industrial Tribunal.
On the equation committee's recommendation, it appears that the Government of India has been pleased to inform that the Award of NIT dated 30.4.1990 and the recommendations of the equation committee dated 1611991 have since been accepted.
The instructions issued by Government of India are as under :-  "Accordingly following instructions are issued, in terms of Provision (1) of Section 17 of the RRBs Act, 1976 for implementing the NIT Award and the recommendations of the equation committee immediately."
"As regards fitment into new scales of pay as on 191987 the procedure is detailed in the following sub paragraph:- The employees of RRB in the workmen cadre as on 191987 in the first instance, are to be fitted into corresponding pay scales of equated posts in their sponsored bank as given in the Annexure-I the pay scale, allowances, etc. of workmen staff in sponsored bank as applicable on Ist Sept 1987 are governed by the settlement between the workmen Union in Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Bank Ltd and the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Bank Limited.
Similarly, the employees of RRB in officer cadre as on 181987, in the first instance, are to be fitted into the corresponding scales of pay of equated posts in sponsor bank.
The pay scales and allowances to officers staff in sponsor bank are governed by the respective staff rules issued by the sponsored bank from time to time.
An extract of pay scales, allowances, etc. obtaining in the sponsor bank in respect of both as applicable on 191987 may be obtained by the bank in being separately advised to supply the same to RRB."
16.
By the impugned decision, it appears that summary of recommendations made by the equation committee of regional rural bank has been accepted by the impugned decision of the Union of India, Department of Finance, not accepting Section 19 of the said report, whereby Branch Manager, Officers of Kshetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Assistant Manager of UP Co-operative Bank Ltd, Lucknow (sic) Aggrieved by aforesaid action, present writ petition has been moved.
17.
It appears, that both the recommendations of the equation committee as well as implementation of Section 19 of the said report has been challenged by the instant writ petition on the ground that the employees of the Kshetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Mainpuri have been discriminated, although they are performing the same job, managerial in nature, which Branch Managers, sponsored by other nationalised bank, are performing.
18.
Thus the writ petitioners, who are 27 in number have been discriminated in the payment of salary and pay scales as they are otherwise entitled to get the same pay scales of the commercial bank, as well as nationalised bank.
19.
Sri Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioners, however, submitted that out of 196 RRBs in the country, Managers/Officers of 195 are getting the pay scales of Branch Manager (Officer Junior Management Scale-I) of the Commercial nationalised scheduled bank, i.e. Rs. 2100-4020, whereas the Branch Managers of the Kshetriya Kisan Gramin Bank, Mainpuri, were directed to be paid (who are the petitioners herein) lesser amount of salary, which is discriminatory and violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Since all Branch Managers and Officers of 196 Regional Rural Banks are performing the same duties and functions they are entitled to the same pay scales as well as benefits.
Therefore the Central Government has clearly erred in law in denying the same pay scales to the present petitioners which are being given to other Officers Branch Managers in respect of 195 RRBs in the country, which is clearly violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution.
20.
No counter affidavit has been filed, defending the Government order, as well as, recommendations of the equation committee.
In the absence of any counter affidavit this Court has to arrive at necessary conclusion, as to the validity of the recommendations of the Equation Committee and the impugned order passed by the Central Government, Ministry of Finance, New Delhi, Dated 22 February, 1991, by carefully scrutinising each and every document available on record, and considering rival submissions.
It appears from the award, which was passed by the National Industrial Tribunal, constituted in terms of the earlier direction passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in a petition under Art. 32 of the Constitution, that the Tribunal, framed the following issue:-  "Are the writ petitioners entitled to claim parity in the salary structure with the employees of the Sponsor Banks within the framework of the 2nd proviso to Section 17 of Regional Rural Banking Act, 1976."
On the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal arrived at relevant conclusion in clause 4120, which runs as under :-  "The duties and functions of the Officers and other employees of the RRBs are similar as those officers and other employees in the comparable posts of rural branches of sponsor banks.
There is not any appreciable difference in the duties and the functions of the employees in the two types of branches in the rural sector.
If the RRBs did not involve themselves in all the business transactions referred to in Section 6 of the B.R Act, it is because of the restrictions imposed by the Central Government/NABARD having regard to sub-section (2) to Section 18 of the RRB Act.
"This admission that the functions are similar is very significant.
It is well to remember that out of 196 RRBs, the Chairmen of 112 RRBs in their answers to the questionaire replied that "the duties and functions of various officers and members of the staff are same and similar as those of the corresponding posts in nationalised banks", 23 Chairman said "to some extent" and only 6 Chairmen said they are not comparable.
"The persons competent to judge similarity of functions are the Chairman of the banks who are no other than the officers of the sponsor banks indisputably commercial banks in RRBs carry on similar banking business and participate in the development acting as instrumentalities of the state in accordance with the Directive Principles of the Constitution."
"There is any amount of justification in the demand of the writ petitioners that they ought to have been equated to comparable posts in commercial banks and their salary structure should have been so related as to be in conformity with the salary structure in the nationalised banks."
"The rural banking entrusted to the RRBs is a special responsibility and in no way inferior to the duties and functions entrusted to the rural banks of nationalised banks."
"The most relevant factor to be considered while equating post in the similarity of functions and duties in a comparable department or industry (sic).
Without regard to the apparent dissimilarities, the Central Government erred in the matter of equation of the posts.
The pay structure determined should have nexus or relation to not only the duties of and functions of the office one holds, but it should also be justly comparable with the posts in a cognate undertaking or sister industry, equations are always made with reference to the qualifications, level of the post, nature, functions, duties and the position vis-a-vis similar posts with which they are equated."
21.
The Tribunal ultimately quoted that the petitioners have genuine grievance and are not being paid equal pay at par with the Commercial Managers, discharging the same duties.
22.
Thus, in our view although the tribunal arrived at the necessary conclusion that the petitioner may be paid "equal pay for equal work" because of similarity in the nature of job performed by them being at par with the Branch Manager of the Commercial Bank, there was no reason for making any discrimination on the part of the Central Government to take the contrary view on the basis of the fact that since the petitioners are attached to Rural Banks, which is sponsored by UP Co- operative Bank Ltd, Lucknow, they cannot be treated at par with those sponsored by Commercial or Nationalised Banks.
23.
We are of considered view that the moment it is established that the nature of job, being performed by petitioners is not dissimilar to that being performed by the those sponsored by Commercial or Nationalised Banks, they cannot be discriminated, in the matter of pay scales and other benefits, with there counter-parts.
Thus, their demand, raised in the present petition, is fully justified.
24.
In our view, the Central Government, in issuing the order, has clearly violated the provisions of equality enshrined under Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution, which guarantees equality in the matter of appointment and sanction of pay scales.
Thus the circular dated 27th February, 1991, is liable to be set aside.
In the result the impugned circular dated 2721991 is set aside.
25.
Respondents and each one of them are directed not to make any discrimination with the petitioners in view of equation committee's finding and the award passed by National Industrial Tribunal, dated 30th April 1990, and fix same pay scales in respect of all 196 Banks, with effect from 1987.
26.
Respondents as directed to pay the arrears of pay in the revised scale within the period of six months, from the date of production of certified copy of this order, and also give similar pay scale to the Assistant Branch Manager, sponsored by the commercial and nationalised bank, in terms of this judgment.
With these observations, the writ petition is allowed, with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.