G S Singhvi, J - Although these petitions are directed against different orders of compulsory retirement passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar (Ropar), the main point raised by the petitioners relating to the competence of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar to retire Assistant Sub Inspectors and Sub Inspectors of Police under Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Services (Pre-mature Retirement) Rule, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as 'the rules of 1975') is common to all the petitions and, therefore, all the petitions are being decided by a common order.
2.
A brief reference to the facts is necessary for the purpose of appreciating various points raised in the writ petitions.
C.W.P.
No. 4959 of 1995  Petitioner-Gurdev Singh joined service as constable in the Police Department of Punjab on 1021964.
He was promoted as Head Constable with effect from 1.10.1974.
On this post, he was confirmed w.e.f.
171980.
Thereafter, he was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on 1081986.
By the impugned order dated 10.6.1994 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar, he has been retired on attaining the age of 50 years.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order of retirement, inter alia, on the ground that the Senior Superintendent of Police does not have the authority to retire Assistant Sub Inspectors of Police because this power vests with the Deputy Inspector General of Police and further that the order of retirement is patently arbitrary and unreasonable apart from being contrary to the principles of natural justice.
C.W.P.
No. 17099 of 1995  Petitioner-Tarsem Singh joined service of the Government of Punjab on appointment as constable with effect from 23111963.
He was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police vide order dated 15.7.1980 and then as Sub Inspector of Police vide order dated 20.10.1990 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
He has been retired by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar vide order dated 23.9.1994 (Annexure P3 in the writ petition) and his representation against the order of compulsory retirement has been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ludhiana Range, Ludhiana vide Annexure P5 dated 1491995.
Petitioner-Tarsem Singh has also challenged the order of retirement on the ground that Senior Superintendent of Police is not competent to exercise the power of retirement of a Sub Inspector.
He has also challenged the order of retirement on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice as well as Articles 14, 16 and 311 of the Constitution of India.
C.W.P.
No. 18363 of 1995  Petitioner-Sawan Singh joined service as Constable in the Police Department of the Government of Punjab on 1321963 in Sangrur district.
He was appointed as Head Constable w.e.f.
1.10.1974 and then as Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
25.11.1985.
The last promotion, according to the petitioner, was accorded to him by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
He has been retired by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar (Ropar) vide order dated 10.6.1994 (Annexure P1 with the writ petition) and his representation against pre-mature retirement has been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ludhiana Range, Ludhiana, vide Annexure P3.
The grounds of challenge raised in this writ petition are identical to the grounds raised in other writ petitions, namely, that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar is not competent to retire the petitioner and also that the order of retirement is arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable.
3.
Shri S K Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners, raised the following points in support of challenge to the impugned orders of retirement:-  (1) The Senior Superintendent of Police is not competent to retire an Assistant Sub Inspector/Sub Inspector of Police because the power to make substantive appointment on these posts vests with the Deputy Inspector General of Police of the Range.
Shri Sharma relied on the provisions contained in Rules 131, 139, 1310, 1312, 1313 and 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules and argued that when promotion has been accorded to the petitioners by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, the Senior Superintendent of Police could not exercise the power of the appointing authority for the purpose of retirement of the petitioners.
He placed reliance on judgments of this Court in Man Singh, Assistant Sub Inspector v. The State of Punjab and others, 1973(1) S.L.R.
365 and in Karnail Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) RCR(Crl.)
61 (P&H) : 1989(2) S.L.R.
345 and also on an unreported judgment of this Court in R.S.A.
No. 3094 of 1986 (State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh) decided by a learned single Judge on May 26, 1988.
Shri Sharma further pointed out that the petition for Special Leave No. 12289 of 1988 filed by the State of Punjab against the judgment dated 26.5.1988 passed by the learned single Judge has been dismissed by the Supreme Court vide order dated 5.121988 and even the review petition No. 69 of 1990 (State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh) has been dismissed by the Supreme Court on 3.121993 and, therefore, it must be held that the impugned orders of retirement are without jurisdiction.
(2) Shri Sharma argued that the orders of retirement are punitive in character inasmuch as the Senior Superintendent of Police has relied on the punishment awarded to the petitioners in different departmental enquiries.
Elaborating this argument, Shri Sharma submitted that an order of retirement founded on a specific act of delinquency is not an order of retirement simpliciter but an order of punishment and as no enquiry was held by the competent authority consistent with the principles of natural justice, the impugned orders should be quashed on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
Learned counsel placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. Bina Pani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269 and on a judgment of this Court in OP Kapoor v. State of Punjab and others, 1981(1) S.L.R.
577 and also on a recent judgment of this Court in Kuldeep Singh v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, 1996(1) R.S.J 187.
(3) That the orders of retirement are arbitrary and capricious.
Elaborating this point, Shri Sharma argued that as per the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide order No. 6520-25-II-75/38581 dated 26.9.1975 only five years past service record can be taken into consideration for the purpose of pre-mature retirement and as the Senior Superintendent of Police took into consideration even that record which is beyond the zone of 5 years, all the impugned orders should be quashed.
Shri Sharma argued that the adverse remarks which were not conveyed to the petitioners could not have been looked into for the purpose of forming an opinion that the petitioners have outlived their utility for the Government service and taking into consideration of such remarks has vitiated the orders of retirement.
Shri Sharma also contended that the punishment of censure awarded to the petitioners became non-existent after expiry of six months in terms of Rule 138A of the Punjab Police Rules and, therefore, the punishments of censure could not be relied upon for the purpose of retiring the petitioners.
In the case of Tarsem Singh-petitioner, Shri Sharma further pointed out that punishment of forfeiture of five years service awarded to the petitioner- Tarsem Singh has been set aside by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated 2691995 and, therefore, it must be deemed that the Senior Superintendent of Police took into consideration an irrelevant material for the purpose of bringing about retirement of petitioner-Tarsem Singh.
(4) That the impugned orders of retirement are also vitiated because good reports and commendation certificates earned by the petitioners have not been taken into consideration while forming an opinion about the suitability of the petitioners to be retained in service.
4.
Learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, relied on Rules 121 and 132 of the Punjab Police Rules to show that the power to make substantive appointment on the posts of Assistant Sub Inspector/Sub Inspector of Police vests with the Senior Superintendent of Police of the district.
She argued that being the appointing authority for the Assistant Sub Inspector/Sub Inspector of Police, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar was competent to exercise power under Rule 3 of the 1975 Rules.
Mrs. Tuli produced before us the service record of each of the petitioners as well as the files in which their cases for premature retirement have been dealt with and submitted that in each case, the competent authority has taken into consideration good as well as bad entries before forming opinion that the petitioners are not fit to be continued in Government service.
Learned Deputy Advocate General argued that the orders of retirement, which have been passed on the basis of material available in the service record of the petitioners cannot be treated as arbitrary and perverse and this Court cannot exercise appellate jurisdiction over the exercise of power by the competent authority.
5.
In order to decide whether the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar (Ropar) was possessed with the authority to pass orders of pre-mature retirement, we may refer to the relevant rules.
The 1975 Rules have been framed by the Government of Punjab under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and all other enabling powers and with the previous approval of the Central Government under Section 115(7) of the State Re- Organisation Act, 1956 read with Section 82(6) of the Punjab Re-Organisation Act, 1966.
Rule 5 of these rules gives an overriding effect to the provisions of 1975 Rules by incorporating a non-obstante clause.
Rule 2(1) contains the definition of the expression "appropriate authority".
Rule 3 gives power to the appropriate authority to order retirement of an employee in public interest.
Rule 3(2) gives a corresponding right to the Government employees to seek retirement by giving three months' previous notice.
Rules 2(1), 3(1)(a) and 5 of these rules are quoted below for the purpose of ready reference :  "2(1) "appropriate authority" means the authority which has the power to make substantive appointments to the post or service from which the Government employee is required or wants to retire or any other authority to which it is subordinate.
3(1)(a) The appropriate authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in public interest to do so, have the absolute right, by giving an employee prior notice in writing, to retire that employee on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified in the notice.
5.
The provisions of these rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other rules for the time being in force."
Rule 121(1) of the Punjab Police Rules specifies various authorities empowered to make appointments.
Table given below Rule 121(1) enumerates various authorities who have been vested with the power to make appointments to non-gazetted ranks.
Rule 121(2) provides that all direct appointments to non-gazetted ranks above that of constable and all first appointments of civilian clerks shall be made by the appointing authority on consideration of the recommendations of a selection board.
By virtue of Rule 121(3) power to confirm the officers appointed on probation vests in the prescribed appointing authority.
Rule 131 speaks of promotion from one rank to another.
Sub-rule (3) of Rule 131 lays down that for the purposes of regulating promotions amongst enrolled police officers, six promotion lists A, B, C, D, E and F shall be maintained.
Lists A, B, C and D are required to be maintained in each District as per the provisions of Rules 136, 137, 138 and 139.
These lists are meant for making promotion of the constables, to the post of Head Constables and Assistant Sub Inspectors.
List E is required to be maintained in the office of the Deputy Inspector General of Police in terms of Rule 1310(1) and this list is meant for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspectors.
List 'F' which is meant for promotion to the rank of Inspector is required to be maintained in the office of the Inspector General of Police as prescribed in Rule 1315(1).
Rule 133 speaks of power to make promotion amongst gazetted officers and enrolled police officers.
Rule 134 deals with the power to make officiating promotions.
Rule 139 contains provisions relating to list 'D'.
Rule 1310 deals with list 'E' which is meant for selection for promotion course of Assistant Sub Inspector for the purpose of promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector.
Rule 1311 lays down that list 'E' shall be published annually in police gazette.
Rule 1315 deals with promotion to the cadre of Inspector from amongst those whose names are brought on list 'F'.
Rule 1316 speaks of substantive promotion to the rank of Inspector.
For the purposes of these cases, we may quote Rule 121 along with the extract of the table, Rule 131, 133(1) and (2), 139(1), (2) and (4), 1310(1) and (3).
"121 (1) Assistant Superintendents of Police are appointed by the Secretary of State for India, either in England or in India, according to the rules framed by him from time to time.
Deputy Superintendents of Police are appointed by the provincial Government according to rules contained in Appendix 121.
The following table summarises the directions given by the provincial Government under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 241 of the Government of India Act, 1935, in regard to the authorities competent to make appointments to the non-gazetted ranks.
Class of Government Servants Authority to whom the power of appointment is delegated The extent of the delegation.
Inspectors Deputy Inspectors-General of Police, Assistant Inspector- General, Government Railways Police Assistant Inspector-General, Provincial Additional Police, (designated as Commandant, Provincial Additional Police) and the Assistant Inspector General Police (Traffic) Full powers subject to rules governing the conditions of service as defined in Police Rules.
Sergeants Sub-Inspectors and Assistant Sub-Inspectors, Superintendent of Police, Commandants of P.A.P.
vide CS No. 155 dated 2nd June, 1964 and Deputy Superintendent (Administrative), Government Railway Police and Assistant Superintendent, Government Railway Police.
^ Head Constable and Constables Superintendent of Police Commandants of P.A.P.
vide CS No. 155 dated 2nd June, 1964 and Deputy Superintendent, (Administrative), Government Railway Police, Assistant Superintendent, Government Railway Police, Deputy Superintendents incharge of Railway Police Sub-divisions, Senior Assistant Superintendents of Police, Lahore and Officers incharge, Recruits Training Centres, Deputy Superintendent of Police, P.A.P.
Lahaul and Spiti, Dy.
Superintendent of Police, Lahaul and Spiti, Distt.
Assistant Superintendent of Police, Lahaul and Spiti, District, District Magistrate, Lahaul and Spiti.
131(1) Promotion from one rank to another, and from one grade to another in the same rank, shall be made by selection tempered by seniority.
Efficiency and honesty shall be the main factors governing selection.
Specific qualifications, whether in the nature of training courses passed or practical experience, shall be carefully considered in each case.
When the qualifications of two officers are otherwise equal, the senior shall be promoted.
This rule does not affect increments within a time-scale.
(2) Under the present constitution of the police force no lower subordinate will ordinarily be entrusted with the independent conduct of investigations or the independent charge of a police station or similar unit.
It is necessary, therefore, that well-educated constables, having the attributes necessary for bearing the responsibilities of upper subordinate rank, should receive accelerated promotion so as to reach that rank as soon as they have passed the course prescribed for, and been tested and given practical training in, the ranks of Constables and Head Constable.
(3) For the purposes of regulating promotions amongst enrolled police officers six promotion lists A, B, C, D, E and F will be maintained.
Lists A, B, C and D shall be maintained in each district as prescribed in Rules 136, 137, 138 and 139 and will regulate promotion to the selection grade of constables and to the ranks of Head Constables and Assistant Sub- Inspector.
List E shall be maintained in the office of Deputy Inspector- General as prescribed in sub-rule 1310(1) and will regulate promotion to the rank of Sub-Inspector.
List F shall be maintained in the office of the Inspector-General as prescribed in sub-rule 1315(1) and will regulate promotion to the rank of Inspector.
Entry in or removal from A, B, C, D or E lists shall be recorded in the order book and in the character roll of the police officer concerned.
These lists are nominal rolls of those officers whose admission to them has been authorised.
No actual selection shall be made without careful examination of character rolls.
133(1) The power to make promotions among gazetted officers and from non-gazetted to gazetted rank vests in the local Government with the concurrance of His Excellency the Governor.
(2) Deputy Inspector-General and the Assistant Inspector-General, Government Railway Police, shall make promotions to the rank of Inspector.
The Inspector-General, who maintains promotion list "F" vide Police Rule 1315, of Sub-Inspectors and Sergeants will notify the Deputy Inspector- General of a Range or the Assistant Inspector-General, Government Railway Police, when a substantive vacancy in the rank of Inspector is to be filled by an officer under his control.
Substantive promotions to the rank of Sub-Inspector and Assistant Sub-Inspector shall be made by Superintendent, Government Railway Police, Deputy Inspector-General of Ranges who maintain promotion lists 'D' and 'E' for these two ranks in the case of District Police, will notify the Superintendent of Police of a district when a vacancy in either rank is to be filled by an officer in his district.
Promotions to the rank of Head Constable shall be made by Superintendents of Police and the Assistant Superintendent, Government Railway Police.
139(1) List 'D' shall be maintained in two parts for Head Constables in card index form No. 139 in each district.
Selection for admission to the promotion course for Head Constables at the Police Training College, will be made from confirmed Head Constables.
No Head Constable shall be eligible for admission to the promotion course for Head Constable at the Police Training College unless - (1) He has passed Middle Standard Examination, (2) He is below the age of forty years on the day of commencement of the next course.
(2) The names of the Head Constables, who qualify at Police Training College in the promotion course for Head Constables will be entered in Part I of List 'D' as soon as they qualify the same.
While entering the names in this part they will maintain their seniority inter se.
The names of the outstanding Head Constables who have not passed the Promotion Course for Head Constables at Police Training College due to being over-age but otherwise are of exceptional merit and are considered suitable may, with the approval of Inspector-General of Police, be entered in Part II of List 'D'.
No more than 10 per cent of the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors both permanent and temporary will be filled from the names in Part II of List 'D'.
This part will not at any time contain names more than two per cent of the cadre strength of Assistant Sub-Inspectors in a range, both temporary and permanent.
(3) xx xx xx (4) Promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector shall be made in accordance with the seniority of the Head Constables on List 'D', which may be ignored by the Superintendent of Police in exceptional circumstances only for reasons to be recorded in writing with the approval of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
1310(1) List 'E' shall be maintained for promotion to the rank of Sub-Inspector in two parts in Form No. 1310 in each range.
The names of Assistant Sub-Inspectors who qualify the promotion course for Assistant Sub- Inspectors at Police Training College shall be entered in Part-I of the said List 'E'.
While entering the names in this list they shall maintain their seniority inter se.
The names of the outstanding Assistant Sub- Inspectors who have not qualified for the course mentioned above, but otherwise are of exceptional merit and are considered suitable may with the approval of the Inspector General of Police be entered in Part II of List 'E' provided they are not below the age of forty-five years.
Provided further that not more than ten per cent of the posts of Sub-Inspectors (inclusive of temporary and permanent posts) shall not at any time contain more than two per cent of cadre strength of the Sub-Inspectors in the range.
(2) xx xx xx (3) Promotion to the rank of Sub-Inspectors shall be made strictly in accordance with the seniority on List 'E'.
Provided that the seniority may be ignored in exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in writing by the Deputy Inspector General and with the approval of the Inspector General of Police."
A combined reading of the above quoted provisions shows that power to make substantive appointment on the posts of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector of Police vests with the Senior Superintendent of Police and various other authorities.
Rule 121 refers to the authorities which are competent to make appointments to the non-gazetted ranks and Rule 133(2) speaks of substantive promotion to the ranks of the Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector of Police by the Superintendent of Police etc.
It must, therefore, be held that power to make appointment, which necessarily includes the power to make appointment against the posts of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector of Police, vests with the Superintendent of Police.
Therefore, for the purposes of the 1975 Rules, "appropriate authority" is the Superintendent of Police and he is competent to pass order of pre-mature retirement under Rule 3 of those rules.
The view which we have taken is fortified by the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Manohar Lal, AIR 1987 SC 201.
Respondent-Manohar Lal was retired on 24.9.1975 by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
The suit filed by Manohar Lal was dismissed by the Sub Judge, Gurdaspur, in so far as it related to the challenge to the order of retirement.
However, on appeal the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur declared his retirement as invalid on the ground that the Superintendent of Police was not competent to pass an order under the 1975 Rules.
Second appeal filed by the State was dismissed by this Court.
While reversing the judgments and decree passed by the Appellate Court and by this Court, their Lordships referred to the provisions of Rules 121 and 133(2) of the Punjab Police Rules and Rule 3 of the 1975 Rules and held :  "on considering the provisions of the aforesaid rules, it is quite clear and apparent that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur being the competent authority to make appointment to the non-gazetted rank of Sub Inspector is also legally competent to pass an order of compulsory retirement of the plaintiff-respondent in public interest in accordance with the provisions of Rule 3(1)(a) and (b) of the said rules."
The Supreme Court also negatived the argument that by virtue of Rule 139(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, the power to make substantive promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector is to be exercised by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and, therefore, the Superintendent of Police is not competent to retire an Assistant Sub Inspector.
By placing reliance on Rule 121, the Supreme Court held:  "power vests with the Superintendent of Police to make appointment to the non-gazetted ranks of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector."
Reference to Manohar Lal's case has also been made by the Apex Court in its order dated December 3, 1993 passed in review petition No. 69 of 1990 in SLP No. 12289 of 1988 [State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh (dead)].
While rejecting the contention raised on behalf of the State of Punjab that the Deputy Inspector General of Police was competent to order retirement of an Inspector of Police, their Lordships observed :-  "In our opinion, the decision of this Court in State of Punjab and another v. Manohar Lal, 1986 (Supp) SCC 524 is distinguishable in the present case.
The decision in Manohar Lal is related to the appointment of Sub-Inspectors wherein the rules provided that the Superintendent of Police had full power whereas the present case relates to the appointment of an Inspector for whom the rules provide that the power of the DIG of Police is subject to the rules governing the conditions of service as defined in the Police Rules and the provision in the service rules requires approval of the Inspector General of Police."
Their Lordships further held:  "whereas the power of the Deputy Inspector General of Police to appoint Inspector cannot be treated as unrestricted, the power of the Senior Superintendent of Police to make appointment of Sub Inspector is unrestricted."
In view of the clear language of Rule 121 read with Rule 132(3) of the Punjab Police Rules and Rule 3(1)(a) of the 1975 Rules and the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Manohar Lal (supra) and the order passed in review petition (State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh) (supra), we do not find any merit in the contention of Shri Sharma that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar (Ropar) was not competent to exercise power of the appropriate authority under Rule 3(1)(a) of the 1975 Rules.
6.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge in Karnail Singh's case (supra), no doubt, supports the argument of Shri Sharma, but, in our opinion, that judgment does not lay down the correct law.
In his judgment in Karnail Singh's case, Bahri, J made reference to the provisions of Rules 121, 133(2), 139 and 1310 of the Punjab Police Rules and held :-  "that as the Deputy Inspector of Police had confirmed the petitioner on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector and had allowed him to continue beyond the age of 55 years, the power to review the case of the petitioner for retention in service could be exercised only by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and not by the Senior Superintendent of Police who was subordinate to the Deputy Inspector General of Police."
It appears to us that attention of Bahri, J was not drawn to the provisions of the 1975 Rules as well as the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Manohar Lal (supra).
If that had been done, it could not have been possible for Bahri, J to take a view contrary to the judgment of the Supreme Court.
We, therefore, hold that the judgment in Karnail Singh's case (supra) which has been rendered without noticing the provisions of 1975 Rules is per incurium and in any case, being contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court, that judgment cannot be treated as laying down correct law.
7.
The judgment of this Court in RSA No. 3094 of 1986 (State of Punjab v. Inspector Surjit Singh) relates to a case of retirement involving an Inspector of Police.
In that case, the learned Single Judge took the view that the power to make substantive appointment on the post of Inspector vests with the Inspector General of Police.
As has been noticed by the Supreme Court itself in its order dated December 3, 1993, the provisions relating to appointment on the posts of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector of Police are different than those relating to the appointment on the post of Inspector.
Therefore, that judgment of the learned Single Judge does not in any manner help the cases of the petitioners.
Rather, the observations made in the order passed by the Supreme Court while deciding the review petition filed by the State of Punjab goes against the petitioners.
8.
Before concluding this aspect of the matter, we may refer to the decision of this Court in Man Singh v. State of Punjab, 1973(1) S.L.R.
365 on which Shri Sharma placed reliance in support of his argument.
That was a case relating to the dismissal of an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
The petitioner had been promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, whereas the order of dismissal was passed by the Superintendent of Police.
By making reference to the provisions of Rule 134 and Article 311 of the Constitution of India, a learned single Judge held that :  "when appointment had been made by the Deputy Inspector General, his subordinate in rank, namely, the Superintendent of Police, could not pass the order of dismissal."
In our opinion, that judgment has no bearing to the controversy involved in these petitions.
Article 311(1) uses the expression "the authority subordinate to by which he was appointed....." A plain reading of the provisions of Article 311(1) shows that it does not use the expression "appointing authority" or "appropriate authority".
Instead it refers to the factum of appointment of the employee by a particular authority.
Therefore, in a case where the appointment is made by a higher authority then the punishment of dismissal or removal from service cannot be awarded by a lower authority.
9.
The contention of Shri Sharma regarding violation of the principles of natural justice deserves to be negatived summarily.
Pre-mature retirement and/or compulsory retirement cannot per se be treated as punitive except when it is brought about as a measure of punishment after holding a departmental enquiry in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
If an employee is retired as a measure of punishment, the Court can examine the legality of that order in the context of the rules relating to the enquiry as well as the principles of natural justice.
However, an order of retirement simpliciter cannot per se be treated as punitive in character.
Time and again, the Supreme Court has held that an order of pre-mature retirement under the relevant service rules does not attract Article 311 or the principles of natural justice.
We may refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Sham Lal v. State of UP, AIR 1954 SC 369; Union of India v. J N. Sinha, 1970 SLR 748; Union of India v. M E Reddy, 1979(2) S.L.R.
792; P&T Board v. C S N Murthy, 1992(2) SCT 325 (SC) : 1992(2) S.L.R.
352; Baikuntha Nath Das v.
C.M.O., 1992(2) SLR 2; and in Chief General Manager, State Bank of India v. Suresh Chander Bihara, 1995(2) SLR 754.
For the same proposition it would also be appropriate to refer to a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 423 (P&H) : 1995(1) SLR 57 and a Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 12258 of 1994 (S N Goyal v. State of Haryana) decided on 2671995.
The judgment of the learned single Judge in OP Kapoor v. State of Punjab (supra) in which it has been held that the order of retirement passed on the basis of an entry 'doubtful integrity' is punitive in character, runs counter to a catena of judgments of the Supreme Court and, therefore, it cannot be regarded as laying down correct law.
In fact, the judgment does not contain any discussion of the law on the subject and, therefore, it cannot be made basis to accept the plea of the petitioners that the principles of natural justice should have been followed or an enquiry should have been made before retiring them.
10.
There is also no merit in the contention of Shri Sharma that reference to the orders of punishment or the adverse reports makes an order of retirement punitive because it casts stigma on the employee.
A cursory look at the three orders of retirement shows that the Senior Superintendent of Police has not made any reference to any particular punishment or adverse remarks in the annual confidential reports of the petitioners.
He has simply referred to the provisions of the 1975 Rules and has expressed that the retention of the petitioners in service is not in public interest.
Therefore, on the face of it, the impugned orders are not stigmatic.
In so far as consideration of the record of the petitioners is concerned, the Senior Superintendent of Police was duty bound to examine the whole record of the petitioners including good and bad entries with particular reference to the record of the immediate past in order to form an opinion whether the petitioners continued to be useful for public service or their retention beyond a particular age was in public interest.
For forming this opinion, the Senior Superintendent of Police was not only entitled but was duty bound to consider the entries made in the annual confidential reports of the petitioners as well as the punishments awarded to them apart from the commendation certificates etc.
Consideration of such material does not vitiate the exercise of power of pre-mature retirement.
Rather, non-consideration of this relevant material may have led to an inference of non-application of mind.
11.
We shall now deal with the argument of Shri Sharma that the orders of retirement are arbitrary and perverse and have been passed without application of mind.
Before proceeding further, we may reiterate the settled principles of law that the power of the Court to interfere with an order of compulsory retirement/pre-mature retirement can be exercised only in cases of violation of law or mala fide exercise of power or patent arbitrariness.
There may be some cases in which order of retirement may be vitiated due to malice in fact.
But, by and large the Court draws an inference of malice in law due to non-application of mind by the competent authority or due to consideration of extraneous or irrelevant factors in the process of forming an opinion about the suitability of the employee to be retained in service.
However, inference of malice in fact cannot be drawn in each and every case.
If the competent authority has evaluated the entire record of the employee and formed a bona fide opinion that the employee has outlived his utility or has become a dead-wood or has become unfit to be retained in service due to inefficiency etc. or that his retention is not in the interest of service or in public interest, then, interference by the Court is not warranted.
Exclusion of one or two good reports cannot in all cases lead to an inference of malice in law.
In such cases, the Court has to consider whether on the basis of other material, the authority could have formed an opinion about pre-mature retirement of the employee.
If only one or two bad entries of remote past is made basis of an order of retirement it may be possible for the Court to draw an inference of arbitrary exercise of power but it is not possible to indicate an exhaustive list of cases in which the Court may interfere.
However, one thing is clear, namely that the Court will not exercise the appellate jurisdiction over the evaluation of the record made by the competent authority.
12.
In Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief Medical Officer (supra), their Lordships carved out the principles which would govern the exercise of power of judicial review.
These principles are :  "1.
An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
2.
The order has to be passed by the Government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a Government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the Government.
3.
Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide, or (b) that it is based on no evidence, or (c) that it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
4.
The Government (or the review committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If the Government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
5.
An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference."
In Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SLR 57, a Full Bench of this Court has examined the issue at length and has held :-  "The concept of 'weeding out dead wood' as embedded in Rule 326(a) or (d), is inherent but that is not the only ground available therein to pass order.
The same is to be read along with the other grounds as mentioned in J N. Sinha's case and Baikuntha Nath's case i.e. the object of these rules is also to maintain high standard of efficiency and initiative in the State services.
There would be spirit of dedication and dynamism in the working of the State Officers.
Officers who are lax, corrupt, inefficient or not upto the mark and have outlived utility should be weeded out.
Thus, the view expressed that Rule 326 will be attracted only to chop off dead wood is not correct.
There may be varied reasons to be taken into consideration, that would constitute public interest that an order as required under Rule 326(d) can be passed as briefly noticed above."
In the light of the above, we have examined the record which was taken into consideration by the Senior Superintendent of Police in the cases of each of the petitioners while deciding whether the petitioners should be retained in service or not.
13.
In the case of Gurdev Singh, the Senior Superintendent of Police has taken note of eleven good entries, three adverse entries in the confidential reports for the years 1987-88, 1989-90 and 1992-93 apart from three punishments.
The adverse remarks in the confidential reports of petitioner- Gurdev Singh are :  "(1) For the period from 30.6.1987 to 3131988  + + (8) General power of control and organising ability = Not much (9) Power of control = Not much.
(10) Interest in modern method of investigation and in modern police method generally = -do- (11) Defects if any and whether these have already been brought to the notice of the officer concerned in any other communication.
= A casual and easy going NGO.
He was found in drunken condition for which a departmental enquiry is pending against him.
(2) For the period from 19589 to 4.2.90 + + (1) General power of control and organising ability = Poor (2) Personality and initiative.
= Initiative poor.
(3) Power of command = Poor (4) Interest in modern method and in modern police method generally = Did not take interest.
(5) Preventive & Detective ability = Poor.
(6) Working experience of criminal law & procedure = Poor (7) Defects if any and whether these have been already brought to the notice of the officer.
= His defects were told to him through letter No. 3217/V dated 14689, 3107/V dated 12689, 3271/V dated 14689, 3459 dated 28689, 3840/V dated 6789, 3915/V dated 12789, 7401/V dated 191089 and through censure.
(8) General Remarks = An indisciplined, careless & inefficient police officer who did not improve himself despite repeated warning and censure.
(3) For the period from 1.10.92 to 31.8.93 + + (1) Moral courage and readiness to expose the malpractices of subordinates.
= Cann't expose mal-practices of subordinates.
(3) Personality with special emphasis of initiative drive, determination and imagination.
= Poor.
The three punishments awarded to Gurdev Singh are :-  (i) One year service forefeited on temporary basis in the year 1980 ;  (ii) Censure in the year 1989; and  (iii) Censure in the year 1990  14.
In the service record of petitioner-Tarsem Singh there exists fifteen good reports, ten bad reports, two of which are after his last promotion as Inspector and ten punishments.
Adverse reports in the annual confidential reports of Tarsem Singh are:-  "(1) For the period from 16.6.84 to 31.3.85 + (3) Moral courage & readiness to expose the malpractices of subordinates.
= Poor.
(8) General power of control and organising ability.
= Poor (10) Power of command.
= Poor.
(12) Preventive & Detective ability.
= Poor (14) Reliability = Cannot be depended upon.
(16) Defects, if any and whether these have already been brought to the notice of the officer concerned in any other communication.
= He was placed under suspension by SHO for negligence of duty & keeping Roznamcha behind time.
He was censured for delaying the investigation of case FIR No. 299/84 under Sections 61/1/14 Excise Act.
His work & conduct remained unsatisfactory.
(2) For the period from 5.12.91 to 31.3.92 + + (i) Honesty = Doubtful (ii) Moral character = Poor.
He has reportedly married four ladies.
(iii) Moral Courage & readiness to expose the malpractices of subordinates.
= Poor.
(iv) Reputation for fair dealing with the public and accessibility to the public.
= Poor (v) Preventive and detective ability = Poor.
(vi) Reliability = Unreliable.
(vii) Any other remarks by the SSP/Ropar.
= He enjoys a bad reputation on account of cheating a number of ladies into marrying him.
(3) Adverse ACR for the period from 1.10.1992 to 3131993.
+ + (i) Professional ability in :- (a) Prevention and detection of crime (Write about performance on anti- terrorist front).
= Satisfactory.
He is not afraid of taking action against extremists.
But lacks own initiative."
The punishments awarded to him are censures in the years 1980, 1984, 1985 (two), 1988, 1990, 1992 and 1993.
His three years approved service was forfeited on permanent basis in the year 1987.
Five years approved service was forfeited on permanent basis in the year 1992 (this punishment order has been set aside by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated 2691995).
15.
In case of Sawan Singh Assistant Sub Inspector his nine good entries eight bad reports and eight punishments have been taken into consideration.
Adverse reports are :-  "(1) For the period from 18.11.85 to 31386 (16) Defects if any and whether these already been brought to the notice of officer concerned in any other communication.
= Being dealt with departmentally for being absent from duty without leave.
(2) For the period from 1486 to 11886 (3) Moral courage and readiness to expose the malpractices of subordinates.
= Did not display any.
(16) Defects if any and whether these have already been brought to the notice of the officer concerned in any other communication = Indulges in absenteeism.
Dealt with departmentally for the same and his two years service forfeited permanently vide order No. 2343-45/ST dt. 9886.
(17) General remarks = An average type who should not indulge in absenteeism.
(3) For the period from 1490 to 2.2.91 + (4) Reputation for fair dealing with public and accessibility to the public.
= Poor.
(11) Interest in modern methods of investigation and modern police methods generally.
= Slow in investigation work.
(12) Preventive and detective ability = Poor.
(14) Reliability = Un-reliable.
(16) Defects if any (17) General Remarks = A drunkard and mischievous type of NGO who is in the habit of remaining absent from duty.
(4) For the period from 18491 to 11991 + + (3) Moral courage and readiness to expose the mal-practices of subordinates.
= So-So.
(8) General power of control and organising ability.
= Not a good organiser.
(9) Personality and initiative.
= Very poor initiative.
(10) Power of command = Poor.
(11) Interest in modern methods of investigation and in modern police methods generally.
= Has no interest in police working.
(12) Preventive and detective ability.
= Very poor.
(5) For the period from 23991 to 31.3.92.
+ + (1) Defects if any (6) For the period from 1492 to 31.3.93 + + (1) Defects, if any and whether these have been brought to the notice of the officer in any other earlier communication.
(7) For the period from 1.4.93 to 30.9.93 + + (18) Defects, if any, and whether these have been brought to the notice of the officer in any other earlier communication.
= He is not taking interest in his job & simply tries to pass the time.
He has received punishments of censure in the years 1982, 1984, 1990 (three), 1991 and 1994.
His two years service was also forfeited in the year 1986.
16.
In all the cases adverse entries have been communicated to the petitioners and whenever they have made representations the same have been rejected by the competent authority.
The petitioners have not questioned the validity of the adverse entries or rejection of their representations in any Court of law and, therefore, all the adverse remarks entered in the service records of the petitioners have become final.
17.
On the basis of punishments awarded to the petitioners and the adverse entries made in their annual confidential reports, even a person of average intelligence could form an opinion that the continuance of the petitioners in service after they had served for 25 years or had attained the age of 50 years would not be in public interest.
Therefore, the formation of the opinion by the Senior Superintendent of Police that the petitioners have outlived their utility and they are no longer useful for service in the Police Department, it is not possible for us to hold that the impugned orders are arbitrary or unjustified or that the Senior Superintendent of Police has acted with malice.
We would like to add that even if this Court was to exercise appellate power, it could not have been possible to record a finding that the Senior Superintendent of Police has acted illegally in ordering retirement of the petitioners.
18.
Every employee who joins service holds the post in trust.
Right of such employee to continue in service subsists till he discharges his duties sincerely and with efficiency and honesty.
No doubt, the security of service is one of the factors which has to be kept in mind for maintaining the morale of the service, but, weeding out of the inefficient and dead-wood from the public services is of utmost importance.
Continuance in service of those employees who are no longer fit for public service causes serious injury to the larger public interest.
Therefore, pre-mature retirement/compulsory retirement which is brought about after due consideration of the relevant material cannot ordinarily be castigated as arbitrary.
In these cases, the competent authority has exercised its power in a bona fide manner and has passed the impugned orders after making an appropriate evaluation of the records of the petitioners.
We, therefore, do not find any ground to interfere with the same.
19.
Argument of the learned counsel, which is founded on the circular dated 26.9.1975 is also without any substance.
No doubt, instructions contained in that circular lay emphasis on the consideration of the record of immediate past but it is not possible to read that circular putting an embargo against the consideration of the over-all record of the employee with greater weightage being given to the record of the immediate past.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court have also stressed on the need of consideration of over-all record of the employee with greater emphasis on the record of the immediate past.
This is exactly what the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar has done in the cases of the petitioners.
He has taken into consideration the over-all record of the services of the petitioners.
He has taken note of the good and bad entries in the record of the petitioners.
Therefore, it cannot be held that the Senior Superintendent of Police has acted in violation of the instructions issued by the Government.
We are further of the opinion that even if the record of the petitioners of the last five years was to be taken into consideration, sufficient material is available for forming an opinion that they do not deserve to be continued in service.
20.
The argument of Shri Sharma regarding consideration of extraneous material in the case of Tarsem Singh is wholly devoid of any substance.
It is, no doubt, true that one of the punishments awarded to Tarsem Singh has been set aside by the appellate authority after the issue of the order of pre-mature retirement.
However, as on the date of the consideration of his record, the punishment order was very much subsisting.
Therefore, the Senior Superintendent of Police did not act illegally in considering that punishment as adverse to petitioner-Tarsem Singh.
Subsequent setting aside of the punishment does not in any manner vitiate the exercise of power of pre-mature retirement by the competent authority.
That apart, we are of the opinion that even if one punishment awarded to Tarsem Singh is excluded from consideration, the opinion formed by the Senior Superintendent of Police about his unfitness to continue in services does not require interference by this Court because the other punishments and adverse entries contained in his confidential reports prove sufficient material on the basis of which a bona fide opinion could be formed regarding his pre-mature retirement.
21.
Before concluding we deem it necessary to observe that no allegation of personal mala fide has been levelled against any reporting or reviewing officer and, therefore, it is not possible for us to scrutinize the adverse remarks made against the individual petitioners in order to find fault with the procedure adopted by the competent authority for recording the adverse remarks.
22.
On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Rup Nagar (Ropar) is the appropriate authority under the 1975 Rules for the persons holding posts of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector and he did not act without jurisdiction in passing the orders of pre-mature retirement of the petitioners.
We further hold that the decision of the learned single Judge in Karnail Singh v. State of Haryana (supra) as well as the judgment of the learned single Judge in OP Kapoor v. State of Punjab (supra) do not lay down correct law.
We also hold that the impugned orders of retirement do not suffer from any arbitrariness or illegality requiring interference by this Court.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are dismissed.