V K Gupta, J - The following two reliefs have been claimed by the petitioner in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, namely :  1.
For issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to settle the pension claim of the petitioner and the reduction made in his monthly pension.
2.
Writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay interest at the rate of 18% per month on commuted pension of Rs. 24,543/- which he has received as commuted pension from the respondents.
2.
In so far as the first relief is concerned, it is worthwhile to mention that the petitioner has received the amount of Rs. 24,543/- as commuted pension and that he has been receiving monthly pension at the rate of Rs. 271/- per month.
The petitioner's only grievance is that he should be paid monthly pension of Rs. 406/- per month.
This grievance, however, is without any basis because the petitioner has not been able to support the allegation of reduction of pension on any tangible ground whatsoever.
There is a bald assertion in the petition about the reduction of the pension amount but is not supported by any facts or figures nor has the petitioner quoted any rules and regulations to allege and establish that in fact what he has been receiving is lesser than what is due to him.
3.
In so far as the second relief is concerned, the admitted case of the petitioner is that he has received Rs. 24,543/- towards the commutation of his pension.
His grievance however is that this amount was due to him much before it was actually received by him and that because of the delay in his actual payment the respondents have become liable to compensate him by paying interest at the rate of 18% per month on the amount from the date it became due uptill the date it was actually payable to him.
I am not commenting upon the merits of the controversy nor I be taken to express any opinion as to whether the respondents were at all liable to pay interest on the belated payment or not.
4.
This petition is being dismissed even in respect of the second relief, only on the ground that for claiming an ascertained sum of money, viz. the payment of interest, the petitioner has an alternative and equally efficacious remedy of approaching a civil court by filing a regular suit.
Invoking the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the Constitution for such relief as payment of interest alone on a principal sum already received by a party is neither permissible under law nor warranted nor desirable.
This court while exercising its extra-ordinary jurisdiction normally deals with only those cases where a party alleges violation or infringement of its fundamental, legal or other right and seeks its enforcement.
5.
Where a party alleges violation or infringement of his fundamental, legal or other right and approaches this court for its enforcement and/or for seeking other ancillary or belated reliefs.
The court while entertaining such a petition examines the complaint/grievance of the party and if it comes to the conclusion that any one of the aforesaid rights has in fact been violated or infringed, it grants the relief to the party by issuance of one of the several writs so that the right is properly enforced.
In some cases while granting such a relief, which may be termed as the main relief, the court also grants additional reliefs which may be directly or indirectly connected with the main relief or may arise out of it.
Take for instance a case where a party complains of his illegal detention.
The court while quashing the detention by holding it illegal and ordering the release of the detenu can in a given situation also direct the detaining authority to compensate the detenu for having illegally detained him.
6.
If, however, a party approaches this court, not for enforcing its fundamental or other legal rights but to claim an ascertained, specified and exact sum of money on the ground that it is due to it from the respondent by way of compensation because of belated payment of the principal sum, this court does not exercise its extra-ordinary jurisdiction.
These are matters which are squarely covered by and fall within the scope, ambit and purview of normal ordinary civil proceedings in civil courts under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure or other related civil enactments.
Remedies thus are available to such a party to approach a civil court for recovery of the ascertained sum of money and obtain a decree for payment.
The contention that the disposal of civil suits in a civil court is likely to take long time and therefore, petition under Article 226 to entertain is not a ground to insist on the party availing of the normal ordinary civil remedy.
If this court starts entertaining petitions under Article 226 which relate to the grant of reliefs confined to recoveries of money, (which are ascertained specified sums) the concept of the invoking of extra-ordinary jurisdiction will not only be diluted but will also be abused rather mis-used at the cost of other deserving persons who are in need, help and aid of this court for the enforcement of their fundamental rights or other legal or constitutional rights.
In fact it must be borne in mind that such persons do not have alternative remedy available to them, particularly when civil courts are not clothed nor equipped with proper jurisdiction or power to deal with such cases and to provide the relief which the party desires or which alone can help and aid the party to come out of its difficult position.
High prerogative writs is the exclusive domain of superior courts, namely the High Courts and the Supreme Courts and this concept cannot be diluted by awarding such reliefs to parties which may amount to, in effect and substance passing decrees for recovery of money, either by way of a principal sum or as interest thereon, jointly or independent or each other.
Of late this tendency has developed in litigants in approaching this court for these reliefs and I must say that this court must take all steps to discourage the tendency so that it involves itself more in the task of examining the basic legal questions relating to infringement and violation of basic rights of the persons approaching it and/or providing relief and succour to them.
Here is a claimant who approaches this court by invoking its extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction for claiming a relief which is basically commercial in nature and has nothing to do with the deprivation of his basic rights as such and there, in a nearby corner are people waiting in anguish, despair, hardship and agony seeking to enforce their basic fundamental rights.
Should this court not draw a distinction between these two contending groups of relief seekers and shut out one indulging in pure commercial activities (because they have alternative remedy of approaching a civil court) and devote its time to providing relief to those who are seeking to enforce their basic rights touching life, liberty and freedom etc.  7.
The mere fact that the disposal of civil suit is likely to take long time and that therefore this court should exercise its extra-ordinary jurisdiction is also not a ground to entertain such petition as that would amount not only to defeating the very basic fabric of system of civil jurisprudence, it may also frustrate the working of the civil courts and the tasks which they are assigned to deal with, namely of entertaining and disposing of ordinary civil litigation.
8.
One more aspect which cannot be lost sight of is the existence of disputed questions of fact when such like petitions are filed in this court.
Writ applications are normally heard and disposed of on the basis of admitted facts between the parties because, it is only in exceptional and rarest of the rare cases that an occasion may arise where this court may in writ applications have to take evidence to ascertain a fact or to establish a point.
On the other hand, in matters like recovery of money, the contentions of the claimants are most likely in a vast majority of cases to be controverted by the respondents and such a situation gives rise to disputed questions of fact which form the subject-matter of issues for trial in the proceedings.
9.
Yet, another reason which may impel this court normally and generally to decline to entertain such like petitions is the fact that civil suits, as and when filed in civil courts do attract the levy of requisite appropriate court fee which goes to State exchequer.
It is a point worth consideration as to whether a party can be allotted to save the court fee by taking recourse to the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this court when the normal ordinary remedy of civil suits is available to it.
I can only ponder over the subject without giving any positive or definite opinion on it at this stage because the question does not require my serious consideration.
10.
For what has been stated above, I am convinced that the petitioner does not deserve a relief of the grant of any writ for receiving interest as claimed by him and he be best left to avail of the alternative remedies, which may be available to him under law in the light of the above discussion.
The petition is accordingly dismissed along with the connected CMP's.