THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed challenging the order of the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, dated 161990.
2.
The petitioner was appointed in the service of the Punjab Roadways as Conductor on 2121978.
The services of the petitioner were terminated on 21.6.1979.
According to the petitioner, his services were terminated illegally on the basis of the false complaint against him.
Though the services of the petitioner were terminated in the year 1979, he raised a dispute only on 12101987.
Thereupon the question namely "whether the termination of services of Shri Karam Chand, workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief, exact amount of compensation he is entitled" has been referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
3.
The Labour Court held that the termination of services of the workman was neither justified nor in order.
As he put in less than 240 days service, his case for reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages was declined.
Instead the Labour Court directed that a fresh appointment be given to the workman as and when the award became enforceable in law.
4.
Aggrieved by the said decision, petitioner (workman) filed the present writ petition challenging the said award.
5.
There is no dispute that the petitioner was appointed on 2121978 and his services were terminated on 21.6.1979.
The order of termination reads as follows :-  "The services of Sh. Karam Chand C. No. 226 are no longer required and hence discontinued w.e.f.
21.6.1979 AN as per terms and conditions laid down in his appointment order."
The petitioner had not placed on record the order of appointment either before the Labour Court on or before this Court.
The above order of termination is simpliciter and does not attach any stigma.
It is no doubt true that before the Labour Court it has come in the evidence that the termination of services of the petitioner was ordered because be was found guilty of defrauding the Government by charging bus fare and not issuing tickets to the passengers.
7.
The point for consideration is whether the order of termination which does not show that the services were terminated for any misconduct on the part of the petitioner can be said to be punitive in nature.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Bihar State Transport Corporation v. State of Bihar and others, 1970(2) LLJ 138) But in my view, the said decision is not applicable to the case on hand.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the workman was appointed on July 27, 1956 and he was discharged from service on February 18, 1959.
Thus he worked for more than two and half years.
Further it has been held by the Supreme Court that the standing orders of the Transport Corporation are applicable to the temporary employees of the Corporation.
The Supreme Court in State of UP v. Ram Chander, AIR 1976 SC 2547 has observed as follows:-  "The order to which exception is taken is ex-facie an order of termination of service simpliciter.
It does not cast any stigma on the respondent nor does it visit him with evil consequences, nor is it founded on misconduct.
In the circumstances, the respondent could not invite the Court to go into the motive behind the order and claim the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution."
The Supreme Court went further and observed as follows :-  "We, therefore, agree with the submission made on behalf of the appellant that the High Court was in error in arriving at the finding that the impugned order was passed by way of punishment by probing into the departmental correspondence that passed between the superiors of the respondent overlooking the observations made by this Court in IN Saksena v. State of Madhya Pradesh (AIR 1967 SC 1264) that when there were no express words in the impugned order itself which throw a stigma on the Government servant, the Court would not delve into Secretariat files to discover whether some kind of stigma could be inferred on such research."
A Division Bench of this Court in Ramesh Kumar v. Haryana State Electricity Board, 1985(2) SLR 356, held as follows:-  "It is evident from the impugned order reproduced above that the same has not been passed by way of punishment.
The language employed in the order does not expressly or impliedly cast a stigma on the petitioner.
The authorities have merely described the status of the petitioner in the order by mentioning that he was under suspension at the relevant time.
On reading the impugned order one cannot come to the conclusion that the petitioner has been guilty of any act of misconduct or any other act of commission or omission.
It only denotes that at the material time the petitioner was under suspension.
As noticed earlier, the order of suspension was not passed by way of punishment because the same was permissible under the regulations."
A similar question came up for consideration before a Division Bench of the Guahati High Court in Albert Francis Labo v. The Chief Engineer, Flood Control and Irrigation Department, Assam, Guahati and others, 1977(2) SLR 575, wherein it was observed as follows:-  "Mere description of the petitioner as "under suspension" did not amount to stigmatizing the petitioner.
The petitioner was in fact under suspension and the respondents could not have shown him to be a person not under suspension.
Factually and legally, the petitioner was "under suspension".
To describe a person "on leave", "whereabouts now known", "under suspension", "on deputation" cannot be termed by itself to be acts of stigmatising under the Assam Service Rules, suspension is not a penalty."
Factually also the petitioner was under suspension.
Such description cannot be termed to be attributing misconduct, negligence, inefficiency.
The expression "termination" itself, in that event, may amount to stigmatising a person.
In our opinion, no evil consequence can be thought of, affecting the future career of a civil servant when his service is terminated and he is described as under suspension, then in fact he was under such suspension not in connection with any departmental proceeding, but because of some criminal prosecution against him.
In this view of the matter, we are of the definite opinion that mere describing a person as "under suspension" is not by itself a stigma.
We are in respect agreement with the above enunciation of law."
Therefore, it is clear when the order of termination does not attach any stigma and it is only a termination similiciter then the termination cannot be treated as punitive or by way of punishment.
9.
Further the services of the petitioner were terminated in June, 1979 whereas he has raised the industrial dispute in 1987.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not work for 240 days.
Therefore, Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act is not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the Labour Court rightly came to the conclusion that the order of termination cannot be quashed.
However, the Labour Court has shown indulgence to the petitioner and directed the authorities to give a fresh employment to the petitioner.
It appears that this direction of the Labour Court has become final as it does not appear to have been challenged by the respondent.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I do not find any merit warranting interference with the order of the Labour Court.
The writ petition is liable to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.