THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition has been filed invoking the Certiorarial jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the award passed by the Labour Court, Amritsar, dated March 7, 1986.
2.
Respondent No. 2 was employed in the petitioner-Company as a conductor.
On February 4, 1980 he was on duty on the bus bearing No. 3692 belonging to the petitioner-Company.
The driver took the bus to the workshop of the management as he found some defect in the bus.
The management asked the Conductor to remain with the bus during the night time when the bus was in the workshop.
While so, according to the management, the petitioner's bus was taken out of the workshop during the intervening night of 4th/5th of February 1989 by the petitioner and the mechanics Paramjit Singh and Sukhwant Singh and after the bus was taken out of the workshop, it met with an accident and it fell in the Khud.
Thereafter, charge sheet was issued to respondent No. 2- Conductor.
According to the management, the Conductor admitted his guilt and accordingly the management terminated his services by its order dated February 18, 1980.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 raised an industrial dispute an May 9, 1980 which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
After considering the material placed before it, the Labour Court found that the order of termination is bad and accordingly directed the reinstatement of respondent No. 2 into service with continuity of service with fifty per cent back wages.
Aggrieved, by the said award, the management has filed this writ petition.
3.
There is no dispute that the order of termination was passed on the alleged admission of respondent No. 2 in regard to his guilt.
Statement/reply of the workman was marked before the Labour Court as Exhibit M/2.
The Labour Court considered the said statement at length and held that the workman never admitted that he had taken the bus out of the workshop.
Further, in his statement, respondent No. 2 has stated that while he was sleeping in the bus, Sukhwant Singh took the bus out of the workshop along with Paramjit Singh and the bus fell in the khud.
He further stated in his statement that he had tried to stop Sukhwant Singh from taking the bus but he did not care.
This statement of the workman cannot be said to be an admission on his part about his guilt.
It does not contain any admission that he also colluded with the mechanics in taking the bus out of the workshop.
Further, the workman has stated that he tried to stop Sukhwant Singh, who is the mechanic of the workshop working under the management from taking the bus but said Sukhwant Singh did not care.
The Tribunal had considered the entire material on record and came to the conclusion that the order of termination is based on no material before the management.
Admittedly, no enquiry was held.
Therefore, the Tribunal came to the conclusion on perusal of the material on record that the order of termination is bad and liable to be set aside.
In the State of Orissa and another v. Murlidhar Jena, AIR 1963 SC 404 it has been held that "in proceedings under Articles 226/227 the High Court cannot sit in appeal over the findings, recorded by a competent tribunal in a departmental enquiry so that if the High Court has purported to reappreciate the evidence for itself that would be outside its jurisdiction."
It cannot be said that the order of the Labour Court is based on no evidence or on the basis of any material which is not legally admissible.
Therefore, I do not find any ground warranting interference with the order of the Labour Court.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that even if the Labour Court comes to the conclusion that the order of termination is bad, the Labour Court should have enquired into the conduct of the workman and see whether the order of termination is justified.
He relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1896, wherein it has been held that :-  "The form of the order of termination or the language in which it is couched is not conclusive.
The Court will lift the veil to see the true nature of the order.
If two factors co-exist, an inference of punishment is reasonable though not inevitable.
If the severance of service is effected, the first condition is fulfilled and if the foundation or causa causans of such serverence is the servant's misconduct the second is fulfilled.
If the basis or foundation for the order of termination is clearly not turpitudinous or stigmatic or rooted in misconduct or visited with evil pecuniary effects, then the inference of dismissal stands negated and vice- versa."
I am of the opinion that this case is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the case in hand, the order of termination by the management is passed on a wrong premise that there is an admission on the part of the workman in regard to his guilt.
When the very basis or the foundation of the order does not exist, then there is no question of making further enquiry.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the order of termination is only simplicitor.
The Supreme Court said in order to see whether the order is only a termination of simlicitor or whether it is punitive, the Labour Court can go into the background of the circumstances under which the order of termination culminated.
Here is not such a case.
Here, the facts clearly show that the bus belonging to the management-petitioner was taken out of the workshop.
According to the management, respondent No. 2 colluded with the mechanics in taking the bus out of the workshop and the management wanted to rely on the admission in the statement said to have been given by the workman but the Labour Court on going through the statement of the workman, came to the conclusion that there was no such admission.
Therefore, the very basis of the order is unfounded.
5.
In these circumstances, I am of the view that the order of the Labour Court is neither illegal nor erroneous.
6.
The Writ Petition, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed but in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.