TS Doabia, J - The Labour Court, Gwalior came to the conclusion that the respondent No. 2 had worked for more than 240 days with the petitioner concern.
It also came to the conclusion that this respondent was entitled to reinstatement with full backwages, as his services were brought to an end without complying the provisions of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
This award as given on 22nd February 1995, is the subject-matter of this petition preferred by the employer.
2.
The brief facts for the purposes of this petition be noticed.
Respondent No. 2 is said to have been engaged as a Trainee Service Technician.
An appointment letter in this regard was issued on 20th February 1989.
This is Annexure P/2.
The petitioner came to be posted at Gwalior with effect from 24th of February 1989.
This is apparent from Annexure P/3.
The respondent No. 2 was to remain available with a concern known as Galaxy Enterprises, Sanjay Complex, Jayendera Ganj, Gwalior.
There is a recital in the petition that the respondent No. 2 underwent the training and was regularly sending his monthly reports upto July, 1989.
The emoluments which were to be paid have been given the nomenclature as stipend.
This was regularly paid to him upto July, 1989.
As the respondent No. 2 stopped sending the monthly reports to the head office, the monthly emoluments were not paid to him.
Respondent No. 2 was asked to report at june.
He did not so report but asked for enhanced tour allowance.
As per the petitioner-employer, as respondent No. 2 was not sending the monthly reports, the company passed an order copy whereof is Annexure P/8.
The order Annexure P/8 in this regard be noticed.
It reads as under:-  "It has been observed from the record that you have been absenting without prior permission or sanctioned leave with effect from August 10, 1989, since you left Poona till date.
As such, we regret to inform you that as per para No. 1 of our appointment order No. PA/4817 dated February 20, 1989, the Management has no other alternative but to withdraw the facility of providing training to you with effect from January 31, 1990 after working hours, which please note.
You are requested to collect your dues, if any, from our Finance Department after submitting the necessary clearance certificate."
The issuance of order Annexure P/8 led to serving a notice of demand.
Copy of this is Annexure P/9.
Conciliation proceedings were taken before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Gwalior.
As there was no meaningful result of this exercise, the matter was referred to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court has given its award.
Copy of this is Annexure P/1.
As noticed above, the respondent No. 2 stands reinstated with full backwages.
3.
A perusal of Annexure P/8 indicates :  (i) that the services of the respondent were terminated with effect from August 10, 1989 as he was absent.
(ii) the termination order was to become operative with effect from 31st of January 1990.
(iii) dues were not paid to the respondent No. 2 and he was asked to collect the same from the June office.
Thus, from the documents on record, it becomes apparent that the respondent No. 2 has completed more than 240 days of his tenure with the petitioner.
He joined on 24th of February 1989 in pursuance of Annexure P/2.
His services were brought to an end on 28th of January 1990.
This termination was to take effect from 31st of January 1990.
As such, on a pure mathematical calculation, it would become apparent that the respondent No. 2 had completed more than 240 days of service.
The order Annexure P/8 indicates that dues were not paid to the respondent No. 2 and therefore, there was apparent non-compliance of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act and therefore, the respondent No. 2 would become entitled to reinstatement.
The position of law in this regard is crystal clear from the following decisions :  (i) State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111.
(ii)Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219.
(iii)Mohanlal v. Bharat Electronics Ltd, (1984) 1 SCC 2445.
(iv) Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and others, (1990) 3 SCC 682.
The above would dispose of the matters with regard to the question as to whether the respondent No. 2 had completed 240 days of tenure with the petitioner company and also that he was not paid any wages or compensation at the time when Annexure P/8 was passed.
4.
Another aspect which can be taken note of is that the services of the petitioner were brought to an end because he was absenting from duties.
If this be the basis, even then, the action taken by the petitioner employer cannot be sustained.
This Court in the case reported as All India Union of Food Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPJR 129 has concluded that where an employee is absent, his services cannot be brought to an end without holding an enquiry.
The Division Bench took note of two earlier decisions of the Supreme Court and also a decision of the Panta High Court.
These decisions are as under:  (i) Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492;  (ii) Deokinandan Prasad v. The State of Bihar and others, AIR 1971 SC 1409;  (iii)S.D.
Gupta v. State of Bihar and another, AIR 1973 Panta 431.
Thus, for this additional reason also, the order of termination which apparently was passed without holding an enquiry was liable to be set aside.
5.
An argument has been raised that the respondent No. 1 was merely a trainee and therefore, he would not fall within the definition of the term 'workman'.
It is accordingly argued that the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act would not be attracted to this termination.
It be seen that vide Annexure P/2 the appointment of the petitioner was made as Trainee Service Technician.
He was to remain on probation for a period of one year.
He would be considered for regular appointment after he had completed more than one year of service.
A probationer would also be entitled to the protection of section 25-F of the Act.
If any judicial precedent is required to be taken note of in this regard then reference be made to the decision given by a Division Bench of Gujarat High Court reported as Gram Panchayat, Damnagar v. Sharadkumar D Acharya, 1994(3) SCT 788.
In para 4 of the judgment, it was observed under :  "The first contention is concluded by the Supreme Court in case of Karnataka S.R.T.
Corpn.
v M Boraiah, 1984(1) SCC 244, wherein it has been held that Section 2(oo) covers every case of termination of service except those which have been embodied in the definition and, therefore, discharge from employment or termination of service of a petitioner, would also amount to retrenchment and compliance with the requirements of Section 25F in the case of such termination is essential and necessary consequence of non-compliance with Section 25F would render the termination void.
Therefore, the first contention must fail."
Even otherwise, the services of the petitioner have been sought to be brought to an end on the ground that he had absented himself.
No enquiry was held in this regard.
Thus, looking from any point of view the order passed by the petitioner employer terminating the service tenure of the respondent No. 2 could not be sustained and the decision given by the Labour - Court reinstating the petitioner with backwages cannot be taken exception to.
This is because on reinstatement an employee is entitled to full back wages.
It is for the employer to prove that the workman was gainfully employed.
See the decision given in Hindustan Tin Works v. Its Employess, AIR 1979 SC 75.
This petition is found to be without merit and is dismissed with costs.
Costs Rs. 500/-.