TS Doabia, J - This order shall dispose of the following two petitions preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
These are : Writ Petition No. 1741 of 1995 and writ Petition No. 1819 of 1995.
2.
In both the cases, a preliminary objection has been raised.
This objection is to the maintainability of the petitions on the ground that the authority against whom a writ is being sought, is not an instrumentality of the State and is not covered by Article 12 of the Constitution of India Before noticing the legal aspect, facts in brief, in both the cases be noticed :  Writ Petition No. 1741 of 1995 :The petitioners claim to be employed in the Unit Canteen Station.
As per petitioner No. 1, he was initially employed in December 1979 and as per petitioner No. 2, he was appointed in June 1988.
It is stated that both the petitioners have worked continuously without any break and have also earned promotions.
They are aggrieved against the order of terminations said to have been passed on 17th of October, 1995.
3.
The respondents have put in appearance.
Written statement has been filed.
As noticed above, preliminary objection has been taken to the maintainability of this petition.
This objection is based on the ground that the Unit Canteen are not amenable to writ jurisdiction.
Writ Petition No. 1819 of 1995 :  The petitioner submits that he was appointed as a Principal of a School known as "Army School".
This school is located in Morar Cantonment.
The order of appointment has been placed on record as Annexure P/1.
This is dated 27th of September, 1995.
This has been issued by the Chairman of the Army School.
The further fact which is being submitted by the petitioner is that now an advertisement has been issued in Dainik Bhaskar and there is a proposal to appoint new Principal.
This advertisement is being challenged inter alia on the following grounds :  (a) that the advertisement has been issued in the name of the Secretary.
It is submitted that the Secretary of the School is the Principal and only the Principal could have issued this advertisement.
(b) that without terminating the services of the petitioner, the advertisement in question could not be issued.
4.
The Army Welfare Education Society is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 by the Registrar of Societies, Delhi Administration.
The aims and objectives of the Society have been mentioned in para 1 of the Articles of Association.
It has a governing body.
The Adjutant General is the Chairman.
The Vice Chairman is Director General, Discipline and Ceremonials Welfare.
The other members of the Society consist of army officers.
The Secretary, Army Welfare Education Society is the Member Secretary.
I am of the view that none of the institutions against which writ is being sought falls within the definition of the term "State" as contemplated by Article 12 of the Constitution of India Some of the judicial precedents in this regard be noticed.
5.
In Capt.
Surinder Mohan Soni (Retired) v. Union of India, (1993) 13 Legal Reports and Statutes (Pb.)
364, a writ was sought against Army Welfare Housing Organisation.
This organisation was engaged in providng residential accommodations in the city of Chandigarh.
The claim of the petitioner in the above petition somehow or the other was not considered.
He approached the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
HS Bedi, J, took note of the constitution of the aforementioned organisation.
This is described in para 7 of the judgment.
For facility of reference, this is quoted below :  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the stand of the petitioner is untenable.
It is clear from Appendix B referred to above, that the Board of Management though constituted of ex-officio Army Officers yet functions independent of any control of the Army authorities.
It has also been averred in the written statement that there is no vestige or any control of the Central Government over the functioning of the AWHO.
By way of clarification, it has been stated that the funds of the organisation are collected by the organisation itself, the staff of the organisation is appointed by the Board of management and the pay and allowances are paid out of funds of the organisation.
It has also been pointed out that the question as to whether the Army authorities had any control over the AWHO was raised as far back as in November, 1985 (Annexure R-2/5) and the Army authorities themselves had stated that the organisation is a distinct entity and a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, and cannot in any manner to be deemed to be part of Army headquarters.
This assertion was reiterated by the authorities on a number of occasions.
The mere fact that the Board of management consists of serving Army Officers appointed ex-officio does not indicate any State control."
After noticing the constitution of the organisation, it was observed that the society in question would not fall within the definition of the term "authority" as occurring in Article 12 of the Constitution of India  6.
The facts in writ petition No. 1819 of 1995 are parallel to the facts in Capt.
Surinder Mohan Soni's case (supra) and I respectfully follow the ratio of the aforementioned decision, and conclude that the Army Welfare Education Society, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, is not an "authority" for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India In this regard, see also JS.
Arneja v. National Co-op.
Consumers' Federation of India Ltd, 1994(2) SCT 636, wherein National Co-op.
Consumers' Federation of India Ltd was held to be not an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India  7.
Again in Dr. Mridula Sharma v. State Chief Commissioner, MP Bharat Scouts and Guides, 1995 (1) SCT 231, Scouts and Guides Organisation was held to be not an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution, by this Court.
In para 6, reference was made to the decision given by the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi etc., AIR 1981 SC 487.
It would be apt to note what was said in paras 6 and 7.
These read as under :  "Again a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi etc., AIR 1981 SC 487 formulated certain tests which may enable one to find out whether a particular body is an instrumentality of the State or not, the relevant tests were summarised as under : (1) One thing is clear that if the entire share capital of the Corporation is held by Government it would go a long way towards indicating that the Corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government.
(2) Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the Corporation, it would afford some indication of the Corporation being impregnated with governmental character.
(3) It may also be a relevant factor ....... whether the Corporation enjoys monopoly status which is the State conferred or State protected.
(4) Existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that the Corporation is a State agency or instrumentality.
(5) If the functions of the Corporation are of public importance and closely related to governmental functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying the Corporation as an instrumentality or agency of Government.
(6) Specifically, if a department of Government is transferred to a corporation it would be a strong factor supportive of this inference of the Corporation being an instrumentality or agency of Government.
It may be seen that none of the tests as indicated in the above two cases is present in the present cases and therefore, the respondent-society cannot be held to be an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India The Delhi High Court in the case of Sammukh Singh v. Indian Red Cross Society, 1985 Lab.
IC 1072 held that Red Cross Society is not an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India In view of the above discussion and in view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in the abovementioned cases, it becomes apparent that the respondent-society is not performing any governmental functions and as such it cannot be said to fall under the term 'State' or 'authority' as contemplated by Article 12 of the Constitution of India The preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondents is upheld and the present petition is held to be not maintainable and the same is dismissed.
The petitioner would be at liberty to pursue such other remedies as may be available to her under the ordinary law."
Thus, the tests indicated by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Ajay Hasia (supra) are not applicable to the facts of this case.
8.
Again the Border Security Force, Takenpur, was held not to be an 'authority' for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution of India by a Division Bench of this Court in Writ Petition No. 996/91, decided on 3rd of July, 1992.
This decision was followed in Miscellaneous Petition No. 1861/92 (Soni Ram Dhaka v. Union of India and others).
9.
So far as the writ petition No. 1741 of 1995 is concerned, the question as to whether Unit Canteen is an instrumentality of the State be examined.
In this regard, it would be apt to mention that this Court in first appeal No. 13/91, decided on 18th of January, 1992 has conceded that these canteens are not covered by Article 12 of the Constitution of India The observations made in para 13 of the judgment are relevant.
These be noticed :  "The plaintiff was not appointed by any statutory Board and the canteen is not any Unit of the Government and is not covered within the provisions of Article 12 of the Constitution.
The provisions of Articles 309 and 311 are not attracted."
Against the aforementioned decision, special leave petition was preferred and this was dismissed by the Supreme Court of India.
The SLP was registered as No. 6290/92.
This was dismissed on 30th of November, 1993.
In addition to what has been said with regard to writ petition No. 1819/95, this additional factor can also not be ignored for coming to the conclusion that the Armiy Unit Canteens are not authorities for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India As such, both these petitions are dismissed on the ground that the institutions against which these are sought are not instrumentalities of "State" and are not amenable to writ jurisdiction.