TS Doabia, J - The petitioners are three in number.
They have a feeling that they have been deprived of the post of the Panchayat Karmi.
According to them, respondent No. 3 who is a relation of the Sarpanch is being accommodated in violation of the equality clauses enshrined in Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is also argued that the policy decisions taken by the State Government in the matter of appointing Panchayat Karmis are being observed in breach rather than compliance.
An assertion has also been made that respondent No. 3 is a relation of respondent No. 2 and, therefore, his appointment is liable to be quashed.
Writ of Certiorari and Quo Warranto is claimed.
Resolution, Annexure P/6 by which appointment has been made is sought to be declared null and void.
2.
The petitioners submit that the appointment is required to be made on the basis of merit.
Reliance is being placed on Annexure P/1 in this regard.
It is submitted that the marks obtained by the petitioners are higher than the marks obtained by the respondent No. 3.
It is stated that :  (i) the petitioner No. 1 has obtained 66% of marks in Matriculation examination; (ii) the petitioner No. 2 has completed XII Class in First Division and has secured 72% of marks; and (iii) the petitioner No. 3 has passed Higher Secondary examination and has obtained 606% of marks.
3.
It has further been submitted that the petitioners No. 2 and 3 belong to backward class and they have a preferential right over the respondent No. 3.
4.
So far as the question of relationship between the respondents No. 2 and No. 3 is concerned, the same has been denied.
A categoric statement has been made in the form of an affidavit that respondent No. 3 is not the nephew of the respondent No. 3.
As such, this contention based on relationship cannot be examined in the present petition.
5.
Thus, the only argument which is required to be gone into in this petition is the one which is based on the argument that the petitioners are more meritorious.
Another argument which would also be required to be gone into is the claim based on the status as member of non-privileged category.
Petitioners No. 2 and 3 submit that they belong to backward classes.
6.
Dealing with the second contention first, it be seen that the respondent No. 3 is a member of Scheduled Caste.
No doubt, backward classes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes have been put at par in the matter of preference, the historical background cannot be ignored.
It is a historical reality that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have been the most ignored sections of this Republic.
It was primarily for them quota of reservation was carved out.
Reservation for backward and other classes is a later phenomenon, and therefore, if a person who belongs to Scheduled Caste has been given appointment in preference to backward classes; no grievance can be made.
As such, no fault can be found in the matter of selection of respondent No. 5 in this regard.
7.
The second contention which is based on the question of merit be examined.
8.
Selection based on merit tested impartially and objectively is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
The object of any process of selection for entry into a public service is to secure the best and the most suitable person for the job avoiding patronage and favouritism.
When a candidate is to be appointed as Panchayat Karmi and when the appointing authority is the Panchayat, besides educational qualifications, many other factors may have to be gone into.
The status of the person, his family background, his ability to deal with the Panchayat matters and as to how he would be dealing with the public at large, may be some of factors.
These are some of the criterion which may be taken note of.
Merely saying that petitioners have obtained more marks in educational attainments cannot be the last word of the subject.
In this regard, it would be apt to examine as to what is meant by merit.
It may also be seen that a persons with better qualification and higher educational qualification always are keen to improve their status and keep on shifting from one post to another.
This sometime disturbs the institution to which appointments are made.
This factor has also to be taken note of while making selections.
9.
The term 'merit system' finds elaborated in Corpus Juris Secondum, Volume 57, at page 1070.
The origin of this system under the American Constitutional set-up has been traced in the following words :  "Merit systems in American government are of comparatively recent development.
The federal government began about 1886 in a tentative way to make certain appointments based at least upon an effort to ascertain the ability of the appointee to perform properly the services of his position, rather than his contributions to the success of the party which happened to be in power, and this system has spread to a greater or less extent in all parts of the country, although it no means is universal."
Taylor v. Mc-Swain, 95 P. 2d 415, 421, 54 Ariz. 295.
After tracing out the origin of the term, the term 'merit system' has been elaborated as under :  "The term 'merit system' has a well-defined and well-understood meaning.
It is defined as the system of appointing employees to office in the civil service, and of promoting them for competency only; a system whereby slection for appointment in certain branches of the public service may be made on the basis of demonstrated relative fitness, without regard to political considerations.
Such a system would necessarily include a fair and impartial selection and appointment of all personnel on the basis of open and competitive merit examinations specific reasons for removal and a reasonable hearing.
The purpose and effect of the merit system is to take from the appointing officer the right of arbitrary removal, either directly or indirectly, of an appointee which he otherwise would have.
The system is sometimes referred to as a "non-partisan merit system".
In the United States it is opposed to the "spoils system".
10.
The Kothari Committee on Recruitment Policy and Selection Methods in their report said :  "A system of recruitment almost totally dependent on assessment of a person's academic knowledge and skills, as distinct from ability to deal with pressing problems of economic and social development with people and with novel situations cannot serve the needs of today, much less of tomorrow..... We venture to suggest that our recruitment procedures should be such that we can select candidates who can not only assimilate knowledge and sift material to understand the ramifications of a situation or a problem but have the potential to develop an original or innovative approach to the solution of problems.
To evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness, resourcefulness, dependableness, co-operativeness, capacity for clear and logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead intellectual and moral integrity, oral interview is the best."
11.
O Glenn Stahl in his Public Personnel Administration points out :  "The oral test has long served as a basic selection tool in private employment but has been more slowly accepted in the public field.
This conservation arises out of three considerations : (1) the difficulty of developing valid and reliable oral tests; (2) the difficulty of securing a reviewable record of an oral test; and (3) public suspicion of the oral as a channel for the exertion of political influence through the destruction of enmity.
Despite these acknowledged disadvantages however oral tests have been used increasingly in public personnel testing and have become important instruments wherever tests of personal attributes are considered essential."
12-14.
While dealing with the above concepts in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777, the Supreme Court observed as under :  "The ideal in recruitment is to do away with unfairness."
United Nations Hand-book on Civil Service Laws and Practice.
"Competitive examinations were the answer to the twin problems represented by democracy and the requirements of good administration.
They were the means by which equality of opportunity was to be united with efficiency... By this means favouritism was to be excluded and the goal of securing the best man for every job was to be achieved."
Public Personnel Administration by O Glenn Stahl.
"Open competitive examinations are a peculiar democratic institution.
Any qualified person may come forward.
His relative competence for appointment is determined by a neutral---disinterested body on the basis of objective evidence supplied by the candidate himself.
No one has "pull" : everyone stands on his own feet.
The system is not only highly democratic, it is fair and equitable to every competitor.
The same rules govern, the same procedures apply, the same yardstick is used to test competence."
Introduction to the Study of Public Administration by Leonard White.
15.
It was further said :  "In the case of services of the like to which recruitment is made from younger candidates whose personalities are on the threshold of development and who show signs of great promise, and the discerning eye can in an interview test catch a glimpse of the future personality.
In the case of such services, where sound selection must combine academic ability with personality promise some weight has to be given though not much too great weight, to the interview test.
There cannot be any rule of thumb regarding the precise weight to be given.
It must vary from service to service according to the requirements of the service, the minimum qualifications prescribed, the age group from which the selection is to be made, the body to which the task of holding the interview test is proposed to be entrusted and a host of other factors..." 16.
Reference be also made to a decision given by a Full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Joginder Singh v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1986 P&H 339.
Reference was made to para 23 of the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, (1986) Lab.
I.C.
1417.
It reads as under :  "While dealing with this question Bhagwati, J (as his Lordship then was) now Chief Justice, first made reference to certain observations made in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777 thus : This Court speaking through Chinnappa Reddy, J pointed out in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan that the object of any process of selection for entry into public service is to secure the best and the most suitable person for the job, avoiding patronage and favouritism.
Selection based on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
So open competitive examination has come to be accepted almost universally as the gateway to public services.
But the question is how should the competitive examination be devised ?
The competitive examination may be based exclusively on written examination or it may be based exclusively on oral interview or it may be a mixture of both.
It is entirely for the Government to decide what kind of competitive examination would be appropriate in a given case.
To quote the words of Chinnappa Reddy, J : In the very nature of things it would not be within the province or even the competence of the Court and the Court would not venture into such exclusive thickets to discover way out, when the matters are more appropriately left to the wisdom of the experts.
It is not for the Court to lay down whether interview test should be held at all or how many marks must be minimal so as to avoid charges of arbitrariness, but not necessarily always.
There may be posts and appointments where the only proper method of selection may be a viva voce test.
Even in the case of admission to higher degree courses, it may sometimes be necessary to allow a fairly high percentage of marks for the viva voce test.
That is why rigid rules cannot be laid down in these matters by Courts.
The expert bodies are generally the best judges.
The Government aided by experts in the field may appropriately decide to have written examination followed by a viva voce test."
17.
It cannot be held as a matter of general rule that oral interview is always defective or that the selection made on the basis of such an interview is arbitrary.
What is required is that the selective test must be reasonable and not arbitrary irrespective of the fact whether the same is oral or written.
See MK Raina and another v. Union of India and others, (1987) 5 Sev.
LR 320.
18.
The method of oral test in the shape of interview is recognised as one of the modes of selection.
See Dr. P. Goverdhan Reddy and others v. B Laxman and others, (1983) 3 Sev.
LR 170 (DB) (AP).
19.
Thus, the educational qualifications alone are not enough to determine the merit.
It is demonstrated relative fitness to meet a particular assignment which is required to be looked into.
Therefore, the argument that the respondent No. 3 had lesser marks would not in itself be a ground to come to the conclusion that he was found wanting in merit.
This argument cannot be accepted.
The employer has to see so many other factors which have been noticed in Para 8 of this order and which have been highlighted by the Supreme Court of India in Lila Dhar's case (supra).
20.
Another factor which is required to be taken note of is that under the instructions (paragraph 8) alternative forum for redressal of grievances has been provided.
It has been specifically mentioned that resort can be had to section 91 of the Madhya Pradesh Panchayati Raj Adhiniyam, 1993.
As pointed out by the Supreme Court, in Lila Dhar's case (supra), these are the matter which fall within the domain of administrative authorities and the Courts should not venture into such exclusive thickets to discover a way out.
This Court is not to sit as a Court of Appeal over the judgment of the prescribed authority.
As such, the petitioners are left free to pursue their remedies under section 91 of the Adhiniyam, 1993 referred to above.
If resort is made within a period of thirty days, the respondents shall not raise any objection as to its maintainability on the ground of limitation.