NK Sodhi, J - This regular second appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated 2081993 passed by the lower appellate Court reversing that of the trial Court whereby the suit of the plaintiff-respondent challenging the order of his dismissal from service has been decreed.
2.
The facts giving rise to this appeal are as under.
Yash Pal Sharma, the plaintiff-respondent was employed as a Dispenser in the year 1979 with M/s Dayalbagh Spinning and Weaving Mills, Amritsar - a unit of the National Textile Corporation of India, the appellant herein.
He was placed under suspension on 1671987 and a regular departmental inquiry was held after serving on him a memorandum of charges on 581987.
It was alleged that on 1261987 the Senior Administrative Manager of Mills was criminally assaulted at his residence situated in the factory compound by some outsiders and that the plaintiff was involved in that conspiracy.
The Inquiry Officer found the plaintiff guilty of the charges levelled against him and accordingly submitted his report to the General Manager who by an order, dated 26.3.1988 dismissed the plaintiff from service.
The General Manager also directed that the plaintiff shall not be entitled to any salary for the period during which he remained under suspension except the subsistence allowance which already stood paid to him.
The order of dismissal was challenged by the plaintiff by filing a suit for declaration to the effect that the said order was illegal, null and void and against the principles of natural justice.
The suit was contested by the defendant-appellant and it was pleaded that the civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit as the dispute sought to be raised by the plaintiff was squarely covered by the definition of an 'industrial dispute' as given in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
On merits, the order was sought to be justified on the ground that a regular departmental inquiry was held against the plaintiff in which he was afforded full opportunity to lead his evidence in defence and that he cross-examined the witnesses produced by the management.
It was further pleaded that in view of the serious charge which stood proved against the plaintiff, the order of dismissal from service was legal and justified.
3.
A preliminary issue was framed as to whether the Civil Court had jurisdiction in the matter.
That issue was decided against the plaintiff and consequently the suit was dismissed.
In appeal, the learned Additional District Judge held that the Civil Court had jurisdiction in the matter and remanded the case back to the trial Court for framing issues on merits and for deciding the same in accordance with law.
After recording evidence of the parties and hearing their counsel, the trial Court dismissed the suit holding that the order of dismissal was legal and valid and that the plaintiff was not entitled to the declaration sought for.
The plaintiff then filed an appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Amritsar and raised two contentions.
Firstly, it was contended that the impugned order of dismissal was illegal because the General Manager while denying to the plaintiff his salary during the suspension period, did not issue any show cause notice to that effect and since that part of the order adversely affected the emoluments drawn by the plaintiff, the order could not be sustained.
Secondly, it was argued before the lower appellate Court that the General Manager, before passing impugned order, did not supply a copy of the inquiry report to the plaintiff so as to enable him to file his objections thereto and thus the principles of natural justice stood contravened.
Both the contentions were accepted by the learned Additional District Judge who in support of his decision on the second contention relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111(SC) : A.I.R. 1991 SC 471.
Consequently, the appeal was allowed and the declaration prayed for was granted and the suit of the plaintiff-respondent decreed.
Hence the second appeal by the defendant-appellant.
4.
The appeal came up for hearing before this Court on 4.3.1994 and the same was dismissed in limine.
The appellant went up in appeal to the Supreme Court and the learned Judges granted special leave and remanded the case back to this Court for decision of all the questions of law raised therein.
This is how the matter has been placed before me.
5.
The appellant filed Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1515-C of 1995 with a prayer that reinstatement of the plaintiff-respondent be stayed.
When this application came up for hearing before me, counsel for the parties requested that the arguments in the main appeal be heard.
The request was allowed.
6.
Mr. HN Mehtani, learned counsel for the appellant at the outset contended that the civil Court had no jurisdiction in the matter since the dispute sought to be raised by the plaintiff-respondent was an industrial dispute within the meaning of section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Premier Automobiles Limited etc. v. Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke of Bombay & others, 1976(1) SCC.
496, and Jitendra Nath Biswas v. M/s Empire of India and Ceylone Tea Co & another, 1989(3) SCC.
582 in support of his contention.
The latest judgment of the Supreme Court in Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Krishan Kant, 1994(1) SCT 23(SC) : 1995(1) AD SC(L) 409 was also brought to my notice where the learned Judges, after an exhaustive discussion of the law on the subject relating to the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in the matter of industrial disputes, have laid down the following principles :-  "We may now summarise the principles flowing from the above discussion :  (1) Where the dispute arises from general law of contract, i.e. where reliefs are claimed on the basis of the general law of contract, a suit filed in civil court cannot be said to be not maintainable, even though such a dispute may also constitute an "industrial dispute" within the meaning of Section 2(k) or Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
(2) Where, however, the dispute involves recognition, observance or enforcement of any of the rights or obligations created by the Industrial Disputes Act, the only remedy is to approach the forums created by the said Act.
(3) Similarly, where the dispute involves the recognition, observance or enforcement of rights and obligations created by enactments like Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 - Which can be called sister enactments to Industrial Disputes Act - and which do not provide a forum for resolution of such disputes, the only remedy shall be to approach the forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act provided they constitute industrial disputes within the meaning of Section 2(k) and Section 2-A of Industrial Disputes Act or where such enactment says that such dispute shall be either treated as an industrial dispute or says that it shall be adjudicated by any of the forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act.
Otherwise, recourse to civil Court is open.
(4) It is not correct to say that the remedies provided by the Industrial Disputes Act are not equally effective for the reason that access to the forum depends upon a reference being made by the appropriate government.
The power to make a reference conferred upon the government is to be exercised to effectuate the object of the enactment and hence not unguided.
The rule is to make a reference unless, of course, the dispute raised is totally frivolous one ex-facie.
The power conferred is the power to refer and not the power to decide, though it may be that the Government is entitled to examine whether the dispute is ex-facie frivolous, not meriting an adjudication.
(5) Consistent with the policy of law aforesaid, we command to the Parliament and the State Legislatures to make a provision enabling a workman to approach the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal directly - i.e. without the requirement of a reference by the government - in case of industrial disputes covered by Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
This would go a long way in removing the misgivings with respect to the effectiveness of the remedies provided by the Industrial Disputes Act.
(6) The certified Standing Orders framed under and in accordance with the Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, 1946 are statutorily imposed conditions of service and are binding both upon the employers and employees, though they do not amount to "Statutory provisions".
Any violation of these Standing Orders entitles an employee to appropriate relief either before the forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act or the civil Court where recourse to civil Court is open according to the principles indicated herein.
(7) The policy of law emerging from Industrial Disputes Act and its sister enactments is to provide an alternative dispute resolution mechanism to the workman, a mechanism which is speedy, inexpensive, informal and unencumbered by the plethora of procedural laws and appeals upon appeals and revisions applicable to civil courts.
Indeed, the powers of the Courts and Tribunals under the Industrial Disputes Act are far more extensive in the sense that they can grant such relief as they think appropriate in the circumstances for putting an end to an industrial dispute."
7.
In view of the aforesaid principles enunciated by the Apex Court, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is clearly barred but again in para 37 of the judgment, their Lordships have directed that the principles enunciated in the judgment shall apply to all pending matters except where decrees have been passed by the trial Court and the matters are pending in appeal or second appeal, as the case may be.
In other words, all suits pending in the trial Court shall be governed by the principles enunciated in this judgment.
In the case in hand, the trial Court has already decided the matter and the lower appellate Court had passed a decree in favour of the plaintiff and the matter is pending in this Court in second appeal.
Therefore, the aforesaid principles enunciated by the Supreme Court would not apply to the present case.
Even though the jurisdiction of the civil Court is barred, the suit of the plaintiff herein will not be dismissed on that ground alone.
8.
Mr. HN Mehtani, Advocate appearing for the appellant then challenged the findings of the lower appellate Court on both the contentions that were raised before it and submitted that the General Manager was not obliged to issue any show cause notice to the plaintiff before deducting his salary for the suspension period.
He also submitted that the lower appellate Court grossly erred in following the ruling laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) as not only the inquiry had concluded but also the impugned order of dismissal had been passed prior to the judgment of the Supreme Court in that case.
9.
I find merit in the submissions made by Mr. Mehtani.
As regards the first contention, I am of the considered opinion that no notice was necessary to be issued to the plaintiff before denying to him his salary for the suspension period.
Standing Order 14(5) of the Certified Standing Orders makes it clear that if on inquiry the order of suspension is confirmed, the workman will be deemed to have been absent from duty during the period of suspension and that he shall not be entitled to any remuneration for such period.
In the instant case, the plaintiff was placed under suspension on 1671987 and thereafter in the departmental inquiry held against him, the charges against him stood proved on the basis of which the impugned order of dismissal was passed.
The aforesaid standing order will apply to the facts of the present case and if the workman is to be deemed to have remained absent from duty during the suspension period, he would not be entitled to any salary for that period and the question of issuing any show cause notice, therefore, does not arise.
Mr. TN Gupta, Advocate for the plaintiff-respondent placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in BD Gupta v. State of Haryana, 1972 S.L.R.
(SC) 845, to contend that notice was necessary to be issued before the plaintiff could be denied his salary during the suspension period.
In BD Gupta's case (supra), it has been held that when a Government servant who has been suspended is reinstated, the competent authority will make a specific order whether or not the period of suspension shall be treated as a period spent on duty.
Such is not the case here.
In the instant case, Standing Order 14(5) provides that if on inquiry the order is confirmed, the workman shall be deemed to be absent from duty during the suspension period.
The rule which applies to the plaintiff-respondent is materially different from the one that was operative in BD Gupta's case (supra).
10.
Again, I find that the lower appellate Court was wrong in following the rule laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra).
It is true that non- supply of the inquiry report to the plaintiff-respondent contravened the rules of natural justice but the law prior to the decision of the Supreme Court was that the rules of natural justice did not require the supply of the inquiry report to the delinquent employee.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) while declaring the earlier law to be no longer good specifically observed in para 17 of the judgment as under :-  "There have been several decisions in different High Courts which, following the Forty-Second Amendment, have taken the view that it is no longer necessary to furnish a copy of the inquiry report to delinquent officers.
Even on some occasions this Court has taken that view.
Since we have reached a different conclusion the judgments in the different High Courts taking the contrary view must be taken to be no longer laying down good law.
We have not been shown any decision of a coordinate or a larger Bench of this Court taking this view.
Therefore, the conclusion to the contrary reached by any two-Judge Bench in this Court will also no longer be taken to be laying down good law, but this shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground."
(Emphasis supplied).
In the present case, the plaintiff was charge-sheeted on 581987 and the Inquiry Officer submitted his report on 2481987 and the impugned order dismissing the plaintiff from service was passed on 26.3.1988.
All this happened before the decision of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) and, therefore, as per the dictum laid down by their Lordships, the punishment imposed on the plaintiff-respondent is not open to challenge on the ground that the inquiry report had not been supplied.
The Lower Appellate Court did not take note of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court.
11.
Faced with this situation, Mr. TN Gupta, Advocate, appearing for the plaintiff-respondent submitted that the impugned order of dismissal was liable to be set aside on the short ground that an industrial dispute between the management and its workmen was pending before the Industrial Tribunal when he was dismissed from service and, therefore, it was necessary for the appellant management to have obtained the approval from that Tribunal as was required by section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Since no approval had been obtained, the learned counsel contended that the impugned order cannot be sustained.
12.
I find no merit in this contention.
It is true that a dispute was pending before the Industrial Tribunal as is mentioned in the impugned order of dismissal.
It is also stated that an application for approval had been moved before the Tribunal.
The plaintiff has not led any evidence to show whether such an approval had been granted or not.
Moreover, this plea though taken before the trial Court, does not appear to have been raised before the Additional District Judge in appeal and if such a contention was not raised in the lower appellate Court, it cannot be allowed to be raised in second appeal, particularly when there is no material on the record to show whether any approval was granted or not.
13.
Mr. Gupta then submitted that the charges levelled against the plaintiff were vague and even if what is alleged against him is taken to be correct, no misconduct is made out for which the extreme penalty of dismissal from service could be awarded to the plaintiff.
This contention too has no merit.
It is common case of the parties that the Senior Administrative Manager of the Mills had been assaulted by some outsiders on 1261987 and he was seriously injured.
One of the charges against the plaintiff is that he is said to have told the injured that had he maintained his friendship with him (plaintiff) he would not have been assaulted.
This charge, according to the Inquiry Officer, has been proved.
The Inquiry Officer has found that the industrial relations in the factory premises were bitter and that one Gora along with others had assaulted the Senior Administrative Manager.
According to the Inquiry Officer, Gora is admittedly a close friend and associate of the plaintiff and in view of the statement made by the plaintiff to the injured, the Inquiry Officer concluded that the plaintiff was actively involved in the conspiracy which resulted in the assault on the Senior Administrative Manager which took place for settling scores.
The inquiry report was accepted by the General Manager who on finding that the plaintiff was involved in the assault, dismissed him from service.
It may be mentioned that the plaintiff has not challenged the inquiry report before either of the Courts below.
14.
Since the findings of the lower appellate Court on both the contentions that were raised before it are not sustainable, the appeal filed by the defendant-appellant is allowed and the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs throughout.
Appeal allowed.