VK Bali, J (Oral) - Block Development and Panchayat Officer, UT Chandigarh through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India takes strong exception to the award rendered by respondent No. 1 Presiding Officer, Labour Court, UT Chandigarh dated 1st August, 1990, vide which UT Block Development Workers Union, UT Chandigarh succeeded in getting some of the demands made by it.
The three demands subject matter of adjudication before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court were that the workmen of Workers Union were entitled to regularisation who had completed one year service as also bonus for the years 1984-85 and 1985-86 and grant of leave as per law to all the workmen.
The Government made a reference on 22nd October, 1988 to the Labour Court for determining existing disputes between UT Block Development Workers Union Chandigarh and the Block Development Officer, UT Chandigarh.
After considering the evidence which was placed before it, the Labour Court adjudicated that those employees who had completed more than 240 days continuous service and who are workmen within the definition of 'workman', their services should be regularised on the expiry of the said period.
Regarding the demand of bonus it was held that members of Union were entitled to get bonus as this benefit was being extended by the UT Administration to its other employees who fall within the purview of the instructions issued by the Government in this regard from time to time.
With regard to the demand of leave, it was held that the benefit will automatically be extended to the employees whose services would be regularised by virtue of decision given under issue No. 1.
2.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that concept of regularisation and consequential benefits flowing therefrom is wholly unknown to the industrial law under the Industrial Disputes Act or any other law enacted by the Legislature.
The workman covered under the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 has only an assured right or rights that may be available to them under the Act and so far as retrenchment is concerned, he can be asked to quit subject to the formalities of payment of retrenchment compensation etc.
Even a regular workman can be asked to quit subject, of course, to the essential formalities like giving him retrenchment compensation etc.
If this be true even with regard to regular workmen, the directions to regularise the services of the workman cannot be issued, contends the learned counsel.
3.
In pursuance of the notice issued by this Court respondent No. 2, the only contesting respondent UT Block Development Workers Union, Chandigarh has filed reply.
By way of Preliminary Objection it is averred that the answering-Union represents the workers of the UT Administration in UT Block and Panchayat Office.
As they are employees of UT Administration any grievance regarding the conditions of service can be taken to Central Administrative Tribunal.
It is a matter of procedure that the employees cannot approach the Central Administrative Tribunal directly if such employees are governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The order of the Industrial Tribunal can be challenged only before the Central Administrative Tribunal and not before the High Court.
The Central Administrative Tribunal is as good as the High Court, so far as the UT employees are concerned.
It is also pleaded that no evidence was produced before the Labour Court though the petitioner was represented through various representatives at initial stage, but later on, the petitioner chose to be absent.
The ex parte proceedings were thereafter taken.
Unless and until the ex parte proceedings are set aside the award cannot be challenged on merits.
It is also averred that no objection was taken before the Labour Court that the department is not an industry.
In so far as the facts giving rise to the award are concerned, the same have not been disputed.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner.
It requires to be mentioned that since morning the case has been called repeatedly and even after lunch but on one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
5.
A bare perusal of the impugned award would make it manifest that in giving the desired benefit to the workmen, the Presiding Officer relied upon the decision of this Hon'ble Court in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, (CWP No. 72 of 1988) decided on 26th September, 1988.
After noticing the judgment aforesaid the learned Presiding Officer proceeded to hold, "After studying the relevant provision, their Lordships also held that even those employees who have completed one or more than one year's service are entitled to be regularised even though there are notional breaks in that service and such notional breaks should be ignored by the management so that those employees may earn the protection of Industrial Disputes Act such as those provisions as contained under Sections 25-G and 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Resultantly, it is adjudicated that those employees who have completed more than 240 days continuous service and fall within the definition of workman, their services should be regularised on expiry of the said period."
The decision of this Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) was challenged in the Supreme Court and it is no more in dispute that the judgment of this Court has been diluted to quite an extent.
While dealing with the workmen the Supreme Court categorised them in category IV.
Supreme Court observed that "the employee, who come within the definition of 'workmen' under the Industrial Disputes Act, shall be entitled to the benefits under the Act and their services should be dispensed with only after following the procedure laid down in the Act and after granting the requisite retrenchment benefit."
It is, thus, clear from the judgment of Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) : 1992(3) RSJ 235 that the workmen governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act are category apart in so far as regularisation of their services is concerned.
It is only on the basis of the Government instructions issued from time to time that the government employees were held entitled to regularisation if they had put in some specific number of years of service subject to of course, that they had basic qualifications and were eligible to be appointed to the post held by them.
In so far as workmen are concerned, they are governed by the Industrial Disputes Act and but for the protection provided to them under the Industrial Disputes Act they do not have any other right and in particular the right of regularisation.
The very basis on which the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court decided the matter i.e. judgment of this Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) has since been modified by the judgment of Supreme Court and therefore, this in itself would be enough to negate the reliefs granted to workman by the Labour Court.
So far as the relief of bonus and leave are concerned, these were dependent upon regularisation.
The petitioners being held not entitled to be regularised, they are not entitled to these reliefs as well.
That being the position, this petition is allowed and the order passed by the Labour Court is set aside.