TS Doabia, J - By this order two writ petitions bearing Nos. 856 of 1985 (Pradeep Kumar Puranik v. The Director, Public Instructions, Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal and others, 1996(1) S.C.T.
716) and 644 of 1986 (Adarsh Vidhyalya Shikash Samiti, Pohari v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and others) are being disposed of.
The first writ petition has been filed by the employee and the second writ petition has been filed by the employer.
In both the petitions challenge is made to an order passed by the State Government by which the respondent No. 4 (writ petition No. 644 of 1986) Pradeep Kumar Puranik was ordered to be reinstated.
The employer is aggrieved against the order of reinstatement and the employee is aggrieved against non-grant of wages during the period he was kept out of employment.
The copy of the order has been placed on the record as Annexure P/1 in writ petition No. 856 of 1985.
2.
The brief facts out of which this petition arises may be noticed as under.
3.
The employee was a teacher in Adarsh Vidyalaya shiksha Samiti, Pohari.
This is a society registered under the Madhya Pradesh Societies Registrikaran Adhiniyam, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the 'society').
This society is a private educational institution and is receiving grant-in-aid from the State Government.
The society also fell within the definition of the term 'institution' defined in section 2(e) of the Madhya Pradesh Ashaskiya Shiksha Sansthan (Adhyapakon Tatha Anya Karmachariyon Ke Vetnon Ka Sandaya) Adhiniyam, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Adhiniyam').
4.
The services of the employee were terminated by the society on 17th February, 1981.
It is alleged that this was done without following the mandatory provisions of section 6(a) (iii) of the Adhiniyam.
A show/cause notice is said to have not been issued.
The employee preferred an appeal before the appellate authority.
As the appeal was not being disposed of, the petitioner preferred a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in this Court.
This petition bears No. 341 of 1982 directions were given to expedite the disposal of the appeal.
In pursuance of the directions so given, the appeal was decided and this resulted in dismissal of the appeal of the petitioner.
This order passed by the appellate authority was again challenged in this Court.
This Court in M.P. No. 277 of 1984 quashed the order and gave a direction on 18th February, 1985 to decide the appeal after hearing the petitioner.
Thereafter on 2nd May, 1985 order Annexure P/1 was passed.
It was held that the order by which the petitioner was removed from service is null and void and as noticed above, a direction was given to reinstate the employee but without payment of backwages.
As noticed above, the employee has challenged the non-grant of backwages and the employer has challenged the order by which the employee has been ordered to be reinstated.
5.
So far as writ petition No. 644 of 1986 is concerned, a preliminary objection has been taken that the petition is not maintainable because resolution of the Society authorising filing of the petition has not been placed on the record.
It is contended that it is only after the society which is a corporate body has applied its mind, a petition could be preferred in this Court.
To controvert this preliminary objection, the petitioner society has pleaded that the Secretary of the society is authorised by the byelaws to take legal action in the matters which are in the interest of the society.
6.
The legal position in this regard may be noticed.
7.
It is settled law that a corporate body has to express its Will through a resolution.
This was so stated by the Supreme Court in the case of Vice Chancellor, Utkal University v. SK Ghosh, AIR 1954 SC 217.
It was held that a legal entity has neither a living mind nor voice.
It can only express its Will in a formal way by a formal resolution and so can only act in its corporate capacity by resolutions properly considered, carried and duly recorded in the manner laid down by its constitution.
The record of the present petition does not indicate that any resolution was passed by the Managing Committee of the petitioner-society and as such, the present petition filed by its secretary is not maintainable.
8.
Reference may also be made to Udat Bhagat Ram Nazool Co-operative Society v. Leekal Singh and others, 1986(1) Punjab Legal Reports and Statutes 37 wherein the requirement of initiating proceedings preceded by a valid reason was held to be mandatory.
It was observed that a body corporate is to act by passing resolution authorising its chairman or officer to act on its behalf.
In the absence of any such resolution no officer or office holder of the body corporate can act on its behalf suo motu.
The necessary authorisation is a must before an officer or a member of such a society can act on its behalf.
9.
It would be pertinent to point out that the question as to whether a particular litigation is to be initiated or not; a decision is to be taken by the corporate body and after this decision is taken then the person who is competent to take such action can take further action in terms of the byelaws.
10.
In Bawa Bhagwan Dass v. Municipal Committee, Ropar, AIR 1943 Lahore 518, an appeal was preferred by the Executive Officer on behalf of the Municipal Committee.
Its maintainability was objected to.
It was argued on behalf of the Municipal Committee that on account of the provisions contained in Punjab Municipal Executive Officers Act, 1931, the Executive Officer could legitimately file the appeal.
This contention was repelled and it was held that the appeal would become competent only when the Municipal Committee by resolution decides to file the same.
Thus, the final decision of the corporate body to take proceedings is a must.
11.
Again a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Municipal Committee, Bhatinda v. Sadhu Singh, (1987) 2 Punjab Legal Reports and Statutes 18 : AIR 1986 Pb.
& Hry.
294 : 1986 R.R.R.
135 came to the same conclusion as was arrived at by the Lahore High Court.
It was observed as under :  "It will thus be seen from a perusal of the aforementioned judgments that in none of them it has been laid down that besides passing a resolution deciding to file an appeal, the Municipal Committee must necessarily pass a separate resolution vesting authority in the Executive Officer to file the same.
The ratio of all these judgments is that before filing an appeal a corporate body like the Municipal Committee must pass a resolution deciding to file the same.
We have no quarrel with this proposition of law."
12.
In this case, there is nothing on the record to show that the society in question had applied its mind.
As noticed above, it is only after the decision is taken by the corporate body the person who is authorised under the rules and regulations can take further proceedings.
13.
Accordingly, I am of the view that there is no valid resolution passed by the petitioner society and therefore, the writ petition was not properly filed and is not maintainable.
14.
So far as the petition filed by the employee is concerned, as noticed above, he is aggrieved against the order of non-grant of full backwages for the period during which he was kept out of employment.
15.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent has argued that notwithstanding the dismissal of the writ petition preferred by the petitioner-society, he is within his rights to contend that the order Annexure P/1 was not validly passed.
16.
One of the arguments advanced by the employer is that the order passed by this Court in M.P. No. 227 of 1984 decided on 18th February, 1985 be not looked into because the society was not been heard in the matter.
A perusal of annexure P/5 shows that the society was impleaded as a respondent in the above petition and figures at Sl.
No. 4.
This Court gave a direction that the appellate authority has not taken note of Rule 10 of the Adhiniyam referred to above.
A direction was accordingly given to decide the appeal in accordance with the rules referred to above.
17.
In view of the direction given by this Court, the matter was examined by the appellate authority and as noticed above the appellate authority came to the conclusion that the order of termination of services of the employee passed by the society is to be treated as null and void as it was not in conformity with the provisions of the Adhiniyam.
The judgment given by this Court was not challenged in appeal and attained finality.
As such when the appellate authority decided the case in terms of the directions given by this Court and the reasoning given by the appellate authority is that there was non-compliance of the rules of the aforesaid Adhiniyam.
This reasoning cannot be taken as an exception.
18.
With regard to the question whether the employee is entitled to backwages or not and if backwages are to be given then what should be the quantum may now be examined.
19.
The learned counsel appearing for the employee has placed reliance on a decision given by Hon'ble Shri Justice AK Mathur in Datia Central Cooperative Bank Ltd v. Prabhu Dayal Dwivedi 1994 RN 269.
According to him, the employee is entitled to full backwages on the same reasoning which was made applicable in the aforementioned case.
20.
It may be seen that in Sevaram v. Board of Revenue, 1983 MPLJ 645, the order of termination of the employee was set aside and a direction was given to grant him full pecuniary benefits.
Similar is the opinion expressed in Gwalior Distt.
Co-operative Central Bank v. Mannilal, 1986 RN 8.
21.
As against the above, reference may be made to MPSRTC v. Mathura Prasad Sharma, 1991(2) MPJR SC 176, wherein backwages were denied because the employee had remained absent without leave for long duration.
The other decisions taking the same view are : Jitendra Singh Rathore v. Shri Baidhyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd., (1984) 3 SCC 5 and Kashi Prasad v. District Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Tikamgarh, 1993(1) MPJR 362.
22.
Taking note of all the aforementioned cases, Hon'ble Shri Justice AK Mathur in Datia Central Cooperative Bank Ltd (supra) observed as under :  "From a review of all the cases mentioned above it appears that no hard and fast rule can be laid down that in which case the back wages should be allowed or in which case half back wages should be allowed or in which case total back wages should be denied.
All the cases have been decided on their peculiar facts, but in the present case, the order of termination has been set aside by the Board of Revenue as a result of the defect in the departmental inquiry and the incumbent had reached to the post of Manager and more than 20 years have been elapsed, therefore, it is neither expedient to order fresh inquiry nor it would be just and proper to deny petitioner back wages.
Therefore, keeping in view equity, I direct that the order of the Board of Revenue to the extent of denying the petitioner back wages is set aside.
Nor it is expedient now after a lapse of more than 20 years to hold an inquiry against the stale claim and more so, the petitioner is said to be due to retire somewhere in June, 1994."
23.
In HMT Limited v. Labour Court, Ernakulam, (1994) 2 SCC 38, the dispute related to dismissal had remained pending for 14 years.
The Supreme Court awarded 60% backwages.
24.
In the case of Dr. RC Tyagi, (1994) 2 SCC 416, the Supreme Court granted backwages to the extent of one-third.
25.
This Court while deciding second appeal No. 68 of 1993 in the case of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board v. Parvat Singh, granted payment of one half backwages.
26.
Thus, the question as to whether the employee is to be granted full backwages or nor is a question which is to be determined on the facts of each case.
The employer has contended that no finding has been recorded by the appellate authority to the effect that the employee was not gainfully employed.
The employee has also made a vague suggestion that he could not secure any other employment and remained out of employment for none of his efforts.
However, taking note of the facts and circumstances of the case and in view of the law laid down in the aforementioned judgments, the petition filed by the employee is allowed to the extent that he would be entitled to backwages to the extent of 50 per cent.
27.
The petition filed by the employer is dismissed.
The petition filed by the employee is allowed to the extent indicated above.