NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge affirming in appeal the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
2.
Briefly put, plaintiff, a Sub Divisional Officer with the Punjab State Electricity Board, was inflicted punishment of stoppage of one annual increment with cummutative effect.
Aggrieved by this order, the plaintiff instituted a suit for declaration to challenge the same.
3.
The defendants filed written statement and alleged that the order is legal and valid and the same has been passed after observing all the requisite formalities of law and rules.
It was further stated that the suit was not maintainable in the present form; that the civil court has no jurisdiction and that no cause of action has accrued to the plaintiff.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, a number of issues were framed.
Primarily, the contest revolved around issue No. 1 which reads : "whether the order No. 253/BEG dated 2131983 is illegal, void etc ?
OPP" The trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
The other issues relating to maintainability of the suit; jurisdiction of the Court etc were decided against the defendants.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
5.
The appellate Court re-examined the matter but found no ground to differ with the conclusion arrived at by the trial Court and so dismissed the appeal.
6.
Challenging the concurrent findings of the Courts below terming these to be wholly illegal and unwarranted, counsel for the appellant once again gave resume of the events leading to the passing of the order and urged that the impugned order is unsustainable in law in view of the latest decision of the apex Court in case reported as Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1990(6) S.L.R.
73 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
30.
Elaborating the counsel urged that the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971, is in pari materia with Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Both these set of rules envisage imposing of penalties which are minor penalties and major penalties.
Under caption minor penalties, minor penalties provided are : (i) censure; (ii) withholding of his promotions; (iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Board by negligence or breach of orders; (iv) withholding of increments of pay.
On the other hand, major penalties are : reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period, with further direction as to whether or not the employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay; etc. Vide office order No. 473 dated 24183, minor penalty at (iv) was amended i.e. the earlier provision was substituted with the following : "withholding of increments of pay with or without cumulative effect."
According to the counsel, the precise point came up for consideration in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra) and the Court was pleased to hold that the same will fall within the ambit of a major penalty hence envisaging an enquiry before such a punishment could be imposed.
Thus examined inthe light of this judicial pronouncement, the punishment imposed falls within the ambit of major penalty and so the impugned order admittedly having been passed without holding such an inquiry is legally unsustainable.
7.
As none on behalf of the respondents has cared to put in appearance, the matter has been examined in the light of the submissions made by the counsel for the appellant and as per facts on record.
The factual aspect is not in dispute i.e. imposition of punishment or stoppage of one annual increment with future effect.
Vide the amendment dated 24.1.1983 made in the rules, withholding of increments of pay with or without cumulative effect has been put under the category of minor penalty.
Superficially examined, it can be said that in such a case no enquiry is envisaged and so the order is valid.
However, on close examination and in view of the authoritative pronouncement of the apex Courts the results are quite different.
The apex Court has examined this matter in the light of the rules and its effect and held that withholding of increments of pay simpliciter undoubtedly is a minor penalty within the meaning of Rule 5(iv).
But when such a penalty is imposed withholding one or two increments with cumulative effect, it indisputably means that the increments earned by the employee is to be cut off as a measure of penalty for ever in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
In other words, the clock is put back to a lower stage in the time scale of pay and it is after the expiry of period of any stipulation that he starts getting a higher pay from that stage afresh.
Thus, the insidious effect of the impugned order by necessary implication is that the appellant is reduced in his time scale.
The Court accordingly reversed the Division Bench of this Court in case reported as Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab and others, ILR 1985(2) Punjab & Haryana 193 and held "with respect we are unable to agree with the High Court.
If the literal interpretation is adopted the learned Judges may be right to arrive at that conclusion.
But if the effect is kept at the back of the mind, it would always be so, the result will be the conclusion as we have arrived at.
If the reasoning of the High Court is given acceptance, it would empower the disciplinary authority to impose, under the garb of stoppage of increments, of earning future increments inthe time scale of pay even permanently without expressly stating so.
This preposterous consequence cannot be permitted to be permeated.
Rule 5(iv) does not empower the disciplinary authority to impose penalty of withholding of pay with cumulative effect except after holding inquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
Then the order would be without jurisdiction or authority of law, and it would be per se void.
Considering from this angle we have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule 5(v) of the Rules; it is a major penalty and imposition of the impugned penalty without equity is per se illegal.
"The Court was examining the case in the light of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, which noticed above are pari materia with the rules framed by the Punjab State Electricity Board.
No doubt, the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971 stating that withholding of increments of pay with or without cumulative effect is minor penalty, yet on account of this amendment the same cannot be construed to be a minor penalty in the light of decision in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra).
Accordingly, I accept the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court below.
No costs.