TS Doabia, J - Challenge is made to the award given by the Labour Court, Gwalior, by which respondent No. 1 was ordered to be reinstated with a further direction that he be paid full back wages.
This challenge is made both on merits as also on the plea of jurisdiction.
It is contended that in view of the provisions contained in Section 55 of the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, the Industrial Court had no jurisdiction.
With a view to supplement this argument it is further contended that the respondent No. 1 having already resorted to his remedy under the Co-operative Societies Act, could not shift to the Labour Court.
Before adverting to notice the above jurisdictional issue and other issues raised on merit, facts in brief be noticed.
2.
The respondent No. 1 was appointed as a Clerk with the petitioner Bank.
This happened on 1st April, 1964.
His services were brought to an end on 7th September, 1982.
Order of termination has been placed on record as annexure P-3.
Order annexure P-3 recites the fact that the services of respondent workman are no longer required and these were ordered to be terminated by giving one month's notice.
It is this order which was challenged before the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
This was adjudicated upon and order annexure P-8 came to be passed.
As noticed above the Labour Court ordered the reinstatement with full back wages.
It is this order which is being challenged on the ground :-  (i) that in view of the bar created by Section 65 of M.P. Co- operative Societies Act, the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to go into the matter; (ii) the workman having resorted to some remedies under the Co- operative Societies Act was not within his rights to shift to remedies provided under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; (iii) that the order annexure P-3 should not be looked at its face value and the real reason for passing this order should be examined; it is contended that the respondent No. 1 was absent for a long time and therefore, his services were rightly brought to an end by issuing annexure P-3.
3.
The question as to whether the Labour Court would have jurisdiction in spite of the fact that some remedy has been provided under the M.P. Co- operative Societies Act, 1960 be examined first.
But before doing so it would be apt to notice the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dimakuchi Tea Estate (Assam Cha Karamchari Sangh) v. Dimakuchi Tea Estate, AIR 1958 SC.
353.
SK Das, J (as His Lordship then was) speaking for the Court summed up the principles of the Act as follows :-  (i) promotion and measures for securing and preserving amity and good relations between the employer and workmen; (ii) an investigation of industrial disputes between employers and employers, employers and workmen or workmen and workmen, with a right to representation by registered trade union or a federation of trade unions or an association of employers or a federation or association of employers; (iii) prevention of illegal strikes and lockouts; (iv) relief to workmen in the matter of layoff and retrenchment; and (v) collective bargaining; The above principle was again highlighted in a later case reported as Life Insurance Corporation of India v. D.J Bahadur, AIR 1980 SC 2181.
VR Krishna Iyer, J, observed that the Industrial Disputes Act is a benign measure which seeks to prevent Industrial tensions, provides the mechanics of the dispute and set up the necessary infrastructure so that the energies of the partners in production be not dissipated in counter-productive battles and assurance of Industrial Justice may create a climate of goodwill.
In the background of the aforementioned purpose of the Industrial Disputes Act some decisions which deal directly with similar issue be examined.
4.
In Jalandhar Transport Co-operative Society, Jalandhar v. Punjab State, AIR 1959 Pb.
34 the question which arose for consideration was whether an Industrial Dispute between the Co-operative Society constituted under the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1954 and its workmen could under the law be referred to forums established under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It was held that it could be so referred.
In DM Co-operative Bank v. Dali Chand, AIR 1969 SC 1320 the issue which came up for determination before the Supreme Court was whether the dispute between Dali Chand and the Bank was required to be referred to the Registrar under Section 91 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1961.
In the above case the Bank had become the owner of the property under a certificate of transfer issued by the Collector of Bombay.
The physical possession of the property was also handed over to the Bank.
A notice was issued to Dali Chand and other persons similarly situated to quit, vacate and deliver the vacant possession of the building.
It was concluded that this was a dispute between a tenant and a member of the Bank in a building which was subsequently acquired by the Bank and that the provisions of Rent Act are not affected.
In Co-operative Central Bank Ltd v. Addl.
Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad, AIR 1970 SC 245 an Industrial Dispute arose between the Central Co-operative Bank in the State of Andhra Pradesh and their workmen.
The principal question related to the determination of service conditions and transfer of employees of the Bank.
It was held that this dispute was not covered by the Co-operative Societies Act as applicable to the State of Andhra Pradesh and that such a dispute could only be dealt with by the Industrial Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In Gujarat State Co.-op.
Land Development Bank Ltd v. PR Mankad, AIR 1979 SC 1203, one Babu Bhai Nagrecha was serving as an Additional Supervisor in one of the Branches of the Co-operative Bank.
His services were terminated.
He challenged that termination order by filing an application before the Labour Court.
The Supreme Court observed that such a dispute does not touch the business of the society and as such could be adjudicated upon by the Labour Court.
In another later decision reported as Allahabad District Co-operative Ltd. v. Hanuman Dutt Tewari AIR 1982 SC 120 a question arose whether a suit filed by Hanuman Dutt Tewari for a declaration that his retrenchment is bad is barred by the provisions of Section 70 of the U.P.
Co-operative Societies Act, 1966.
It was held that the dispute was not barred.
5.
The precise question was considered by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Rashtriya Khadan Mazdoor Sahakari Samiti Ltd, Durg v. Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Jabalpore, 1975 M.P.L.J 583.
The various decisions on the point including some noticed above were taken into consideration.
The Full Bench was seized with the determination of the question as to whether the earlier view of the Division Bench in the case of Sagar Motor Transport Karamchari Union, Sagar v. Amar Kamgar Passenger Transport Co. and another, AIR 1969 MP 46 holding that the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court is completely ousted is the correct enunciation of law.
The Full Bench concluded :  (i) that there is no repugnancy between Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the MP Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 and both can exist side by side  (ii) that the two Acts cover different fields.
Section 55 of the Co-operative Societies Act cannot cover all disputes between the society and its employees and that an Industrial Dispute connotes a different concept.
(iii) that the Co-operative Societies Act does not override the comprehensive provisions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It was accordingly held that the view expressed by the Division Bench is not the correct enunciation of law and that the Industrial Court or the Labour Court would have jurisdiction in the matter.
As a matter of fact in Sohan Lal v. Guna Central Coop.
Bank Ltd, 1992 Revenue Nirnaya 258 a Division Bench after referring to the Full Bench decision concluded that it is well settled that an employee falling within the definition of term 'workman' under Section 2(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 can also avail of the remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
6.
Reference be made to a Full Bench decision of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Sonepat Co-operative Sugar Mills v. Presiding Officer Labour Court, AIR 1986 Pb.
& Hr.
386.
The Full Bench was of the view that the Labour Court or the authorities constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are fully trained in law and are best suited for adjudication of industrial disputes.
Such legal training may not be available with the Registrar of the Co-operative Societies.
The fact that the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal is presided over by a person who has been a Judge of the High Court or Additional District Judge was taken note of.
It was accordingly concluded that the provisions of the Haryana Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 which sought to exclude the jurisdiction of the Labour Court and the Industrial Tribunal would be arbitrary in nature.
At the same time reference was made to para 28 of the Judgment in PR Mankad's case, AIR 1979 SC 1203 (1203) which reads as under :-  "The matter can be looked at from another angle also.
The law of Industrial Disputes or Industrial Relations is a special law dealing with rights and obligations specially created by it.....in accordance with the maximum generalia specialibus non derogant.
Therefore, nothing in these general provisions can derogate from the BIR Act and the Coop.
Societies Act must read to the special provisions in the Bombay Industrial Relations Act whenever a dispute clearly comes within the language of the later Act."
Thus the conclusion is inevitable that the Industrial Court had the requisite jurisdiction and the decision was rightly given by it.
7.
The further question as to whether the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 could be resorted to when the respondent No. 1 had pursued some remedies under the M.P. Coop.
Societies Act, 1960 may also be examined.
Reference is being made to annexure P-7 and P-7/A.
A petition was preferred before the Registrar.
Some stay order was also passed.
As to what further happened to these proceedings is not apparent from the file.
The employer did not take any step with a view to bring these facts on the record.
The reference in this case under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was made on 13th July, 1983.
It is not brought on the record whether these proceedings were taken earlier or after that.
As an abstract proposition of law it may be possible to contend that once a workman resorts to certain proceedings under the ordinary law then he must stick to them.
Such a conclusion may be discernible from the decision given in the case of Premier Automobile Ltd v. Kamlekar Shanta Ram Wadke, AIR 1975 SC 2228.
The issue in the above case was as to whether a workman can seek remedy before a Civil Court with regard to a matter which may equally be covered by Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Supreme Court held that if the right was available under the General Law then remedy could be had both under the Code of Civil Procedure as also under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
If the right was conferred by industrial disputes Act, 1947 then the civil Court would have no jurisdiction.
It was further concluded that where remedy was provided and available under the Code of Civil Procedure before the Civil Court as also under the Industrial Disputes Act, then it would be apt to direct the concerned workman to follow and pursue that remedy to which a workman has followed to its logical end and he could not shift in between.
The four conclusions laid down in this regard are relevant and be noticed :-  1.
If the dispute is not an industrial dispute, nor does it relate to enforcement of any other right under the Act the remedy lies only in the Civil Court.
2.
If the dispute is an industrial dispute arising out of a right or liability under the general common law and not under the Act, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is alternative, leaving it to the election of the suiter concerned to choose his remedy for the relief which is competent to be granted in a particular remedy.
3.
If the industrial dispute relates to the enforcement of a right or an obligation created under the Act, then the only remedy available to the suitor is to get an adjudication under the Act.
4.
If the right which is sought to be enforced is a right created under the Act such as Chapter VA then the remedy for its enforcement is either Section 33-C or the raising of an industrial dispute, as the case may be.
Thus the workman was at liberty to pursue his remedy before the Industrial Court.
It has not been brought on the record as to when alternate proceedings were resorted to.
It has also not been brought on the record as to what was the precise nature of that dispute.
This has not been elaborated.
As such no fault can be found with the order passed by the Labour Court.
8.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that order Annexure P-3 should not be taken at its face value and that the court should look into the circumstances which led to the passing of the impugned order Annexure P-3.
Annexure P-3 specifically recites that the services of the respondent are no longer required.
He was given one month's wages in lieu of notice.
No retrenchment compensation was given.
As such no fault can be found with the reasoning adopted by the Labour Court.
Requirement to pay retrenchment compensation is a sine qua non for a valid order of termination.
See the following decisions :  1.
State Bank of India v. Sundarampney, (A.I.R. 1976 SC Page 1111).
2.
Hindustan Steel Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, (A.I.R. 1977 SC page 31).
3.
Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, (A.I.R. 1980 SC Page 1219).
4.
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhunath Mukherjee, (A.I.R. 1978 SC Page 8).
5.
Mohanlal v Management of M/s Bharat Electronics, (A.I.R. 1981 SC Page 1253).
6.
L Robert D'souza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railway, (A.I.R. 1982 SC Page 864).
As such no fault can be found with the reasoning given by the Labour Court.
Even if it be presumed that the petitioner brought an end to the relationship of Master and Servant on account of continued absence of employee even then this would not be sustainable as no enquiry was held in this regard.
Requirement to hold an enquiry is a must.
The concept of automatic termination of service on account of over stay was considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492.
Service Regulations provided that in case an employee overstayed his leave, then the concerned employee would be deemed to have sacrificed his service.
The argument of the State of Rajasthan that relationship of master and servant stood snapped in view of the aforementioned provisions was negatived.
The observations made by the Supreme Court, in this regard may be noticed :  "The regulation, no doubt, speaks of reinstatement but it really comes to this that a person would not be reinstated if he is ordered to be discharged or removed from the service.
The question of reinstatement can only be considered if it is first considered discharged from service.
Whichever way one looks at the matter, the order of the Government involves a termination of the service.
The Regulation involves a punishment for overstaying one's leave and the burden is thrown on the incumbent to secure reinstatement by showing cause.
It is true that the Government may visit to punishment of discharge or removal from service on a person who has absented himself by over-staying his leave, but we do not think that Government can order a person to be discharged from service without at least telling him that they propose to remove him and giving him an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be removed.
If this is done the incumbent will be entitled to move against the punishment for, if his plea succeeds, he will not be removed and no question reinstatement will arise.
It may be convenient to describe him as seeking reinstatement but this is not tantamount to saying that because the person will only be reinstated by an appropriate authority that the removal is automatic and outside the protection of Article 311.
A removal is removal and if it is punishment for overstaying one's leave an opportunity must be given to the person against whom such an order is proposed, no matter how the Regulation describes it.
To give no opportunity is to go against Article 211 and this is what has happened here."
After making the aforementioned observation, it was observed that the concerned employee was entitled to an opportunity to show cause against the proposed removal from service on the ground that he had overstayed his leave.
The above judgment of the Supreme Court was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in All India Trade Union of Food Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPRJ 129.
The decision given in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1409 and SD Gupta v. State of Bihar, AIR 1973 Patna 431 was referred to.
The same view was expressed by this Court in Nagar Palika Parishad Lahar v. Ram Naresh Rajoriya, 1994(4) SCT 261(MP).
The last argument with regard to grant of full wages may also be examined.
In Hindustan Tin Works (P) Ltd. v. Employees of Hindustan Tin Works (P) Ltd., AIR 1979 SC 75 it was held that grant of full back wages is the normal rule.
It was further held that it is for the employer to establish that the workman was gainfully employed.
This has not happened in this case.
Nothing has been brought on the record with a view to show that the workman was gainfully employed as such no exception can be taken to order passed by the Labour Court.
This petition is without merit and is dismissed.