GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing of order Annexure P1 dated 1431995 whereby respondent imposed a penalty of censure on the petitioner.
2.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the relevant facts are that while holding the post of Superintending Engineer the petitioner was served with memorandum Annexure P4 dated 1871991 for holding an enquiry against him order Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
This memorandum was accompanied by a statement of charges, statement of allegations, list of witnesses and list of documents.
The petitioner sought copy of the fact finding report dated 651991, copies of the statements of witnesses recorded during the course of preliminary enquiry and a copy of the complaint.
A copy of the preliminary report was made available to the petitioner but not the annexures.
He ethereafter submitted a reply and controverted the allegations levelled against him.
The enquiry was conducted by the Joint Secretary, Food and Supplies Department, Punjab in respect of the charges levelled against the petitioner and one Shri.
BR Bhatia (Executive Engineer).
During the course of enquiry, the petitioner made an application for assistance by an Advocate on the ground that the Department was being represented by a legally trained person.
The request of the petitioner for being provided with the assistance of a lawyer was rejected and he was told that he can get assistance of a government servant.
The enquiry officer submitted his report Annexure P15 dated 531993 and held that the allegation of committing financial irregularities by splitting of work orders is proved against the petitioner.
The petitioner was given a copy of the enquiry report and he filed a detailed representation running into about 28 pages.
Thereafter, the impugned order of punishment came to be passed by the Government.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the ground of violation of procedure prescribed by the Rules and the principles of natural justice.
3.
The respondent has supported the impugned order by pleading that the petitioner was afforded full opportunity of defence and after thoroughly considering the evidence recorded by the enquiry officer, the Government has found him guilty of committing financial irregularities by splitting of work order and ordering purchase of consumable articles far in excess of requirement and, therefore, the punishment of censure awarded to him is quite just and proper.
4.
In support of the writ petition, Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the enquiry held against the petitioner is vitiated due to violation of the principles of natural justice on the following counts :-  (i) Copies of the annexures which formed part of the preliminary enquiry report were not supplied to the petitioner.
(ii) The petitioner was denied opportunity of representation by a lawyer even though the departmental representative was a legally trained person.
(iii) The enquiry officer permitted the presenting officer to produce additional evidence after the evidence had been closed.
(iv) The enquiry officer suo moto examined the witnesses even though there is no provision for such course to be adopted by the enquiry officer.
(v) The Government did not apply its mind to the enquiry report and recorded a finding of guilt against the petitioner in respect of an allegation on which the finding recorded by the enquiry officer is favourable to the petitioner.
5.
The learned counsel challenged the order of punishment on the grounds; (a) that the punishment order is a non-speaking order inasmuch as the Government has not at all considered the various points raised by the petitioner to challenge the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer and the findings recorded by him on the issue of alleged financial irregularities; and (b) the Government has punished the petitioner for a charge which did not form part of the charge sheet and the statement of allegations and on which no finding could have been recorded by the enquiry officer.
6.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab argued that non-supply of the copies of the annexures which formed part of the preliminary enquiry report has not resulted in the violation of the rules of natural justice because the preliminary report has not been made basis for holding the petitioner guilty of the allegations.
Mrs. Tuli argued that there is no provision in the Rules, which permits a government servant to seek assistance of a lawyer in a departmental enquiry and, therefore, the rejection of the prayer made by the petitioner for engaging a lawyer does not amount to the violation of the principles of natural justice.
On the issue of violation of the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer, Mrs. Tuli argued that full opportunity was afforded to the petitioner to cross-examine all the witnesses and to produce oral as well as documentary evidence and, therefore, the petitioner cannot complain of the violation of the Rules.
Mrs. Tuli defended the impugned order of punishment and argued that the Government has awarded minimum penalty to the petitioner because he has been found guilty of financial irregularities.
She submitted that the committee appointed by the Government had clearly opined that the petitioner had committed serious financial irregularities by splitting up the work orders so as to keep them within his competence and that huge quantity of consumable articles was purchased without requirement causing loss to the public exchequer.
She further submitted that the allegation of splitting of work orders can be read as a part of charge No. 1 and allegation No. 1.
7.
Coming to the grievance of the petitioner that he was not given an opportunity to defend himself through an Advocate, I may take note of Rule 8(8) of the Rules.
The same reads as under :-  "The Government employee may take the assistance of any other Government employee or a retired Government employee to present the case on his behalf, but may not engage a legal practitioner for the purpose unless the Presenting Officer appointed by the punishing authority is a legal practitioner, or the punishing authority having regard to the circumstances of the case, so permits."
A plain reading of the above quoted provision shows that ordinarily a Government employee is entitled to take assistance of any other Government employee or a retired Government employee but he cannot engage a legal practitioner.
However, if the Presenting Officer appointed by the punishing authority is a legal practitioner, the Government employee has a right to seek assistance of a legal practitioner.
Discretion has also been conferred on the punishing authority to permit a Government employee to take assistance of a legal practitioner in particular circumstances of a case.
In this case, the petitioner had applied for being permitted to seek assistance of a lawyer because the presenting officer-Shri R.s.
Hundal was not only a legally trained person but had also worked as a Prosecuting Sub Inspector in Courts for ten years and had handled Court cases on behalf of the Government.
The enquiry officer declined the request of the petitioner for engaging a lawyer without assigning any reason.
In may opinion, rejection of the request of the petitioner is legally unsustainable.
Admittedly, the petitioner was pitted against a legally trained mind.
The presenting officer had acted as a prosecuting Sub Inspector in Courts for ten years and as the petitioner felt handicapped in defending himself against the legally trained mind, he sought assistance of legal practitioner.
The Government was, therefore, under an obligation to provide the petitioner with such assistance.
8.
In CL Subramaniam v. The Collector of Customs, Cochin, 1973(2) S.L.R.
415, while interpreting Rule 15(5) of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1967, which is pari materia to Rule 8(8) of the Rules, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that if a person is pitted against a trained prosecutor who may not be a legal practitioner, he is entitled to engage a legal practitioner for his defence.
The principle laid down by the Supreme Court is as under :-  "The appellant was pitted against a trained prosecutor who though not was a legal practitioner.
The Disciplinary Authority did not consider the request of appellant to engage a legal practitioner to assist him on the ground that the person appointed by the Disciplinary Authority to present the charges was not a legal practitioner.
The grounds urged by the appellant in support of his request for permission to engage a legal practitioner were by no means irrelevant.
The fact that the case against the appellant was being handled by a trained prosecutor was a good ground for allowing the appellant to engage a legal practitioner to defend him lest the scales should be weighed against him.
The Disciplinary Authority completely ignored that circumstance.
Therefore, that authority clearly failed to exercise the power conferred on it under the rule.
It is not unlikely that the Disciplinary Authority refused to permit the appellant to engage a legal practitioner in the circumstances mentioned earlier had caused serious prejudice to the appellant and had amounted to a denial of reasonable opportunity to defend himself."
9.
In The Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay v. Dilip Kumar Raghavendranath Nadkarni and others, AIR 1983 SC 109, the Supreme Court again examined the same issue and while interpreting Regulation No. 12(8) of the Bombay Port Trust Employees Regulations, 1976, their Lordships held that where in an enquiry before a domestic tribunal, the delinquent officer is pitted against a legally trained mind, if he seeks permission to appear through a legal practitioner, the refusal to grant this request would amount to denial of a reasonable request to defend himself and essentially the principles of natural justice would be violated.
In taking the said view, their Lordships relied on the observations made in AK Roy v Union of India, AIR 1972 SC 710 in which the Apex Court had recognised the new concept given to the words 'life and liberty' under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court further held that "the enquiry officer combines the judge and prosecutor rolled into one.
Witnesses are generally employees of the employer who directs an enquiry into misconduct.
This is sufficient to raise serious apprehensions.
Add to this uneven scales, the weight of legally trained minds on behalf of employer simultaneously denying that opportunity to delinquent employee.
The weighted scales and tilted balance can only be partly restored if the delinquent is given the same legal assistance as the employer enjoys.
Justice must not only be done but must seem to have been done is not an euphemism for Court alone, it applies with equal vigour and rigour to all those who must be responsible for fair play in action.
And a quasi-judicial tribunal cannot view the matter with equanimity on inequality of representation."
10.
In Pett v. Greyhound Racing Association Ltd, (1968) 2 All E.R.
545, an enquiry was directed to be held into the withdrawal of a trainer's dog from a race at a stadium licensed by the National Greyhound Racing Club.
The rules of the Club did not prescribe the procedure to be followed in such an enquiry.
The licensee charged with misconduct sought permission to be represented by counsel and Solicitor at the enquiry, which request was turned down.
Lord Denning held that the action of denial of representation through counsel was unjustified and observed, "I should have thought, therefore, that when a man's reputation or livelihood is at stake, he not only has a right to speak by his own mouth.
He has also a right to speak by counsel or solicitor."
In view of the decisions of the Supreme Court, it must be held that when an enquiry is held under the rules and the employer is represented by an officer who is legally trained, the employee has a right to seek assistance of a legally trained person including a legal practitioner and the employer cannot decline the request of the delinquent to engage legal practitioner for his assistance only on the ground that the departmental representative is not a legal practitioner.
11.
In this case, it is clearly borne out from the facts that the petitioner's request for being represented through an Advocate was turned down by the respondent without any cogent reason and thereby the petitioner was prevented from effectively defending himself in the enquiry held against him.
As a logical corollary, it must be held that the proceedings of the enquiry held against the petitioner are vitiated by violation of rules of natural justice.
12.
The grievance of the petitioner regarding non-supply of the copies of the documents which formed part of the preliminary enquiry report, is, in my opinion, not sufficient to affect the validity of the enquiry.
It is true that the petitioner was not given copies of the documents along with the preliminary enquiry report but neither the enquiry officer nor the Government has relied upon the preliminary enquiry for the purpose of holding the petitioner guilty of the allegations of the financial irregularities by splitting the work order or of having purchased goods without requirement.
It can, therefore, be said that the preliminary enquiry report did not constitute an adverse material which was relied upon by the enquiry officer and the Government for holding the petitioner guilty of the charge levelled against him.
The petitioner cannot, therefore, be heard to say that he has been denied opportunity of hearing because copies of the documents were not made available to him.
It is significant to mention here that the petitioner did not submit before the enquiry officer that the documents forming part of the preliminary enquiry were necessary to enable him to effectively cross- examine the witnesses.
If that would have been the situation it may have been possible to hold that the denial of copies of the documents forming part of the preliminary enquiry resulted in denial of the effective opportunity of hearing.
It would also be a different situation where the preliminary enquiry report or the documents forming part of it are made basis of adverse findings recorded by the enquiry officer or the Government uses the same for punishing the delinquent.
In that situation, it would be necessary for the enquiry officer and the Government to make available the copies of those documents which are being relied upon for the purpose of recording a finding of guilt against the delinquent.
13.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that examination of additional witnesses by the presenting officer after close of evidence was not permissible, is based on an erroneous assumption that this course is prohibited by the Rules.
Rule 8(14) to Rule 8(18) of the Rules read as under :-  "8(14) - On the date fixed for the inquiry, the oral and documentary evidence by which the articles of charge are proposed to be proved shall be produced by or on behalf of the punishing authority.
The witnesses shall be examined by or on behalf of the presenting officer and may be cross-examined by or on behalf of the Government employee.
The presenting officer shall be entitled to re-examine the witnesses on any points on which they have been cross-examined, but not on any new matter, without the leave of the inquiring authority.
The inquiring authority may also put such questions to the witnesses as it thinks fit.
8(15) - If it shall appear necessary before the close of the case on behalf of the punishing authority, the inquiring authority may, in its discretion, allow the presenting officer to produce evidence not included in the list given to the government employee or may itself call for new evidence or recall and re-examine any witnesses and in such case the Government employee shall be entitled to have, if he demands it, a copy of the list of further evidence proposed to be produced and an adjournment of the inquiry for three clear days before the production of such new evidence, exclusive of the date of adjournment and the day to which the inquiry is adjourned.
The inquiring authority may also allow the Government employee to produce new evidence if it is of the opinion that the production of such evidence is necessary in the interest of justice.
Provided that new evidence shall not be permitted or called for or any witness shall not be recalled to fill up any gap in the evidence.
Such evidence may be called for only when there is an inherent lacuna or defect in the evidence which has been produced originally.
8(16) - When the case for the punishing authority is closed, the Government employee shall be required to state his defence orally or in writing as he may prefer.
If the defence is made orally it shall be recorded and the Government employee shall be required to sign the record.
In either case, a copy of the statement of defence shall be given to the presenting officer, if any, appointed.
8(17) The evidence behalf of the Government employee shall then be produced.
The Government employee may examine himself on his own behalf, if he so prefers either at the outset or after the conclusion of examination of the witnesses produced by him.
The witnesses produced by the Government employee shall then be examined and shall be liable to cross- examination, re-examination and examination by the inquiring authority according to the provision applicable to the witness for the punishing authority.
8(18) The inquiring authority may, after the Government employee closes his case, and shall, if the Government employee has not examined himself, generally question him on the circumstances, appearing against him in the evidence for the purpose of enabling the Government employee to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him."
14.
A combined reading of various clauses of Rule 8 quoted hereinabove shows that the enquiry officer has the discretion to allow the presenting officer to produce evidence not included in the list given to the delinquent employee.
He is also empowered to suo moto call for new evidence or recall and re- examine any witness.
The only condition subject to which this procedure can be adopted is that the Government employee shall be entitled to have, on demand, a copy of the list of further evidence proposed to be produced and the case can be adjourned before production of the new evidence.
The Government servant is also entitled to inspect such documents before they are taken on record.
The enquiry officer can also allow the Government servant to produce new evidence.
Another rider to the exercise of the power under the above quoted rules is that new evidence shall not be permitted or called for and no witness should be recalled to fill up the gap in the evidence.
It is, therefore, evident that the statutory rules empower the enquiry officer to permit the examination of the additional witnesses or to produce additional documents, subject to a reasonable opportunity to the delinquent employee.
This rule is nothing but one of the reflections of the principles of the natural justice and, therefore, Shri Atma Ram is not correct in contending that the enquiry officer did not have power to allow the examination of additional witnesses.
I am further of the opinion that even if the action of the enquiry officer in permitting the examination of the additional witnesses or production of additional documents is not expressly permitted under the Rules and in a given case it is treated as an irregularity, the findings of the enquiry officer and the action taken by the competent authority on the basis of the enquiry report cannot be nullified only on the ground of such irregularity.
Interference with the finding of the enquiry officer or the order of punishment on the basis of such irregularity is warranted only in a case where it is shown that the employee was not given a proper opportunity of cross-examining the additional witnesses or by producing additional evidence in defence.
It has also to be seen whether the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer has resulted in failure of justice.
Here I may also take note of Rule 19(2) of the Rules.
This Rule speaks of consideration of the appeal filed against the order of punishment.
One of the issues which the appellate authority is required to examine is whether the enquiry has been held in accordance with the Rules and the principles of natural justice or constitutional provisions and if there is a violation of rules of procedure or natural justice, it has further to be seen by the appellate authority whether such breach has resulted in failure of justice.
This Rule fortifies the conclusion that every irregularity in the conduct of the enquiry cannot be itself by a ground for declaring the order of punishment as void.
15.
The judgment of the learned single Judge in Hans Raj Gupta v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) SCT 258(P&H) : 1992(1) R.S.J.
462 on which Shri Atma Ram has placed reliance, no doubt, supports his argument but it appears that the attention of the learned single Judge was not drawn to the provisions of Rules 8(14) to 8(18) of the Rules and there is no discussion on the scheme of the Rules as a whole.
Therefore, the judgment in Hans Raj Gupta's case (supra) cannot be read as laying down a proposition of law that in every case where additional evidence is produced by the presenting officer, the proceedings of enquiry are vitiated only on the ground that the names of the additional witnesses had not been incorporated in the list supplied to the Government servant.
16.
I shall now deal with the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Government did not apply its mind to the enquiry report and recorded a finding of guilt against the petitioner in respect of the allegation on which the enquiry officer had not found the petitioner guilty.
The show cause notice Annexure P17 shows that after making a reference to the factum of initiation of enquiry, holding of the enquiry and receipt of the enquiry report, the Government recorded the following :  "After considering the enquiry report and the reply/representations thereto received from you, it has been found that you have committed evasion of financial commitments by splitting up work orders and ordering consumable items grossly in excess of the requirement.
As such, you are guilty of gross incompetence and deliberation in the performance of official duties."
A perusal of the enquiry report shows that on the issue of excess purchase of items the enquiry officer has held that the petitioner is not guilty of the allegation of having caused loss to the State Exchequer due to purchase of consumable items.
This finding of the enquiry officer has been recorded under Allegation No. 2 constituting part of the charge levelled against the petitioner.
It is, therefore, clear that the Government has disagreed with the findings of the enquiry officer but no such disagreement with the findings of the enquiry officer has been recorded in the show cause notice.
Therefore, Shri Atma Ram is right in arguing that the Government issued show cause notice without applying its mind to the findings recorded by the enquiry officer.
17.
The last argument of Shri Atma Ram relates to the order of punishment.
The first limb of his submission is that the Government has not passed a speaking order while rejecting the submission made by the petitioner in the reply filed by him in response to the show cause notice.
A look at the enquiry report and the reply to the show cause notice shows that the petitioner challenged the proceedings conducted by the enquiry officer on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice and the procedure.
He also challenged the findings recorded by the enquiry officer.
In para 5 of his reply, the petitioner has detailed various violations of Rules 8(3), 8(4), 8(8), 8(12), 8(15) and 8(17) of the Rules.
He had made a grievance that denial of opportunity of defence through a legal practitioner was unwarranted and unjustified.
He had also challenged the show cause notice issued by the Government.
The Government has rejected all the contentions of the petitioner in one line by observing that the petitioner has no satisfactory plea with regard to the allegation of committing financial irregularities by splitting work order and ordering purchase of consumable items in excess.
To be precise, I may quote para 4 of the impugned order to show as to how the Government has applied its mind to the reply filed by the petitioner :  "Sh. KB Rai, Superintending Engineer, submitted his reply vide his letter No. Spl.-1, dated 16.11.1994.
After considering the reply of Sh. KB Rai, Superintending Engineer, it has been seen that he has no satisfactory plea with regard to the allegations of committing financial irregularities by splitting up work orders and ordering consumable items grossly in excess of requirements.
As such Sh. KB Rai, Superintending Engineer is found guilty of violating the laid down procedure and financial rules and thus guilty of discharging his official duties properly."
In my opinion, the manner in which the Government has dealt with the long reply filed by the petitioner is wholly unsatisfactory.
As a quasi-judicial authority, the Government was duty bound to consider the objections raised by the petitioner in regard to the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer and then decide whether the contentions raised in the reply merit acceptance or rejection.
The requirement of speaking order is a part and parcel of the concept of natural justice which must inform every quasi-judicial order.
A speaking order is one which contains reasons for the decision/conclusion.
Such reasons cannot be supplied by other documents or evidences.
The order must speak for itself.
A conclusion running into one or two sentences cannot be equated with reasons which are required to be recorded by the quasi- judicial authority.
The word 'considered' itself implies objective application of mind by the concerned authority to the facts and evidence and a decision on the various points based on reasons.
In this case, the Government has not given reasons for rejecting the reply filed by the petitioner and, therefore, the impugned order is liable to be vitiated on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
18.
The second facet of the last contention of Shri Atma Ram is that the petitioner was not charged with the allegation of committing financial irregularities by splitting work order and, therfore, he could not be held guilty for the same and he could not be punished on the basis of such a charge.
After having carefully perused the charge sheet, the findings recorded by the enquiry officer, the show cause notice and the punishment order, I am convinced that the learned counsel for the petitioner is right in contending that the petitioner had not been charged with the allegation of having committed financial irregularities by splitting work orders.
For the reasons best known to it, the Government did not charge the petitioner with the allegation of financial irregularities by splitting work orders.
Charge No. 1 relates to loss/embezzlement to the State exchequer.
Charge No. 2 relates to lack of integrity.
Charge No. 3 relates to improper upkeep of financial accounts.
Charge No. 4 relates to lack of financial control of work.
Charge No. 5 relates to dereliction in performance of duties and Charge No. 6 is of incompetency in performance of Govt. duties.
In the first allegation levelled against the petitioner, it has been stated that the petitioner purchased non-consumable/major items without requirement and thereby caused loss to the Exchequer.
There is not an iota of inidication either in the charge or in the statement of allegations that the petitioner was to answer the allegation that he had splitted up the work orders and has, thus, committed financial irregularities.
In the absence of such charge or allegation, the enquiry officer did not have jurisdiction to record evidence on this charge much less to record a finding of guilt against the petitioner.
Similarly, the Government did not have the authority to issue show cause notice to the petitioner on the premise that he has been found guilty of financial irregularities by splitting the work orders nor could the Government punish him for such a charge which did not form part of the charge sheet.
19.
Rule 8(3) of the Rules requires that the punishing authority shall draw up or cause to be drawn up the substance of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour into definite and distinct articles of charges; a statement of imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour in support of each article of charge, which shall contain all relevant facts including any admission or confession made by the Government Servant.
Rule 8(4) of the Rules requires the punishing authority to deliver or caused to be delivered to the Government employee a copy of the articles of charge, the statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour etc.
It is, thus, evdent that it is the duty of the punishing authority to frame definite and distinct articles of charges and include all relevant facts in support of such charges.
This necessarily implies that the enquiry can be held against the delinquent only on the basis of charges framed against him and the punishing authority cannot punish the delinquent for a charge or allegation which did not form part of the charge sheet and the statement of allegations.
Unfortunately, in the case of the petitioner, he has been held guilty of the charge of financial irregularities by splitting work order even though no such charge or allegation was levelled against him.
20.
In State of Punjab v. Bakhatawar Singh, AIR 1972 SC 2083, removal of a member of the State Electricity Board on a charge of not discharging his duties impartially was called in question.
The High Court upheld the contention of the petitioner that he had been removed on the basis of a charge which did not form part of the charge sheet.
While upholding the finding of the High Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "It may be noted that Shri Bakhtawar Singh was not charged with having not discharged his duties impartially.
None of the charges levelled against him accused him of not discharging his duties impartially.
Hence the Minister was not justified in taking into consideration a charge in respect of which the member was not given any opportunity to explain his position."
21.
In Virendra Kumar v. Chief of the Army Staff, 1986(2) SCC.
217, the appellant was removed from the rolls of the Bar Council on the charge which did not form part of the notice issued to him.
The notice indicated that the appellant was to show cause as to why his licence should not be cancelled for withholding certain information at the time of admission to the Bar.
Ultimately he was removed on a different allegation, namely, that he had been restored to the Government service.
The Supreme Court held that the action taken by the Bar Council was contrary to the principles of natural justice because the appellant was not given opportunity to defend himself against the allegation that he had been restored to the Government service.
22.
In view of the above discussion, it must be held that the Government has acted illegally in punishing the petitioner on the basis of a charge which did not form part of the memo Annexure P4 by which charge sheet and the statement of allegations were issued to the petitioner.
23.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order of punishment Annexure P1 is declared illegal and void and the same is quashed.
Since the petitioner has already retired from service, the Government is directed not to take fresh action against the petitioner.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.