VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to orders, Annexures P-1 and P-2 passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur and Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt respectively.
Petitioner has prayed that his dismissal from service be declared illegal and respondents be directed to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner joined police department as Constable in 1951; passed Lower School Course in 1961; was promoted as Head Constable in 1962; promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector in 1975 and thereafter on his passing the Upper School Course in 1985, he was promoted as Sub Inspector.
Petitioner was working as S.H.O.
Police Station Kartarpur in the year 1987 when he was transferred to Gurdaspur where he reported for duty on 1571987.
The petitioner was posted as Additional SHO Police Station Sri Hargobindpur.
Petitioner had hardly worked for 60 days as such when the order of his dismissal from service was passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur, in exercise of powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India read with rule 16.1(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (in short 1934 Rules).
Petitioner filed an appeal against the order of dismissal to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar, who vide order dated 111988 (Annexure P-2) dismissed the appeal.
Petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that the petitioner has more than 36 years' service to his credit and he was never dubbed any Reporting Officer as having links with terrorists and anti-social elements.
According to the petitioner, orders against him have been passed without any evidence and the same have got no relationship with the material on the file, and that he had no links whatsoever with any terrorist and the evidence, if any, has been collected with an ulterior motive and for extraneous considerations.
In regard to the allegation that the petitioner had links with one Sukhdev Singh, a hard-core terrorist wanted by the police, the petitioner has averred that Sukhdev Singh has two brothers namely Baldev Singh and Surti living at Shri Hargobindpur.
Baldev Singh and Surti had land dispute with a contractor of the same village and the litigation had gone upto the High Court where Baldev Singh filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3891 of 1987 and obtained stay of his dispossession.
Petitioner has denied that he ever helped the brothers of Sukhdev Singh in their land dispute.
Respondents in their written statement have not denied that the petitioner had more than 36 years of service to his credit and he was never dubbed by any Reporting Officer as having links with terrorists and anti-social elements, but have stated that report of Sh. Harjit Singh, DSP Patiala has disclosed that petitioner had close links with Sukhdev Singh Bedi.
They have stated at the time of passing the order of dismissal, the Senior Superintendent of Police was satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to conduct an enquiry for the reasons recorded in the order.
They have also averred that the order has been passed with due application of mind and by taking into consideration all material placed before the Senior Superintendent of Police.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned orders passed against the petitioner are without any basis and simply an excuse for not following the procedure of departmental enquiry.
Counsel contended that there was no material with the competent Authority to form an opinion that the petitioner had links with terrorists or had helped Sukhdev Singh Bedi, a known terrorist.
In answer to these submissions, Mr. SK Bhanot, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, has contended that the exercise of powers by the Competent Authority under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India bring bona fide, this Court cannot go into the sufficiency of the reasons which prevailed with the competent Authority for passing the impugned order of dismissal.
He contended that in the circumstances as prevailing then, it would not have been possible for the department to establish the charge against the petitioner in regular enquiry under rule 16.1(2) of the 1934 Rules.
4.
Under proviso (b) of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, no enquiry need be held if the Competent Authority records in writing that it is not reasonably practicable to hold such an enquiry.
The only requirement is that the Authority must be satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold enquiry.
The Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, 1988 (2) S.L.R.
576 has held that the condition precedent for the application of clause (b) of the second proviso is that the disciplinary Authority should record in writing that ' it is not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry contemplated by clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution' What is requisite is that the holding of the inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of reasonable man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
It is not possible to enumerate the cases in which to hold inquiry but some instance by way of illustration may however be given that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold inquiry where the government servant through or together with his associates, threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, who are going to give evidence against him so as to prevent them from doing so or where the government servant by himself or together with or through associates, threatens the officer or members of his family so that he is afraid to hold the inquiry or direct it to be held.
The Apex Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and Haryana, AIR 1991 SC 385 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
125 has held that the decision to dispense with the departmental inquiry cannot be rested solely on the ipse-dixit of the concerned authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of Law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of caprice of the concerned officer.
In that case, it was alleged that the petitioner therein, instead of replying to the show- cause notice, instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the superiors and gave threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, if any departmental inquiry was held against him.
The order of dismissal was quashed as it was not shown to the Supreme Court on what material the respondent came to the conclusion that the appellant had thrown threats.
A learned Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12973 of 1993 decided on 2321995 has held that the order of dismissal or removal passed under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India is open to judicial review and can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent Authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant considerations.
Validity of the order passed under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India can be challenged, where the authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations; where its satisfaction is based on considerations which are not relevant; where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked; where the satisfaction is not grounded on materials which are of rationally probative value; and where the exercise of power is not in good faith.
5.
In the context of what has been discussed above, the impugned orders need to be viewed.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur, has passed the order of dismissal on the ground that petitioner has links with the hard core terrorists/anti-social elements and helping them.
In the order, it has also been stated that the petitioner helped the brothers of Sukhdev Singh who is a hard core terrorist wanted by the police.
The reason given in the order for dispensing with the enquiry is that there is every likelihood that in case a departmental enquiry is initiated against the petitioner, the terrorists may cause bodily harm to the Enquiry Officer or the prosecution witnesses.
In order to ascertain the correctness of the allegation of the counsel for the petitioner that there is no material on record to show that the petitioner had links with terrorists, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce the record for showing that the order has been passed on the basis of material.
Record produced before me has shown that Sohan Singh and Sarup Singh sons of Dewan Singh and Surinder Singh son of Ravel Singh who had land dispute with Surat Singh and Baldev Singh in their statements before the police alleged that during consolidation of holdings, land measuring 5 Kanals 5 marlas had fallen to their share, but a dispute was raised by Malkiat Singh, Mewa Singh and Sardara Singh.
On filing of appeal before the Consolidation Officer and the Additional Director, Jalandhar, the matter was decided in their favour.
They further stated that after the decision was given by the Consolidation authorities, demarcation of the land was done by the Revenue department for giving possession to them.
They are alleged to have come into possession, but Malkiat Singh etc. ploughed this land having connived with the petitioner.
They also stated that a report was lodged in the police station when the petitioner was away and on the basis of the report, Dilbagh Singh and Baldev Singh were arrested under Sections 107/151 Cr.PC but when the petitioner came back he directed the officials to arrest the opposite party.
On the basis of these statements, DSP Harjit Singh in his report dated 1491987 found that Surat Singh and Baldev Singh etc. has ploughed the land in connivance with the petitioner and these persons are lodged in jail at Sri Hargobindpur in connection with case, F.I.R. No. 158 dated 1681987 registered under Section 3/4 TDP Ordinance of 1987.
He thus, opined that the petitioner had close links with terrorists.
This report appears to have been received by the Senior Superintendent of Police on 15.9.1987 when the order came to be passed against the petitioner.
The statements made by Sohan Singh, Sarup Singh and Surinder Singh on 1391987 and the report of DSP Harjit Singh dated 1491987 do not disclose that there was any evidence of proof with the disciplinary Authority involving the petitioner with terrorists or with terrorist Sukhdev Singh Bodi.
The Senior Superintendent of Police has not recorded either in the impugned order or in any other document that he has verified the facts contained in the report of DSP Harjit Singh or has any other information from any independent source about petitioner's links with terrorists or with Sukhdev Singh Bodi.
The statements on the basis of which report was made by DSP Harjit Singh only reveals that there was some land dispute going on between brothers of Sukhdev Singh Bodi and the persons who gave statements against the petitioner and the matter had come to this Court in Civil Writ Petition No3891 of 1987 when on 371987 the operation of order of the Consolidation authorities was stayed and notice of the petition was issued for 1191987.
The statements and the report which are dated 1391987 and 1491987 respectively deem to have been made two days after the case had been fixed in the High Court whereby operation of the order of Consolidation authorities was stayed.
As a matter of fact, the record does not reveal that the Senior Superintendent of Police made any independent enquiry, rather it appears that he solely acted on the recommendations made by DSP Harjit Singh.
Since the petitioner had put in more than 36 years' unblemished service, the least required from the Senior Superintendent of Police was to verify the allegations made against the petitioner.
In view of this, it must be held that the impugned order suffers from total non-application of mind.
The appellate order too has to be set aside as it does not contain any reason in support of the conclusion recorded by the disciplinary Authority warranting the exercise of powers under proviso to Article 311(2).
Moreover, once the initial order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police is vitiated, the appellate order is also liable to quashed.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and orders, Annexures P-1 and P-2 quashed.
Petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
This shall, however, not preclude the respondents to hold enquiry in case they intend to hold one against the petitioner in accordance with law and pass fresh order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.