VK Jhanji, J - This shall dispose of civil writ petitions No. 670, 686, 688, 687, 689 and 5753 of 1992 and 16689 of 1991 as common question of law and facts is involved therein.
2.
Petitioners in all these writ petitions were Constables in the Haryana Police and they continued to serve as such upto the date when all of them were discharged.
The dates of joining of all petitioners are given in the respective writ petitions.
All petitioners are aggrieved of order of their discharge.
Except in Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 992, all orders are identically worded and have been passed by the Superintendents of Police of the districts where petitioners were posted on the date of their discharge.
Petitioners' grievance is that the said orders have been passed on allegations of misconduct against them and are in fact punitive in nature, passed under the guise of powers vested under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules and therefore, the same cannot be sustained.
3.
It has been averred in the petitions that pursuant to report given by the Dharamvir Commission which was set up by the Government of India recommending and approving the formation of Police Associations in various States, the Haryana Police Association (Sangathan) was formed in the year 1969 whose members included Constables, Head Constables, Assistant Sub Inspectors, Sub Inspectors and Inspectors.
Head Constable Dilawar Singh, President of the Association and Constables Mohinder Singh and Shyam Singh, General Secretaries, had been struggling to ameliorate and uplift the lot of policemen in Haryana.
One of the demands of the Association was that excessive political interference in the police in Haryana should be cut off and this demand was highlighted during the Lok Sabha elections in Haryana in the year 1990 when in certain constituencies including Meham the police force was used for political purposes.
Further the Association was demanding that recruitment of constables and other members of the force should be by some neutral independent agencies as even in the recruitment of the police personnel there was too much political interference and persons are being recruited in disregard of the rules and not on merits but for extraneous considerations.
Besides this, the Association was demanding better pay scales, cycle allowance for Constables/Head Constables and also uniform etc.
It has further been averred that the demands raised by the Association had irked the superiors who did not want the Constables/Head Constables in the police to assert their rights, but rather wanted them to continue to work as per their dictates.
Dilawar Singh, President and the General Secretary of the Association had been approaching their superior officers from time to time in a bid to get their demands accepted.
It has also been averred in the petitions that since January, 1991 there was a consistent and sustained effort on the part of Government and superior officers of police in Haryana to suppress the Association and also not to recognise the Association.
In a bid to do so, Dilawar Singh, President and Mohinder Singh, General Secretary were dismissed from the police service by dispensing with the enquiries under Rule 1624 (ix)(b) and Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution vide orders dated 18121990.
These orders were challenged by them by filing civil writ petitions and the Division Bench of this Court admitted the writ petitions and stayed the operation of order of dismissal.
The said writ petitions are pending decision in this Court.
Petitioners have further averred that the Authorities having failed to crush the Association after trying all other methods arrested Dilawar Singh, President and Mohinder Singh, one of the General Secretaries on the night of 2891991.
Shyam Singh, the other General Secretary was arrested on the morning of 2991991.
Cases were registered against them under Sections 332, 353, 148, 149 and 506 IPC as also Section 3 and 4 of the Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act, 1922.
Thereafter when these Head Constables/Constables later on succeeded in securing bail but they were detained under the National Security Act and the time of hearing of the petitions, it was submitted by the counsel that the detention orders have been quashed by this Court.
4.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 1992, petitioners were serving as Constables in district Sirsa.
In the wake of the arrest of President and General Secretaries, there was a procession on 6101991 by over 200 members of the police force including Constables/Head Constables and some Assistant Sub Inspector also.
The procession went upto Police Station City, Sirsa.
Later on, on the same day they sat in dharna in front of residence-cum-office of Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa to persuade their senior officers in the State of Haryana to release their leaders and to accept their demands.
This dharna continued till evening of 6101991 when the petitioners were discharged from service by Superintendent of Police  5.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 686 of 1992, at Kurukshetra procession and dharna was held on 3091991 and also on 1101991 when 56 constables were discharged by taking recourse to Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Likewise in Civil Writ Petition No. 687 of 1992, 27 constables (petitioners) posted at Jind were dismissed by order dated 211991/3101991 and also on 16101991.
In district Sonepat, Constables i.e. petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 688 of 1992 were discharged on 6101991.
Six constables who were posted at Rohtak were ordered to be discharged on 1101991 when they took out procession and sat on dharna.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 5753 of 1991 two petitioners posted as Constables at Sonepat were ordered to be discharged on 25101991, as they had participated in procession and dharna but later on an appeal filed by one of the petitioners order of discharge was withdrawn and he was reinstated in service.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents in Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 1992, although the respondents have taken the stand that petitioners were discharged not because of their taking part in dharna but because of their unsatisfactory conduct and performance since their appointment, yet the stand taken is not borne out on record and also from the orders which were passed against the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 1992.
However, the common stand of the respondents in the written statements filed in response to other writ petitions is that the petitioners took part in procession and instigated other police officials to cause disaffection and indiscipline amongst the members of police force.
They were discharged under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules as they had less than three years of service.
In regard to the formation of the Association, it has been stated that there has never been any association of Haryana Police Sangathan and formation of such an association is against the provisions of Section 3 of the Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1965 which provides that a member of a Police force shall not, without the express sanction of the Centeral Government or the prescribed Authority, be a member of or be associated in any way with any other society, association or organisation that is not recognised as part of the force of which he is a member or is not a purely social, recreational or religious nature.
Respondents have also averred that First Information Reports under various sections of Indian Penal Code, Essential Services Maintenance and Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Act and Police (Incitement) to Disaffection) Act, 1922 were registered against the persons who took part in procession and dharna.
7.
The case of the petitioners before this Court is that they have been removed from service without recourse to proceedings under Article 311 of the Constitution and the order of discharge is in fact one of removal from service and is therefore bad in law.
It has also been argued by Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate, for the petitioners that the petitioners have been discriminated as against other persons who though had participated in the procession and dharna but have been allowed to continue in service, whereas the petitioners have been discharged.
The orders of discharge are also being attached on the ground that the same have been passed mechanically without any application of mind.
In reply to these contentions, Mr. HL Sibal, Advocate General, Haryana, contended that orders of removal from service passed in the case of petitioners are innocuous in nature and do not cast any stigma having been passed strictly under Rule 1221 as the petitioners had less than three years of service and their Superintendent of Police found that they were unlikely to prove efficient police officers.
8.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties, order passed in the case of petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 1992 and in other writ petitions, where identically worded orders were passed, deserve to be noticed :  "Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 1992 : That you, Constable Suresh Kumar No. 1038 having been indulging in the activities prejudicial to the maintenance of discipline amongst the members of the Police Force and spreading disaffection amongst the Police Ranks and exhorting them to resort to general disobedience of the orders of the competent authorities.
You participated in the procession and unionist activities and also stage dharna in front of the Deputy Commissioner's office-cum-residence on 16101991.
You are therefore, unlikely to prove an efficient Police Officer.
You are therefore discharged from service w.e.f.
6101991 under rule 1221 of PPR Vol.
I Issue orders in OB Sd/- Superintendent of Police Sirsa, 6101991.
Civil Writ Petition No. 686 of 1992 : (Identical in the remaining other petitions) - Constable Ram Pal No. 159/KKR is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
Therefore in exercise of the powers vested in me under Rule 1221 Punjab Police Rules, I hereby discharge Const.
Ram Pal No158/KKR from Police force with immediate effect.
Sd/- Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra.
The law relating to the discharge of temporary employees has now been well settled by a catena of cases decided by their Lordships of the Supreme Court : In Jagdish Mitter v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 449, it has been held that protection of Article 311 can be invoked not only by permanent public servants, but also by public servants who are employed as temporary servants or probationers and so, if a temporary public servant or a probationer is served with an order by which his services are terminated, and the order unambiguously indicates that the said termination is the result of punishment sought to be imposed on him, he can legitimately invoke the protection of Article 311 and challenge the validity of the said termination on the ground that the mandatory provisions of Article 311(2) have not been complied with.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court also held that the appropriate Authority may make an enquiry whether the temporary employee deserves to be continued.
Such an enquiry is actuated solely by the desire to decide the simple question as to whether the temporary servant should be continued or not and is undertaken for that purpose alone without any desire to attach any stigma to him.
An enquiry of this character must be distinguished from a formal departmental enquiry which is undertaken for the purpose of punishing an employee.
In case after such an enquiry, the authority decides to terminate the service of the temporary employee, such termination would not amount to dismissal or removal as no stigma attaches to it.
The test in such cases must be, does the order cast an aspersion or attach a stigma to the person when it purports to discharge him.
If the answer to this question in an affirmative, then notwithstanding the form of the order, termination of service must be held in substance to amount to dismissal.
But if the answer is in the negative, then it is discharge simpliciter.
In Champaklal v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 1854, their Lordships of Supreme Court applied the two tests mentioned in Purshottam Lal v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36 and held that temporary servants are also entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) in the same manner as permanent government servants, if the government takes action against them by meting out one of the three punishments i.e. dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
But this protection is only available where discharge, removal or reduction in rank is sought to be inflicted by way of punishment and not otherwise.
The mere use of expressions like "terminate" or "discharge" is not conclusive and in spite of the use of such innocuous expressions the court has to apply the two tests mentioned namely - (1) whether the servant had a right to the post or the rank, or (2) whether he has been visited with evil consequences; and if either of the tests is satisfied, it must be held that the servant had been punished.
Further even though misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or other disqualification may be the motive or the inducing factor which influences the Government to take action under the terms of the contract of employment or the specific service rule, nevertheless, if right exists, under the contract or the rules, to terminate the service the motive operating on the mind of the Government is wholly irrelevant.
However, in Union of India and others v. RS Dhaba, 1969 SLR 442 the Supreme Court held that where the order of reversion does not contain any express words of stigma attributed on the conduct of the respondent, it cannot be held that the order of reversion was made by way of punishment and the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution are consequently attracted.
RS Dhaba's case (supra) was explained in case State of Bihar and others v. Shiva Bhikahuk Mishra, (1971) 2 Supreme Court Reports 191 and it was held "Dhaba's case is not an authority for the proposition that so long as there are no express words of stigma attributed to the conduct of a Government Officer in the impugned order it cannot be held to have been made by way of punishment.
The form of the order is not conclusive of its true nature and it might merely be a cloak and camouflage for an order founded on misconduct.
It may be that an order which is innocuous on the face and does not contain any imputation of misconduct is a circumstance or a piece of evidence for finding whether it was made by way of punishment or administrative routine, but the entirety of circumstances preceding or attendant on the impugned order must be examined and the overriding test will always be whether the misconduct is a mere notice or is the very foundation of the others."
(Emphasis supplied).
In Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 2192, their Lordships of the Supreme Court were pleased to observe that the fact of holding an enquiry is not always conclusive.
What is decisive is whether the order is really by way of punishment.
If the fact that the substance of the order is bad and termination is by way of punishment, then probationer is entitled to protection of Article 311.
Substance of order and not form would be decisive.
The very view had earlier been taken by the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Sukh Raj Bahadur, AIR 1968 SC 1089.
In Gujrat Steel Tubes Ltd etc. etc. v. Gujrat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1876, Hon'ble Mr. Justice VR Krishna Iyer speaking for the majority for the first time expounded the doctrine of lifting of the veil to see the true nature of the order, i.e. whether the discharge orders issued by the Management were punitive or non-penal.
In that case, as a result of strike by the workers, services of the casual workers were terminated and they were discharged from service and some new workmen took their place.
That matter was referred to the Arbitrator under Section 10-A of the Industrial Disputes Act in order to determine as to whether discharge orders issued by the management were legal, proper and justified.
The Arbitrator decided against the workmen but on challenge in petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court decided in favour of the workmen.
The order which was served upon the workmen was in the following terms :-  "Your services are hereby terminated by giving you one month's salary in lieu of one month's notice and accordingly you are discharged from service.
You should collect immediately from the cashier of the factory your are month's notice-pay and due pay, leave entitlements and gratuity, if you are entitled to the same.
The payment will be made between 12 noon and 5 pm If and when you desire to be employed, you may apply in writing to the Company in that behalf and on receipt of the application, a reply will be rent to you in the matter."
While determining as to whether the discharge orders issued by the management were punitive or non-penal, it was held that "the form of the order of termination or the language in which it is couched is not conclusive.
The Court will lift the veil to see the true nature of the order.
If two factors co-exist, an inference of punishment is reasonable though not inevitable, If the severance of service is effected, the first condition is fulfilled and if the foundation or cause of such severance is the servant's misconduct the second is fulfilled.
If the basis or foundation for the order of termination is clearly not turpitudinous or stigmatic or rooted in misconduct or visited with evil pecuniary effect, then the inference of dismissal stands negated and vice-versa".
His Lordships was pleased to observe :-  "Masters and servants cannot be permitted to play hide and seek with the law of dismissals and the plain and proper criteria are not to be misdirected by terminological cover-ups or by appeal to psychic processes but must be grounded on the substantive reason for the order, whether disclosed or undisclosed.
The Court will find out from other proceedings or documents connected with the formal order of termination what the true ground for the termination is.
If, thus scrutinised, the order has a punitive flavour in cause or consequence, it is dismissal.
If it fails short of this test, it cannot be called a punishment.
To put it slightly differently, a termination effected because the master is satisfied of the misconduct and of the consequent desirability of terminating the service of the delinquent servant, it is a dismissal, even if he had the right in law to terminate with an innocent order under the standing order or otherwise.
Whether, in such a case the grounds are recorded in a different proceeding from the formal order does not detract from its nature.
Nor the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the master abandons the enquiry and proceeds to terminate.
Given an alleged misconduct and a live nexus between it and the termination of service the conclusion is dismissal, even if full benefits as on simple termination, are given and non-injurious terminology is used."
(Emphasis supplied).
The doctrine of lifting of veil was again considered by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, 1984 (1) S.L.R.
426 and after consideration of the law on the subject, their Lordships were pleased to observe "Where the form of the order is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal for misconduct it is always open to the Court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and ascertain the true character of the order.
If the Court holds that the order though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality a cloak for an order of punishment, the court would not be debarred, merely because of the form of the order, in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the employee."
9.
Rule 1221 providing for discharge of a constable, who is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, by the Superintendent of Police at any time within three years of enrolment came up for consideration before the Apex Court in Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State and another, 1983(6) SLR 78, Hardeep Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1987(4) SLR 576 and an unreported decision of Apex Court in Sukhbir Singh etc. v. State of Haryana and others (Civil Appeal Nos. 93, 94, 95 and 1989).
In Rajinder Kaur's case (supra), although the order was simple and innocuous one but it was urged by the delinquent lady constable that it was made by way of punishment, the ground being her misconduct as found on the basis of the investigation of certain allegations behind her back.
The trial Court dismissed the suit and the first appellate Court and the High Court affirmed the decision.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court recorded a finding that the order of discharge though made in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1221 is really made on the basis of misconduct as found on enquiry into the allegation of her spending two nights with a constable behind her back by the Deputy Superintendent of Police.
It was thus held that the order of discharge though couched in innocuous terms, is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal from service on the ground of misconduct.
The order was quashed.
In Hardeep Singh's case (supra), petitioner was a member of an unregistered Haryana Police Association.
The said Association had been canvassing for improvement in the service conditions of the police personnel serving with the Haryana Police and on several occasions made representation for improvement of the service conditions of the members of the police service.
As a part of its campaign for improvement in service conditions, the association in the month of July gave a call to all its members to participate in " a non-taking of food campaign" which was to take place on 1581982.
On that day, the petitioner and other police personnel numbering about 16,000 consisting of constables and head constables of Haryana police force attended to their duties but did not take their food in the Mess.
The Superintendent of Police issued order of dismissal/removal against 425 policemen under Rule 1221 of the Rules without serving on them any charge-sheet and without giving them any opportunity of hearing against the charges, prior to the passing of order of dismissal/removal from service.
On these facts and relying upon decision in PL Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36, Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, AIR 1974 SC 2192 and Annop Jaiswal's case (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the order of removal from service was in substance and in effect an order made by way of punishment.
After considering the service conduct of petitioner, it has held that the order casts a stigma on the service career of the petitioner and the order being made by way of punishment, the petitioner is entitled to protection afforded by the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution as well as by the provisions Rule 1624 (IX) (b) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
Similarly in the case Sukhbir Singh's case (supra) a complaint was made against the appellants therein by one Ramesh whose house they had searched on 381995.
The case of the appellants was that since they had received information that a girl of ill-repute was brought to his house, they searched the house to verify the correctness of the information but on finding nothing incriminating took no action against Ramesh, and it appears that Ramesh complained about the search to the superior officers and immediately thereafter the orders of discharge came to be passed.
On the basis of counter affidavit filed on behalf of State Government, it was found that the real reason for the discharge of appellants therein was the incident dated 381995.
The vague statement, that the Superintendent of Police, Bhiwani, had taken into consideration the overall work and conduct of the appellants in coming to the conclusions that they were unlikely to prove efficient police officers was found to be only camouflage.
The order of discharge was consequently quashed.
Very recently in State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SCT 427(SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 108 rule 1221 of the rules again came up for consideration before the Apex Court.
In this case, respondent therein was discharged under rule 1221 and in the order of discharge the Superintendent of Police recorded that "he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer because he is habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and indisciplined."
From this order, the Apex Court held that it is not an order of discharge but on the other hand the Superintendent of Police considered the record and found him to be habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and indisciplined.
The findings of habitual absence and indiscipline necessarily cast stigma on his career and there would be an impediment for any future employment.
Under these circumstances, it was held that the principles of natural justice do require that he should be given an opportunity to explain the grounds on which the Superintendent of Police proposed to pass an order of discharge and then to consider the explanation submitted by the concerned officer.
While considering rule 12.
21 the Hon'ble Judges of the Apex Court observed :  "A reading of this rule would indicate that the Superintendent of Police, before expiry of three years from the date of enrolment of the police officer into the service, has been obviously given power to observe the conduct and discharge of service by the police officer to find him whether he was efficient in the discharge of duties and maintains the discipline and conduct expected of him as a disciplined Police Officer.
During that period if the S.P.
finds that he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, exercising the power under the rule, he may discharge simpliciter the police officer from service.
For recording the finding that the officer is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, there must be anterior record and the Superintendent of Police must objectively consider that record and record the conclusion in that behalf.
But if he records a finding, after considering the record, which would be stigma on the career of the discharged police officer, it is settled law that the principles of natural justice require that an opportunity be given to him before recording finding adverse to the officer's conduct which disentitles the officer for any future employment or would be a blot on his career."
In Shesh Narain Awasthy v. State of UP and others, 1988(3) SLR 4, services of one constable namely Shesh Narain Awasthy who was working as such in Uttar Pradesh were terminated without holding any enquiry on account of the alleged active part in the activities of the Unrecognised Police Karamchari Parishad.
The Supreme Court in view of decisions in Rajinder Kaur's and Hardip Singh' cases (supra) quashed the order on the ground that the same had been passed without following the procedure prescribed by Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the relevant rules applicable to the UP Police Force.
In this case, though the order of discharge appeared to be innocuous but was found to have been passed on account of alleged active part in the activities of the Unrecognised Police Karamchari Parishad as was obvious from the entry made in his character roll which read :-  "Took active part in the activities of Unrecognised Police Karamchari Parishad and created disaffection in the police has since discharged."
10.
On the basis of the decisions of the Apex Court, referred to above, the following principles stand settled :-  "(1) The services of a temporary servant or a probationer can be terminated under the rules of his employment and such termination without anything more would not attract the operation of Article 311 of the Constitution (2) The entirety of circumstances preceding or attendant on the order of termination of services have to be examined in each case and the overriding test will always be whether the misconduct is a mere motive or is very foundation of the order i.e. whether there is a live nexus between the alleged misconduct and the termination of services.
(3) The form of the order is not conclusive of its true nature and it might merely be a cloak and camouflage for an order founded on misconduct.
If the order visits the public servant with any evil consequences or casts an aspersion against his character or integrity, it must be considered to be one by way of punishment, no matter whether he was a mere probationer or a temporary servant.
(4) An order of termination of service is unexceptionable form preceded by an enquiry launched by the superior authorities only to ascertain whether the public servant should be retained in service, does not attract the operation of Art. 311 of the Constitution.
(5) If there be a full-scale departmental enquiry envisaged by Art. 311 i.e. an Enquiry Officer is appointed, a charge-sheet submitted, explanation called for and considered, any order of termination of service made thereunder will attract the operation of the said articles."
The principle that even in the case of a temporary or officiating government employee his services cannot be terminated by way of punishment casting a stigma to him in violation of Article 311(2) is not in dispute, but difficulty comes in the application of this principle.
When the services of an officiating or temporary government employee are dispensed with by an order of termination simpliciter, then difficulty arises in finding out whether it is by way of punishment.
Ordinarily and generally the Courts are faced with three categories of cases;  (i) Where the order terminating the services of an employee is simple and innocuous; (ii) Where the order discloses on the face of it that it is stigmatic; and (iii) Where the order although simpliciter and innocuous but the delinquent alleges that termination of his services is intended by way of punishment.
The approach to be adopted by the Courts in such cases has been answered by Hon'ble Mr. Justice RS Pathak in his separate judgment in State of Maharashtra v. Veerappa R Saboji and another, AIR 1980 SC 42.
It has been held :  (i) Where the services of a temporary Government servant or a probationer Government servant are terminated by an order which does not ex-facie disclose any stigma or penal consequences against the Government servant and is merely a termination order simpliciter, there is no case ordinarily for assuming that it is anything but what is purports to be.
(ii) Where, however, the order discloses on the face of it that a stigma is cast on the Government servant or that it visits him with penal consequences, then plainly the case is one of punishment.
(iii) There may still be another kind of case where although the termination of services is intended by way of punishment, the order is framed as a termination simpliciter.
In such a case, if the Government servant is able to establish by material on the record that the order is in fact passed by way of punishment, the innocence of the language in which the order is framed will not protect it if the procedural safeguards contemplated by Article 311(2) of the Constitution have not been satisfied.
In a given case, the Government servant may succeed in making out a prima-facie case that there order was by way of punishment but an attempt to rebut the case by the authorities may necessitate sending for the official records for the purpose of determining the truth.
It is in such a case generally that the official records may be called for by the Court.
It is not open to the Court to send for the official records on a mere allegation by the Government servant that the order is by way of punishment.
For unless there is material on the record before the Court in support of that allegation, an attempt by the Court to find out from the record whether the termination of service is based on the unsuitability of the Government servant in relation to the post held by him or is in reality an order by way of punishment will in effect be an unwarranted attempt to delve into the official records for the purpose of determining the nature of the order on the basis of a mere allegation of the Government servant.
On a sufficient case being made out on the merits before the Court by the Government servant it is open to the Court to resort to scrutiny of the official records for the purpose of verifying the truth."
If the impugned order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 670 of 1992 are viewed in the light of decisions of the Apex Court a mention of which has been made in the earlier part of the judgment, it would be clear that these are not orders of discharge simpliciter.
The orders appear to have been passed under the provisions of rule 1221of the Rules which provide that a constable who is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent of Police at any time within three years of his enrolment, but this rule does not entitle the Superintendent of Police to punish the constable without grant of an opportunity.
On a reading of the impugned orders, it is apparent that the petitioners have been discharged for having participated in the procession and unionist activities and also dharna in front of Deputy Commissioner's office-cum-residence.
The findings that the petitioners have been indulging in activities prejudicial to the maintenance of discipline amongst the members of the police force and spreading disaffection amongst the police force and exhorting them to resort to general disobedience of the orders of the competent Authority, cast stigma on their career and these findings would be an impediment for any future employment.
Any one who reads these orders would conclude that there is something seriously wrong with the petitioners.
The impugned orders are not simple orders of discharge but are stigmatic and could not have been passed except after holding enquiry and affording the petitioners due and reasonable opportunity of hearing.
The orders thus deserve to be quashed on this score alone.
11.
As regards the orders passed in other writ petitions, although the orders framed are discharge simpliciter but it has been alleged by the petitioners that these have been passed by way of punishment.
There is sufficient material on record in support of the allegation that the termination of services is not based upon unsuitability of the petitioners on the post held by each of them but in reality it is by way of punishment.
In this regard, reference may be made to the stand taken by the respondents in their written statement wherein they have admitted that the petitioners have been ordered to be discharged from service as they took part in unionist activities and instigated the other police officers to cause disaffection and indiscipline amongst the members of the police force.
It is erroneous for the learned counsel for the respondents to argue that the indiscipline as alleged in the case of the petitioners itself is enough to form satisfaction that they are unlikely to prove efficient police officers and therefore, the orders cannot be termed to be bad in law or that the protection of Article 311 of the Constitution can be invoked by them.
In the impugned orders, though a reference has been made to rule 1221 of the Rules, yet it is clear that the petitioners are being accused of having participated in the procession and dharna and also the unionist activities.
In this situation, it is apparent that the orders of discharge are founded on alleged misconduct and as such, these could not have been passed except after grant of due and reasonable opportunity of hearing as contemplated under the provisions of Punjab Police Rules and Articles 311 of the Constitution.
Petitioners thus have successfully demonstrated that there is a live nexus between the alleged misconduct and discharge from service.
In this view of the matter, orders impugned in the other writ petition too have to be quashed.
12.
A strong reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the respondents on the Full Bench decision of this Court in Sher Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 1(P&H) : 1994(2) R.S.J.
412.
The question posed before the Full Bench was "Can a constable be discharged from service under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 at any time within three years of his enrolment in spite of the fact that there is a specific allegation which may even amount to misconduct against him ?".
The Full Bench answered the question by saying :  "(1) A constable can be discharged from service under Rule 1221 at any time within three years of his enrolment in spite of the fact that there is a specific allegation which may even amount to misconduct against him; (2) A Superintendent of Police can form his opinion regarding the likelihood or otherwise of a constable making a good police officer not only on the basis of the periodic reports contemplated under Rule 195 but also on the basis of any other relevant material; and  (3) The provisions of Rule 1624 and Article 311 shall be attracted only when the punishing authority decides to punish the constable".
Learned counsel for the respondents referred to para 32 of the judgment where the Full Bench observed "A single act of indiscipline can lead the competent authority to conclude that the constable is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer and to discharge him from service" to contend that a single act of the petitioners i.e. taking part in procession and dharna was enough to conclude that they are unlikely to prove efficient police officers and the Superintendent of Police was justified in discharging them from service.
There is no dispute with the proposition that under Rule 1221 a constable can be discharged from service on the basis of a single act of indiscipline in case the competent Authority finds that he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer but as noticed in the present case the real cause or foundation for discharge of the petitioners are incidents of 6101991, 3091991, 3101991, 6101991, 3091991 when there were processions dharnas in Sirsa, Kurukshetra, Jind, Sonepat and Rohtak districts respectively.
The action taken against the petitioners is clearly for alleged misconduct and has nothing to do with the efficiency of the petitioners.
Counsel for the respondents cannot derive any assistance from the decision of the Full Bench of this Court because in my view the orders passed in the case of the petitioners are by way of punishment and the provisions of rule 1624 of the Rules and Article 311 of the Constitution of India are attracted.
13.
In view of the finding that the impugned orders are not orders of discharge simpliciter but have been passed by way of punishment, it is not necessary to go into other contentions of learned counsel for the petitioners, namely, that the petitioners have been discriminated as against the other persons who have been allowed to continue in service and also that orders have been passed mechanically without any application of mind.
It shall remain open to the petitioners to raise the matter with regard to discrimination before the Authorities in case the Authorities intend to hold an enquiry.
14.
Consequently the writ petitions CWP Nos. 670, 686, 688, 687, 689 and 5753 of 1992 and 1689 of 1991 are allowed and the impugned orders quashed.
In view of the relief granted to the petitioner in Jagdish Chander's case (supra) and the judgment of the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in Managing Director, E.C.IL., Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319(SC) : 1993(5) S.L.R.
532, the petitioners presently are not entitled to be reinstated into service.
Instead they will be deemed to be continuing under suspension.
It shall be open to the respondents to hold enquiry against the petitioners in accordance with law and pass fresh orders within six months from the date of receipt of orders of this Court.
The petitioners shall be not entitled to salary or other monetary benefits between the date of their dismissal and the date of this order.
As to what treatment should be meted to the period of their suspension shall be decided by the disciplinary Authority at the time of passing of fresh orders.
No costs.