Doabia, J - The Madhya Pradesh State Transport Corporation seeks interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It challenges an order passed by the Labour Court, Gwalior.
By this order the age of retirement of respondent No. 1 was fixed at 60 years.
The order passed by the Labour Court stands affirmed in appeal by the Industrial Court.
These orders are annexures P-5 and P-7 respectively.
2.
As per the Corporation it has framed regulations which govern the terms and conditions of the employees employed with the Corporation.
Regulation No. 59 provides the age of retirement.
This is 58 years.
This regulation No. 59 was enforced with effect from 1st June, 1970.
It is the further case of the Corporation that there are MP Industrial Employment Standing Orders Act, 1961 and the Rules framed under it.
These came into force on 25th November, 1961 and were made applicable to the petitioner- Corporation w.e.f.
1671963.
It is on the basis of the above, the age of retirement of the respondent No. 1 is sought to be fixed at 58 years.
3.
The case of respondent No.1 be now examined.
According to him he was employed in the then Gwalior Engineering Works.
He was working as a fitter.
He pleads that Fundamental Rules governed his service conditions.
As per FR 56 his age of retirement should be 60 years.
It is his further case that he became an employee of Madhya Pradesh Roadways or CPTransport Services.
These later organisations were taken over by the petitioner-Corporation.
Thus the respondent No.1 claims to be a workman and an artisan.
He states that his age of retirement has been rightly fixed at 60 years.
4.
The stand taken by the Corporation is that Rule 56 of Fundamental Rules is not applicable and that the respondent No.1 was not an employee of inferior service.
According to the Corporation inferior service would mean that service which is specially classed as such or the emoluments whereof do not exceed Rs. 35/-.
It is not in dispute that an employee who falls within the scope of the FR 56. his age of retirement would be 60 years.
5.
The matter was considered by the Supreme Court in SP Duby v. Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, 1991(2) SCT 201(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 276.
One SP Duby was employed with the Corporation.
He was made to retire at the age of 58 years.
His claim was that the age of superannuation was 60 years.
The aforementioned employee was working with Central Provinces Transport Service.
The age of retirement in the above Corporation was 60 years.
This Corporation- was taken over by petitioner-Corporation.
When the petitioner-Corporation sought to fix the age of retirement at 58 years he preferred a writ petition in this Court.
This was dismissed.
An appeal was preferred.
The Supreme Court concluded that the age of retirement would be 60 years.
The decision given in the case of General Manager, Mysore Road Transport v. Dev Raj Ors, AIR 1965 SC 1027 was taken note of with a view to hold that the instructions issued by the State Government under section 34 of the Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950 would be binding on it.
The matter was dealt with in paras 9 and 10.
These read as under.-  "9.
The appellant was in service of the company from 1947 to August 30, 1955.
Admittedly, the age of superannuation of the company employees was 60 years.
The Government of Madhya Pradesh took over the company with effect from August 31, 1955 by a notification of the same date.
The notification specifically stated that the existing staff of the company would not be adversely affected with regard to their conditions of service.
It is no doubt correct that on August 31, 1955 rules were operating in respect of the State Government employees according to which the age of superannuation was 58 years but the persons who were serving with the company were taken into Government service with a specific assurance that their conditions of service were not to be adversely affected.
When the State Government takes over a private company and gives an assurance of the type it is but fair that the State Government should honour the same.
Thus, the State Service rules which fixed the age of superannuation at 58 years could not be made applicable to the appellant and other employees of the taken over company.
We, therefore, do not agree with the reasoning of the High Court.
10.
It was then urged that on the transfer of appellant's services to the Corporation he was governed by Regulations framed by the Corporation under the Act and Regulation 59 provided 58 years as the age of superannuation.
We do not agree with the contention.
The State Government issued directions under Section 34 of the Act which we have reproduced above.
The said directions are binding on the Corporation.
This Court in The General Manager, Mysore State Road Transport Corporation v. Devraj Urs, (1976)2 SCC.
862 : AIR 1976 SC.
1027, interpreting Section 34 the Act held as under :-  Directions given by the State Government are binding on the Corporation and it cannot depart from any general instructins issued under sub- section (1) of section 34 except with the previous permission of the State Government.
Such instructions have the force of law. . . .
Therefore, breach of the directions given by State Government in the matter of disciplinary action against the respondents was a breach of the statutory duty and made the action of the Corporation amendable to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution."
In view of the above, the argument that the age of retirement should still be 58 years cannot be accepted.
6.
Fundamental Rule 56 was also interpreted in the case of Prithipal Singh v.
U.O.I., 1991(2) SCT 109(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 915.
It was held that a person who answers the description of the term 'workman' is to remain in service till he attains the age of 60 years FR56(b) was noticed in the above judgment, this reads as under :  "F.R.56(b) - A workman covered by these rules shall retire from service in the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of 58 years."
It was held that the workman had to satisfy the twin test of being an artisan and also a person who is employed in an Industrial or workcharged establishment.
Prithipal Singh who was a driver of a staff car was held to be a workman.
The Supreme Court was of the view that he has to use his whole body specially his hand and feet to drive the vehicle.
He was accodingly treated as a skilled or a semi-skilled person.
7.
Similar view was expressed in Chandigarh Administration through the Chief Engineer v. Mehar Singh, (1992) Suppl.2 SCC 43.
8.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (3rd Ed.) Vo.1 page 103 defines the term artisan.
According to it, it means :  "1.
One who practices and cultivates art, an artist.
2.
One occupied in any industrial act, a mechanic or handicraftsman; Artist has been defined to mean "one who pursues some practical science, a follower of manual art." Webster's Third New International Dictionary Volume I defines artisan as under.-  "One who practices an art, 2.
One trained to manual dexterity or skill in a trade.
The Black's Law Dictionary defines artisan as under :  "One skilled in some kind of trade, craft, or art requiring manual dexterity e.g. a carpenter, plumber, tailor, mechanic."
9.
The words workman and artisan therefore have to be understood in common parlance in a wider sense as engaged in an art or an artist or one employed in any of the industrial act or produces an article of commercial value or utility with manual dexterity, either by manual labour or with the help of tools or machine and brings into existence a product for the sale or service.
An element or an effort not only would be applied to bring into existence an article of commercial goods with dexterity employing manual or technical labour or with the aid of tools.
In the present case the person concerned is admittedly a fitter and cannot be placed at a position worse than a driver of a car and would thus be an artisan and a workman.
As such this petition is without merit and is dismissed.