Ashok Bhan, J - Challenge in this petition is to the order Annexure P.1 dated 841988 terminating the services of the petitioner and to regularise his services with effect from 1111986 in terms of the policy decision dated 1621987 Annexure P2 framed by the State of Haryana to regularise the services of Class-III employees who had completed two years' service as on 1111986.
Shortly stated the facts are :-  2.
Petitioner was appointed on 741983 to Class-III post as a Clerk on ad hoc basis.
He continued to work in that capacity till 2891984, on which date his services were terminated.
On a representation filed by the petitioner, he was reinstated in service as a Clerk on 2031985.
He was granted continuity in service and the intervening period during which he remained out of service was ordered to be treated as leave of the kind due.
Thereafter, the petitioner continued to work as Clerk till 841988.
He had completed five years service on the date his services were terminated.
Order of termination has been attached as Annexure P.1.
3.
State of Haryana issued a policy decision Annexure P2 dated 1621987 to the effect that the services of Class-III ad hoc employees who had completed two year services as on 1111986 be regularised.
One of the conditions laid down in this policy decision was that the services of those employees were to be regularised who were working against the posts which had been taken out of the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board).
Since the petitioner was working against a post which was within the purview of the Board, his services were not regularised.
In this backdrop of facts, the present writ petition was filed challenging the order of termination Annexure P.1 inter alia on the ground that the petitioner had completed more than two years of service as on 1111986 and was thus entitled to be regularised, that the condition in the policy decision that only such Class-III ad hoc employees shall be regularised whose posts were out of the purview of the Board was arbitrary and was liable to be struck down.
4.
On the notices issued to the respondents, written statement was filed.
The stand taken in the written statement is that petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis and his services were terminated because the Chief Secretary to the Govt. of Haryana had granted ex-gratia employment to Shri Yudhvir Singh on compassionate ground as his father Abhey Ram had died while in service.
The services of the petitioner were terminated being the junior-most employee in the Health Department to make room for the said Yudhvir Singh; that the instructions issued by the State of Haryana were not applicable to the petitioner as his post was within the purview of the Board and the condition in the policy decision Annexure P-2 that it would not be applicable to the posts which were within the purview of the Board was not arbitrary.
5.
This writ petition came up for hearing before the Division Bench consisting of GC Mital and SS Sodhi, JJ (as their Lordships were then) on 30111988.
The writ petition was allowed in terms of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(4) SLR 739 and the order of termination was set aside.
Against Piara Singh's case (supra) special leave petition was filed.
Supreme Court of India allowed the SLP filed by the State of Haryana on December 6, 1993 and remitted the case to this Court for re-decision keeping in view the law laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(3) RSJ 235.
The case was placed before the Division Bench.
State of Haryana took an objection that the petitioner has filed a civil suit on the same cause of action and, therefore, the writ petition was not maintainable.
Petitioner was granted time to place on record the order passed by the civil Court.
Order of the civil Court has been placed on records as Annexure P-4.
Petitioner had filed the suit without service of notice under Section 80, C.P.C. on the defendants and an application was moved under section 80(2), C.P.C. for dispensing with the notices under section 80 CPC which was rejected.
Plaint was returned to the plaintiff (petitioner) for being presented after service of notice under Section 80 CPC The plea raised by the counsel for the respondents that the writ petition was barred by principles of res judicata would not be applicable as the plaint filed by the petitioner in the civil suit was ordered to be returned to him for being presented after service of notice under section 80, C.P.C. which the petitioner never did.
The question of any adjudication of the civil suit under the circumstances did not arise.
6.
The main point to be considered in this case is as to whether the petitioner was entitled to be regularised in terms of the policy decision Annexure P2 and as to whether the condition put in the policy decision that only those Class-III employees who were working against the posts which were within the purview of the Board would not entitled to regularisation was arbitrary or not.
These very instructions had come up for consideration before the Division Bench of this Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) which were struck down.
It was held as under :-  "In the State of Haryana from the year 1970 to 1987, till before the notification of 1st/4th March, 1987, was issued, most of Class-III and IV posts with which we are concerned, were kept out of the purview of the SSSB.
Moreover, for over ten years there was no SSSB.
By the notification dated 1st/4th March, 1987, certain posts have again been brought within the purview of the SSSB, and the regularisation policy contains a clause that the ad hoc employees working on the posts, which are within the purview of the SSSB, shall not be considered for regularisation.
When the aggrieved petitioners, whose posts have now come within the purview of the SSSB were appointed, these posts were outside its purview.
The basic question with which we are dealing is as to the fate of the ad hoc employees, who were so appointed by way of administrative necessity and have been allowed to continue for more than one year.
In one of the orders passed by the State of Punjab, for the purposes of regularisation, the following object was mentioned :- `Whereas by continuation of the ad hoc appointments made as above, as an administrative necessity, the ad hoc employees have acquired necessary experience and their ouster after a considerable period of service would entail hardship to ad hoc employees, as a whole and accentuate the problem of unemployment, the President of India is pleased to decide...' If the aforesaid is the background of regularisation the employee hardly knows whether he is being appointed on ad hoc basis against the post, which is within or outside the purview of the SSSB.
This is making as invidious distinction having no reasonable basis or object to be achieved and we hold it to be arbitrary.
The State of Haryana would be well advised in reframing its policy by deleting this clause/condition in the instructions issued by it.
Till then it will not be given effect to.
The decision of MR Agnihotri, J dated 2291987 in this behalf given in C.W.P.
No. 120 of 1987, which is under challenge in the LPA before us is also hereby set aside."
Against the judgment in Piara Singh's case (supra) an appeal was filed before the apex Court.
The judgment rendered by Their Lordships of the Supreme Court is reported as State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) : 1992(3) RSJ 235 in which it was held as under :-  "The learned Judges have further directed that in so far as the State of Haryana is concerned Class III and IV posts which were within the purview of the SSSB shall equally be within the purview of regularisation orders issued by it.
The learned Judges have pointed out that for a period of 10 years there was no such Board functioning and further that from the year 1970 to 1987 "most of the class III and IV posts with which we are concerned were kept out of the purview of the SSSB" The correctness of the said factual statement is not questioned before us.
It is, therefore, not necessary to alter or modify the direction made by the High Court on this aspect.
In fact, no arguments were addressed to us with respect to the said direction made by the High Court.
If any of the petitioners have been excluded from consideration (for regularisation) on the basis of the above condition, they may be considered and appropriate orders passed."
Relying upon para 16 of the judgment of the apex court in Piara Singh's case, referred to above and the subsequent judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 15414 of 1994 (Santosh Kumari v. State of Haryana and another), decided on 1111995, it was contended by the counsel for the petitioner that the condition imposed in the order Annexure P-2 dated 1621987 that the services of those employees would be regularised who were working against the posts taken out of the purview of the Board, was bad in law.
In Santosh Kumari's case (supra), the Division Bench of this Court while considering the same instructions and the effect of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) took the following view :-  "We fail to understand the contention reflected in this paragraph.
All these documents were relied upon by the respondents in Piara Singh's case (supra) and after considering the same, the Court has given direction to regularise the services of such ad hoc employees.
What is sought to be urged on behalf of the respondents by Mr. Kamal Sharma, the learned Addl.
AG Haryana is that in the year 1991, the Government has issued certain instructions and since Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Bali has issued a direction to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation in terms of the instructions, the case of the petitioner was considered in the light of the Government instructions issued in 1991 with effect from January 1, 1991, and thus, the petitioner was not entitled to regularisation with effect from November 1, 1986.
We are unable to accept this contention since the same would run counter to the direction given by the Court as well as by the Supreme Court in Piara Singh case (supra).
We are unable to appreciate the defence of the respondents that the petitioner's case is different and the Government instructions dated February 16, 1987, are not applicable.
No distinction has been brought to our notice.
In view of the pleadings of the parties and the decision of this Court as well as the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra), in our opinion, the petitioner is entitled to be regularised with effect from November 1, 1986.
The respondents are accordingly directed to regularise the services of the petitioner from November 1, 1986."
The instructions Annexure P2 to the extent it provided that the instructions shall not be applicable to those employees who were working against the posts which were within the purview of the Board was held to be bad.
It was further held that these instructions would be applicable to all employees who had put in two years service as ad hoc employees as on 1111986.
We concur with the reasoning given in Santosh Kumari's case (supra) and respectfully follow the same.
Petitioner had put in more than two years' service as on 1111986 and was thus entitled to be regularised w.e.f.
1111986.
Counsel for the respondent argued that the period of six months between 2891984 to 2031985 be not included while computing the period of two years as the petitioner had not worked for this period and had been granted leave of the kind due while he was in service on 2031985.
We do not find any substance in this submission.
The Division Bench of this Court in Saroj Bala v. The State of Haryana, C.W.P.
No. 645 of 1988, decided on August 9, 1989, held that the employee who has been granted leave of the kind due, he/she will be deemed to continue in service and therefore entitled to regularisation of service according to the policy.
It was observed therein as under :-  "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that it is wrong to say that the period from July 6, 1985 to July 23, 1985, for which period the leave of the kind due was granted to the petitioner should not be counted for counting two years' service.
While she was granted leave of the kind due, she will be deemed to continue in service and, therefore, she was entitled to regularisation according to the policy letter Annexure P4.
Consequently this petition succeeds and it is directed that the case of the petitioner be considered for regularisation in view of the policy letter Annexure P4 within two months."
Thus, the period for which the petitioner was granted leave of the kind due has to be counted while computing the period of total service of the petitioner.
7.
Since the petitioner had put in more than two years' service as on 1111986, he would be entitled to regularisation w.e.f.
1111986.
He will be deemed to have been regularised w.e.f.
1111986.
Termination of his services by the order Annexure P.1 would be bad in law as service of regular employees could not be terminated on the ground that his services were no longer required by the department.
Service of the regular employee can be terminated only in accordance with the rules framed by the State Govt. in this regard after following the due procedure provided therein.
The impugned order Annexure P.1 is set aside and the petitioner is ordered to be reinstated within one month from the receipt/production of a copy of this judgment before the authorities concerned.
Respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioner with effect from 1111986.
Petitioner would be deemed to continue in service from the date of his appointment.
8.
Petitioner has not worked for the last seven years.
On a question put by this Court to the counsel for the petitioner as to whether the petitioner was gainfully employed during this period or not.
Mr. RK Malik, Advocate, fairly conceded that the petitioner had not taken up any other job but was living with his parents and may have been helping his father on the land owned by him as an agriculturist.
Keeping in view the fact that petitioner may have been helping his father as an agriculturist, we hold that he would be entitled to 50% of the back wages from the date his services were terminated till today.
For all other purposes, he would be deemed to be in service and would be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Civil Writ Petition is allowed in the above terms with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.