Mrs. Shobha Dikshit, J - Petitioner has approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with the prayer to issue a writ of certiorari quashing the orders dated 1761992 and 2111993 contained in Annexures 6 and 9 respectively to the writ petition by which the State Government has declined to promote him in the higher grade and thereafter in super-time scale.
Petitioner has further prayed to quash the orders dated 11111991 and 9121991 contained in Annexures 10 and 11 respectively by which the opposite parties have though granted special grade to the petitioner but erroneously with effect from 21.12.1979.
Petitioner claims that the same ought to have been granted to him with effect from 1051975 when his junior was given the same.
2.
This writ petition is second in sequence.
Petitioner had approached this Court earlier also through Writ Petition No. 556 of 1980 which was allowed by a Division Bench vide its judgment and order dated 1811989 a copy of which is annexed as Annexure 2 to the Writ Petition.
The concluding paragraph of this judgment reads as follows:  "In view of what has been stated above, the writ petition is allowed and the punishment order dated 15111979 contained in Annexure 13, the order dated 5111979 passed by State Government contained in Annexure 21 to the writ petition and the order dated 1431988 contained in Annexure 26 to the writ petition are quashed and a mandamus is issued to the opposite parties not to give effect to the suspension order dated 17.11.1973 contained in Annexure 1 and these orders mentioned above and treat them as inoperative and ineffective and non-existing.
A writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the opposite parties to consider the case of the petitioner for awarding him selection grade and also for promotion to I.A.S.
cadre from PCS quota for the year 1979-80 and in case the petitioner retires during this period the opposite party will consider his case and give a decision within a period of one month from the date of production of copy of this order in accordance with law giving him necessary grade, promotion and other benefits etc.
There will be no order as to costs."
3.
That after the grant of aforesaid reliefs, petitioner made representation after representation to the opposite parties for implementing the same but the State Government declined to grant the same on the alleged ground of unsuitability.
Petitioner's grievance therefore, in the instant writ petition is that the opposite parties have acted illegally, mala fide and capriciously.
Petitioner further alleges bias and discrimination also.
4.
Let us now notice the relevant facts :  5.
Petitioner is a direct recruit to UP Provincial Civil Service (Executive Branch) [hereinafter referred to as PCS (E)] of 1956 batch.
In the year 1973, when the petitioner was posted as Officer Incharge, Municipal Board, Meerut, he has placed under suspension allegedly on the ground that on conducting some preliminary enquiry, he has been found guilty of serious irregularities pertaining to the year 1972 while he was posted as Deputy Director of Consolidation, Meerut.
No chargesheet was served on him in spite of his repeated requests for about three years when the petitioner filed a claim petition challenging the suspension order before the UP Public Services Tribunal, Lucknow.
During the pendency of this claim petition, a chargesheet was served upon him by the Chairman, Administrative Tribunal.
The claim petition was finally heard by the UP Public Services Tribunal but before the judgment could be pronounced a second chargesheet was served upon him on 23.12.1977 containing charges which were wholly unrelated to alleged charges for which he was suspended.
Not only this, during the pendency of the aforesaid claim petition, the State Government instituted a vigilance enquiry also against the petitioner in the year 1974 but the same was referred by the State Government to the Administrative Tribunal (I) after two years ie in the year 1976 which exonerated him from the first charge.
A copy of the enquiry report was however never supplied to the petitioner.
6.
Since the petitioner had already been exonerated in respect of the charge, the petitioner represented to the State Government to reinstate him as the second charge had no relevance to the order of suspension.
Consequently, the State Government vide its order dated 5101978 reinstated the petitioner and posted him as Assistant Land Reforms Commissioner, Board of Revenue, Lucknow.
7.
A reference to second charge at this stage is necessary because it is this charge which has virtually ruined the service career of the petitioner.
The charge levelled against the petitioner was that while deciding a chak revision No. 756 of 1968-69 Ram Chandra v. Ram Nath, the petitioner had rejected the adjournment application moved by Laxmi Chandra Tyagi, Advocate who was appearing for the revisionist and later on, passed final orders factually after receipt of the transfer application of Laxmi Chandra Tyagi though shown to have been presented before the passing of the order.
The charge in substance was that the petitioner made interpolations and manipulations in the order-sheet and is guilty of misconduct.
The petitioner submitted his reply to this charge before the Administrative Tribunal but the Tribunal found him guilty of the same and recommended punishment of stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect and sent its recommendations to the government vide its order dated 2711979.
The.
State Government acted upon this report and issued a show cause notice to the petitioner as to why the said punishment be not awarded to him and to further withhold his salary for the period he remained suspended and not to count this period on duty for the purpose of promotion.
Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner preferred a writ petition No. 556 of 1980 in this Court praying for quashing of the suspension order, punishment awarded to him and for issuance of writ of mandamus treating him in continuous services and to consider his case for promotion to IAS Cadre in the quota for PCS officers in the year 1979-80.
The petitioner further prayed for directing the State Government to grant selection grade to the petitioner in the pay scale of Rs. 14004800 from the due date.
8.
The second charge was based on some strictures/observations made in a judgment passed by this Court in Writ Petition No. 2213 of 1973 filed by one Ram Chandra under Consolidation of Holdings Act related to the aforesaid matter of chak division which was heard and disposed of by the petitioner in his capacity as Deputy Director of Consolidation, Meerut.
The observations being uncalled for and unwarranted were challenged by the petitioner before Hon'ble Supreme Court in the year 1974 through Civil Appeal No. 306 of 1974.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court after considering the matter allowed the Civil Appeal No. 306 of 1974 preferred by the petitioner by its judgment and order dated 9.10.1987 and observed that the Lucknow Bench of this Court is free to dispose of the writ petition preferred by the appellant dispassionately and on merits without any reference to the earlier remarks of the learned Judge at Allahabad and expunged all the remarks "as nil".
9.
The Writ Petition No. 556 of 1980 was duly contested by the State Government and was finally heard and decided by a Division Bench of this Court vide its judgment and order dated 1811989, of which has been annexed as Annexure 2 to the writ petition.
The learned Judges have discussed in great detail the second charge levelled against the petitioner and came to the conclusion that the findings arrived at by the Administrative Tribunal were in violation of principles of natural justice.
It further held that after Hon'ble Supreme Court expunged the remarks recorded by this Court in an earlier Writ Petition No. 2213 of 1973, the entire basis for levelling the second charge goes.
The Division Bench thus held:  "After the expunction of remarks by the Supreme Court, the entire basis goes away and it is remark which led to all these proceedings which remained pending, for years together depriving the petitioner of his legitimate dues including promotion.
Thus, there being no case, the suspension of the petitioner and the punishment order which was passed against him was not in conformity with any law but was rather in violation of law.
The finding on which action has been subsequently taken on the second charge-sheet after State having failed to prove the first charge-sheet the entire proceedings are rendered void, illegal and the punishment order is manifestly illegal and cannot be sustained."
10.
It seems that the long drawn agony of the petitioner did not come to an end.
This Court in the aforesaid judgment has already observed that it is only this remark which led to all these proceedings which remained pending for years together thereby depriving the petitioner of his legitimate dues including promotion.
After the aforesaid judgment, the petitioner made several representations before the opposite parties requesting them to implement the said judgment as early as possible because he had already suffered irreparable loss for about 16 years.
Soon after the aforesaid decision, the petitioner superannuated on 3111980 while holding the post of Joint Secretary in the Directorate of Institutional Finance, State Government.
Copies of several such representations have been annexed to this writ petition by which he continued to represent and request the opposite parties to consider his case notional promotion to IAS cadre and grant of selection grade and super-time scale.
11.
This State Government after maintaining silence for long granted special grade to the petitioner with effect from 22121979 (Annexure 10 to the writ petition).
Petitioner represented again saying that the special grade has not been granted correctly i.e. from the date it was given to his junior Rajendra Kumar on 1051976, but the State Government instead of correcting the error, rejected the request of the petitioner vide communication dated 9121991 (Annexure 11) impugned herein.
12.
As regards petitioner's representation for grant of higher grade and super-time scale, the State government rejected his representation vide orders dated 1961992 and 2111993 (Annexures 6 and 9) informing him that his case for promotion was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee on 18.5.1992 but the said Committee did not find the petitioner suitable for grant of promotion in the higher pay scale in the PCS Rs. 5100-5700/-.
This letter further states that once the Committee did not find him suitable for higher grade, therefore, the question of consideration for grant of super-time scale of Rs. 5900-6700/- does not arise.
13.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner has approached this Court again with the prayer to quash the impugned orders and command the opposite parties to give him his dues.
14.
A show cause notice was issued to the opposite parties and sufficient time and opportunity has been granted to file counter-affidavit but the same has not been filed so far.
We, therefore, proceed to decide the matter on the basis of the averments made by the petitioner which remain uncontroverted.
15.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
16.
Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that once this Court in the earlier writ petition had finally adjudicated and held that after the expunction of alleged remarks by the Apex Court, the entire basis for any adverse action taken against the petitioner goes and thus, the petitioner became entitled to all the benefits i.e. promotion, increments, allowances etc. which were withheld by the State Government on that count alone.
It was further held by the Division Bench that petitioner is also entitled for promotion to IAS cadre from PCS for the quota for the year 1979-80.
However, on the question of issuing necessary directions to promote the petitioner, instead of directing to consider him for the same, the learned Judges while placing reliance on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of The District Registrar, Palghat v. MB Koyakutty, reported in 1979(2) SCC 150 held that in peculiar circumstances, the Courts can even direct promotion as well as determine seniority too but in the facts and circumstances of this case, the learned Judges while quashing all the punishment orders including the suspension order passed by the State Government issued mandamus directing the opposite parties to consider the case of the petitioner for awarding selection grade and also for promotion to IAS cadre from PCS quota for the year 1979-80.
It was further provided that in case the petitioner retires before his case is so considered for promotion to IAS cadre even then opposite parties shall consider his case for promotion to IAS within one month from the date of production of a certified copy of the said order for the same in accordance with law.
The relevant part of the directions/mandamus issued are again extracted for ready reference.
"A writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the opposite parties to consider the case of the petitioner for awarding him selection grade and also for promotion to IAS cadre from PCS quota for the year 1979-80 and in case the petitioner retires during this period the opposite party will consider his case and give a decision within a period of one month from the date of production of copy of this order in accordance with law giving him necessary grade, promotion and other benefits etc.
There will be no order as to costs."
17.
In the light of the aforesaid directions, the learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously urged that the mandamus of this Court was very clear i.e. to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to IAS cadre but regarding promotion in higher grades, the mandamus was to give the same to the petitioner.
In spite of the aforesaid clear mandamus, the authorities after maintaining silence for all these years granted him only selection grade and that too with effect from a later date i.e. 22121979 whereas it should have been given to the petitioner with effect from 1051975 when the same was given to his junior Shri Ramesh Chandra, and declined to grant higher grade and the supertime scale for no cogent reasons.
Learned counsel assailed the decision of the State Government declining to grant the aforesaid reliefs on the ground that the authorities have acted arbitrarily with bias, caprice and vindictiveness.
The allegation of discrimination has been made on the ground that since his juniors were given all these promotions whereas the petitioner has been denied the same when there is nothing against him after the remarks given by the State government pursuant to the strictures passed by a Division Bench of this Court were expunged by the Apex Court.
18.
We have perused the judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 9101978 and the judgment of this Court dated 1811989 and various representations submitted by the petitioner.
We have no doubt whatsoever in our minds that except the allegations of interpolation in the order-sheet in the year 1972 made by an Advocate in some consolidation proceeding, there is nothing against this officer for which he has been made to suffer for about two decades, and his service career has been completely ruined.
The representations preferred by the petitioner from time to time, copies of which have been annexed to this writ petition make a pathetic reading and very clearly reflect the total apathy of the State Government in not granting reliefs to the petitioner in spite of the fact that he was exonerated of all the charges by none else but the Apex Court of this country.
The impugned orders contain no reason whatsoever as to why the petitioner could not be given the higher and the super-time scale.
19.
No counter affidavit has been filed in spite of sufficient opportunity being given to the learned Standing Counsel.
The opposite parties could have disclosed the reasons for not granting him the said grades through it, but they have chosen to remain silent again.
20.
Learned counsel for the petitioner next contended that at no point of time any adverse entry has been communicated to the petitioner except his earlier suspension on some flimsy ground from which he was exonerated by the Administrative Tribunal long back and after his reinstatement on 16101978, he was posted as Assistant Land Reforms Commissioner, Board of Revenue, Lucknow and thereafter he performed his duties to the best of his ability and he was never even orally cautioned or informed about any adverse material on his record so much so that he ultimately retired from the post of Joint Secretary in the Finance Department of the State Government.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the only possible reason which the petitioner could think of for not granting him the aforesaid benefits could be gaps in the annual remarks for the years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 and 1977- 78.
Learned counsel stated that the guess of the petitioner is that the opposite parties being biased and vindictive might have possibly treated the entries for this period as average whereas they could have very well treated them as good or very good since in spite of so much of harassment, the petitioner successfully performed his duties on such posts on which he was directed to be posted.
It would be relevant to mention in the words of the petitioner himself as to how he presented his case through his representation submitted to the opposite parties dated 15.7.1992 after his request for grant of relief was rejected.
"But sir, as I regret bothering you, it appears that in taking this decision, the background of the matter seems to have been ignored.
For a bona fide writing of order-sheet, in a judicial file by a reader, the punishments imposed by the government are detailed at Annexure-'A' which would convince you of unjustness and need for review.
The gap in character roll entries for the period of suspension, treated as satisfactory, could be very good as well.
In spite of the shabby, demoralising treatment I got from the government, my faith in very good conscientious work, in noble traditions of Civil Service, was never shattered as would be revealed from my entire character roll.
I had the fortune to work under stalwarts of administration like Messrs. RK Trivedi, Ex.
Governor, Gujarat, Mahesh Prasad, Nripendra Misra and their assessment cannot be easily ignored on any mathematics or formula evolved by the government, to assess the merit of an officer, who cleared merit based selection to Special Grade of PCS in 1979 by the same DPC.
I wonder if the government, under your positive stewardship, would care to reconsider the matter of promotion in this light and allow me notional promotion to Higher Grade and Supertime Scale of PCS, and put an end to long mental torture, started in 1973.
You can appreciate my agony and suffering.
Besides the above, there are still some reliefs the government can confer even now, which have been detailed in the enclosed representation.
I would be obliged if the matter could be examined afresh and legal views, taken by the Highest Court of the land, the Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Court of Allahabad and other High Courts and Tribunals, is implemented and decision communicated at an early date.
I would appreciate if my long standing injustice is removed and I get peace, at least after retirement, which has been denied so far and I richly deserve."
21.
In spite of the aforesaid appeal which the petitioner made to the opposite parties after the higher and super-time scale were declined to him, the authorities instead of applying their minds afresh, rejected his request in the same mechanical manner through communication dated 2111993 contained in Annexure 9 impugned herein.
22.
The petitioner also annexed details of various adverse actions taken against him for which he suffered for about two decades.
The same are as follows:  1.
The integrity of the petitioner for the year 1972-73 was withheld and was not certified for a long period of 12 years merely on the ground that.
since the Administrative Tribunal has found him guilty of having made interpolations and manipulations in the order-sheet pending before him with mala fide intention, therefore, his integrity cannot be certified.
This situation continued and it was only on 681984 that his integrity was certified and he was given promotion in special grade on 17101984 but with effect from 28.12.1979.
This still did not grant him full relief because his junior was granted the special grade with effect from 1051976 but the State Government in spite of repeated requests declined to correct this error.
2.
Petitioner remained suspended from 18121973 to 16101978 when he was reinstated for no fault of his and it was merely the inaction of the State Government that his suspension continued without any charge-sheet for the said five years.
3.
His two increments were arbitrarily withheld.
4.
Payment of salary for the period he remained suspended was withheld and the State Government further ordered to exclude the period of suspension from his service as not been spent in the same.
5.
Lastly, denial of higher grade of Rs. 5100-5700/- supertime scale Rs. 5900-6700/- and his consideration for his promotion to IAS cadre.
23.
Out of the aforesaid punishments/adverse orders, presently the petitioner is aggrieved by denial of grant of higher grade and super-time scale.
He is further aggrieved by the grant of special grade with effect from 22121970 whereas it should have been given with effect from 1051975.
24.
Regarding the grant of special grade with effect from 22121979 and refusing to correct the same to 10th May, 1975, the petitioner has extracted the gradation list of PCS officers for the year 1985 in Annexure 13.
A perusal of the same clearly shows that his junior Sri Rajendra Kumar (I) was given the special grade with effect from 1051975 and in front of the name of the petitioner, the date has been shown as 10101984 which was later on corrected to 22121979 which again is wrong.
This position is since uncontroverted, hence we have no doubt in our minds that the State Government has committed an error by granting the same to the petitioner with effect from 22121979 instead of 1051975.
We, therefore, quash the office memorandum dated 11111991 bearing, No. 9436/Do-(2)-4/2(64)/89 contained in Annexure-10 as also the communication to the petitioner dated 9121991 contained in Annexure-11 and direct the opposite parties to issue fresh order granting special grade to the petitioner with effect from the date the same was given to his junior i.e. 1051975 within two weeks from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before them.
25.
In connection with the grant of higher grades, we perused the executive instructions contained in Annexure-14 dated 2961978.
Clauses 5 and 7 of the same provide that an officer who is exonerated of the charges should be immediately given the promotion to which he is entitled in the event he was not suspended or his case might not have been referred to the Administrative Tribunal.
His seniority should also be maintained.
The petitioner is, therefore, within his rights to claim the reliefs because he has been exonerated of all the charges which have been levelled against him by Hon'ble Supreme Court as also this Court in the earlier judgment.
We have also perused the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court relying upon a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in the earlier writ petition (supra) and find that in the facts and circumstances of this case also, the aforesaid decision is fully applicable.
The facts of the present case are so telling that we are constrained to direct the opposite parties to grant the petitioner higher scale as also the super-time scale.
May be some element of selection is involved while granting super-time scale but in the facts of the present case as also in the light of the mandamus already issued by this Court earlier, the opposite parties are directed to grant both the grades to the petitioner with effect from the date the same were given to the petitioner's junior.
Since the petitioner has retired, therefore, this has to be an exercise to grant him these benefits notionally only.
The damage to the petitioner's career because of the alleged incident of 1972 is indeed irreparable and even the grant of these two grades though notionally cannot suitably compensate him for what he has suffered and lost in his career.
Petitioner lost promotion to IAS cadre for which an officer of Provincial Civil Service aspires and looks forward.
We, therefore, hold that in the facts and circumstances of this case, the petitioner is entitled to these benefits for the reason that his seniority and fitness for grant of the same has not been disputed by the State Government either through the orders passed by it or by filing a counter affidavit indicating the same therein.
26.
In the light of the aforesaid findings, we quash the orders passed by the State Government and communicated to the petitioner dated 1961992 contained in Annexure-6 as also the order dated 2111993 contained in Annexure-9.
27.
We, therefore, allow the writ petition with costs and issue a writ of mandamus to the opposite parties to pass fresh orders in the light of our findings within four weeks from the date a certified copy of this order is placed before them granting special grade to the petitioner with effect from May 10th 1975, higher grade and supertime scale with effect from the date the same was given to his junior and make the payment of all the arrears of salary and allowances etc. as a result of these orders within one month thereafter along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
Opposite parties shall also refix the pension and other pensionary benefits due to the petitioner accordingly within two months thereafter and pay the arrears etc. towards the same without any further delay.
Cost is quantified to Rs. 10,000/-.
Petition allowed.