GS Singhvi, J - These two writ petitions are being decided by a common order because one of the issues relating to eligibility of respondent-Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari to be appointed against the roster point reserved for Backward Class candidate in the Punjab Civil Medical Services (Class 1) Rules, 1972 is common in both the cases.
Of course, Dr. Puran Singh Jassi has raised some other points in addition to his challenge to the eligibility of Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
2.
Reference to the facts of the two cases may now be made.
Dr. Puran Singh Jassi, who belongs to Scheduled Caste, joined Punjab Civil Service Class II (for Short PCMS-II) on 2221965 against the roster point reserved for the Scheduled Caste candidate on the basis of selection made by the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short, the Commission).
He was promoted to Punjab Civil Medical Service Class-I (for short, PCMS-I) on 22.12.1975.
He was promoted as Deputy Director, Health Services, vide order dated 27.9.1989.
Subsequently, this order was modified vide Annexure P-1 dated 1321990 and the petitioner was treated as promoted on the post of Deputy Director, Health Services, w.e.f.
9.5.1988.
He was further promoted as Joint Director and Additional Director respectively w.e.f.
13111990 and 4.11.1991.
The petitioner claims that between 21101988 and 20101989, he had made several representations for promotion to the post of Deputy Director, Health Services, w.e.f.
2561986 but the Government ignored his claim and promoted him as Deputy Director only w.e.f.
9.5.1988.
After the issue of order dated 1321990, the petitioner made about ten representations between 1431990 and 11101993 for grant of retrospective promotion as Deputy Director w.e.f.
2561986 and one of his grievances is that such representations have not been decided by the Government so far.
Though the petitioner and respondent No. 3 have made reference to some criminal cases and disciplinary proceedings initiated against the petitioner all those proceedings are not relevant because the order of punishment passed against the petitioner as a result of disciplinary proceedings was set aside by the Government.
Proceedings under the criminal cases were also quashed for want of sanction and even though the sanction was subsequently given by the Government in the year 19(sic) no further action seems to have been taken against the petitioner.
Petitioner Dr. Jassi has claimed that as per the policy of the Government for providing reservation in favour of members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes point Nos. 1, 7,15,22, 30, 37,44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80,87 and 94 are meant for Scheduled Castes with a total reservation of 14% in Class-I and Class-II services and roster point Nos. 26 and 76 are reserved for Backward Classes with total reservation of 2%.
He has further pleaded that reservation in the promotion quota for Class-I and Class-II services came to be provided vide Government circular dated 451974 and after that day, the first vacancy was given to the Scheduled Caste on 18.3.1975.
The seventh vacancy was given to another Scheduled Caste on 1021978.
Reserved point No. 15 was given to a general category candidate and the carried forward point was given to Dr. Ram Lal at Serial No. 17.
The reserved point No. 22 was also given to a general category candidate and although the petitioner became entitled to be given point No. 22, the same was not given to him.
Instead he was given 34th vacancy against reserved point No. 22.
He has pleaded that despite his eligibility to be promoted at reserved point No. 22, the respondents ignored his claim and promoted one Dr. Pritpal Singh and in this manner the respondents have deprived him of his valuable right of preferential promotion as a member of Scheduled Caste.
3.
Another grievance of the petitioner relates to respondent No. 2 Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
Petitioner's assertion is that Dr. Bhandari was not entitled to be treated as a member of Backward Class as per the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab which postulated that only a person whose family income does not exceed Rs. 1,000/- per annum is eligible to be treated as a member of the Backward Class.
The petitioner has stated that respondent No. 2 was appointed as PCMS-II in December, 1964 but he did not join on the ground that he was doing a house-job from 111965 to 31121965.
He was ultimately appointed as PCMS-II on 111966.
Further assertion of the petitioner is that the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab on 241981 (Annexure P-8) are not applicable to the case of respondent No. 2 because his own income was more than Rs. 1800/- per annum during the year 1965 and subsequent waiver of the income limit cannot operate to the benefit of respondent No. 2.
In para 9 of the writ petition detailed averments have been made by the petitioner to show that the evidence produced by respondent No. 2 in order to claim himself to be a member of Backward Class was wholly unreliable and in fact respondent No. 2 had tried to hoodwink the Government by producing fake documents.
The petitioner has heavily relied on Annexure P-13 dated 871983 and Annexure P-14 dated 15121982 written by the office of the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, indicating that respondent No. 2 cannot be given benefit of reservation at the stage of promotion.
Petitioner says that notwithstanding the overwhelming evidence available with the department showing that respondent-Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari was not entitled to be treated as a member of Backward Class, the Government issued order Annexure P-15 dated 111994 giving benefit of roster point No. 26 and thus placing him above the petitioner.
4.
Third facet of the petitioner's case relates to his claim for promotion as Director, Health Services, as per the Roster.
In support of his claim that there exist two posts of Directors, the petitioner has stated that the post of Assistant Director, Health, was upgraded to that of Assistant Director (State Insurance) which was in turn upgraded to that of Deputy Director (State Insurance) then as Joint Director (State Insurance) and finally upgraded to the post of Director, Employees and State Insurance vide order Annexure P-17.
The petitioner has also pleaded that against the post of Director, E.S.I.
Shri Inderjit Singh, the then Joint Director, Health Services, was promoted vide order dated 2241985 and as per the reservation policy of the Government contained in circular dated 451974 roster points 1, 7, 15, 22 and so on should have been reserved and given to the Scheduled Castes candidates.
It has been stated that Dr. Ram Lal (SC) was appointed as Director, ESI on 14.12.1990 and, therefore, he will be deemed to have been adjusted against first roster point and therefore seventh vacancy should have been filled from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes at roster point No. 9.
However, the claim of the members of the Scheduled Caste has been ignored and respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have been promoted as Directors (SI) vide orders (Annexures P20 and P-21).
5.
Petitioner has also made reference to a civil suit filed by Dr. NS Bhatt against respondent-Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
It has been given out that the suit filed by Dr. Bhatt was decreed by the Sub Judge first Class, Jalandhar, on 1821992.
This decree was reversed by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, vide judgment and decree dated 4.11.1992 and Regular Second Appeal No. 2366 of 1992 filed by Dr. Nidhan Singh Bhatt is pending.
In that case, an order against the reversion of the appellant from the post of Joint Director has been passed.
Reference has also been made to Civil Writ Petition No. 3661 of 1993 filed by Dr. Manmohan Kaur and it has been alleged that the said petition was filed with the sole object of obstructing the promotion of the petitioner.
6.
In their reply, respondent Nos. 1, 5 and 7 have by and large admitted the averments made by the petitioner in regard to his service particulars.
However, these respondents have disputed the claim of the petitioner to be promoted as Deputy Director w.e.f.
2561986 on the ground that he was not eligible on account of lack of 10 years experience as PCMS-I.
According to the respondents, the petitioner had remained on extraordinary leave from 1141980 to 25.2.1981 and, therefore this period cannot be treated as a period spent on duty for the purpose of counting of experience.
It has also been pleaded that sanctioned strength of the cadre of Deputy Director was 7 as on 3131986 and on the basis of 14% reservation, one post could be given to a member of Scheduled Caste and further that Dr. Ram Lal, who too belongs to Scheduled Caste and who is senior to the petitioner in PCMSI, was promoted against the roster point No. 15.
On the basis of these assertions, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioner had no right to be given the benefit of reservation after completion of the reservation quota.
In regard to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari, these respondents have stated that Dr. Bhandari had submitted application before the Punjab Public Service Commission for being treated as a member of Backward Class and had produced his own as well as his father's affidavits and thereafter he was recruited as a Medical Officer.
Earlier to this, he was offered temporary appointment as Medical Officer till the availability of the regularly selected candidates.
The respondent (Dr. Bhandari) did not join duty by disclosing that he was doing house-job.
Ultimately, he joined in PCMS-II on 111966.
It has been denied that respondent-Baldev Raj Bhandari was getting more than Rs. 1,000/- as stipend.
Further assertion of the respondents is that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari was considered by the Commission as a member of Backward Class.
He later on claimed his promotion to PCMS-I against the reserved point No. 26.
His representation was considered by the Government.
Thereafter a notice was issued to the affected persons for submission of objections.
Finally, the Government decided to give him the benefit of reserved point No. 26 and for this purpose order dated 22121986 was issued.
In this manner, respondent Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari has been treated as promoted on the post of Deputy Director w.e.f.
16101986.
In regard to the post of Director, Health Service (SI) case of respondent Nos. 1, 5 and 7 is that the same is an ex-cadre post and, therefore, 100 point roster is not applicable to that post.
In regard to Annexure R-3, the respondents have pleaded that the said document cannot be treated as correct roster register because the Government has not accepted it to be correct.
It has also been pleaded by these respondents that the case of the petitioner was also considered for promotion as Director, Health and Family Welfare but other senior persons were available and found suitable for promotion and for this reason, the petitioner could not be promoted.
7.
In his separate reply, Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari has pleaded that while making application for recruitment to PCMS-II, he had claimed himself to be a member of Backward Class and had deposited concessional fee meant for Backward Class candidates.
Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari has stated that after his promotion to PCMs-I, he had made a representation for grant of benefit of reservation.
His claim was accepted by the Social Welfare Department as well as by the Health and Family Welfare Department.
Thereafter, notice (Annexure R2/3) dated 251985 was issued by the Government inviting objections against its proposal to give benefit of reservation to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
Some persons requested the Government to supply the documents.
These documents were made available vide letter dated 1331986 (Annexure R-2/4).
Objections submitted against the proposed decision were considered by the Government vide order dated 22121986 and thereafter Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari was given appointment to PCMS-I w.e.f.
1.4.1986 Annexure R-2/5.
Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari has further pleaded that Annexure P-16 is consequential to the order Annexure R-2/5 and as the petitioner had not challenged the legality of order dated 22121986, at his instance Annexure P- 15 cannot be quashed.
Another objection raised by Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari is that the petitioner was fully aware of the fact that benefit of roster point No. 26 has been given to him vide order dated 22121986 and yet he kept silent for a period of over seven years and that this unexplained delay is sufficient to non-suit the petitioner.
Allegation of suppression of material facts leading to the passing of order dated 22121986 has also been levelled against the petitioner.
It has been pleaded by Dr. Bhandari that the petitioner has knowingly suppressed the order dated 22121986 and has been able to mislead the Court in admitting the petition.
This respondent has also raised an objection of delay in regard to the petitioner's challenge to order (Annexure P-1) on the ground that the petitioner has challenged the order dated 1321990 after a period of four years of its issue.
On merits, Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari has pleaded that the petitioner is not entitled to get promotion against the reserved point No. 22 because one member of the Scheduled Caste had already been given benefit of reservation and that the roster point cannot be applied after the reservation quota is complete.
This respondent has asserted that Dr. Ram Lal was promoted as Joint Director on 921988 and the post vacated by him became available for promotion of the petitioner and in fact he has been given promotion to that post against roster point No. 34 by applying the carry forward rule.
It has also been pleaded by Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari that before the issue of order (Annexure P.15), the petitioner as well as the respondent No. 2 were given personal hearing and after considering the contentions put forward by both the sides, the Government passed the impugned order.
In paras 18, 19, 20 and 21 of his reply, respondent No. 2 has given details of his family income in support of his claim that he is a member of Backward Class and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to question his eligibility for promotion as a member of Backward Class.
8.
In a separate reply, respondent No. 3 has also contested the claim of the petitioner to be given promotion as Deputy Director w.e.f.
2561986 on the ground that the percentage of reservation stood achieved with the promotion of Dr. Ram Lal.
This respondent has also pleaded that the post of Director, Health Service (SI) is an ex-cadre post and against this post Dr. Ram Lal was already promoted.
Another plea raised by respondent No. 3 is that being a direct recruit to the post of Deputy Director, be has a right to be placed over and above the petitioner and qua him the petitioner cannot have any claim of preferential consideration.
9.
Respondent No. 4, Dr, Dalbir Singh Bakshi has also filed a separate reply and has raised objection of delay and laches.
He has asserted that on all the posts, namely, the posts of Deputy Director, Joint Director and Additional Director, he is senior to the petitioner and delay of more than four years in filing of the writ petition should be treated as sufficient to deny relief to the petitioner.
10.
In his separate replications filed in response, to the replies of respondent Nos. 1, 5 and 7 as well as respondent No. 2, the petitioner has reiterated his claim and has pleaded that his representation had not been decided by the Government for years together which by itself is sufficient to overlook the delay and that in any case the fraud played by Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari should not be ignored by the Court.
11.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 2649 of 1994, Dr. Manmohan Kaur has questioned the legality.
of order (Annexure P-20) dated 311994 by which respondent No. 4 has been granted promotion as Deputy Director, Health Services, w.e.f.
16101986.
She has prayed that this order be quashed and fixation of his seniority below Dr. HS Aneja and Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi be also declared illegal.
Annexure P-9 has also been attacked on the ground that it is consistent with the statutory rules.
A prayer has also been made by this petitioner to declare her senior to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
Dr. Manmohan Kaur joined service to PCMS-I on 831973 after selection by the Commission.
She was promoted as Joint Director w.e.f.
1171990 vide order Annexure P-4 dated 2491991.
By an order Annexure P-5 dated 2951991, she was given current-duty charge of the post of Additional Director (Food and Drugs) Punjab.
Her assertion is that three posts of Additional Directors, Health Services, were created on 2841989 and the fourth one on 2771991 and against one of these posts, she was posted as Additional Director.
Dr. Manmohan Kaur has alleged that assignment of seniority to Dr. Ram Lal as also to Dr. Puran Singh Jassi is violative of the Punjab Civil Medical Service (Class-I) Rules.
Her case is that in the seniority-lists of Class-I officers issued as on 171975 and 111992 respectively, she had been shown senior to Dr. Puran Singh Jassi as well as Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari but by unlawful grant of benefit of roster point No. 26, Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari is being treated senior to her.
This petitioner has also set out details in paragraphs 19 and 28 to show that Dr. Baldev Raj could not have been treated as a member of Backward Class.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of instructions dated 1971969 on the ground that they are inconsistent with the statutory rules.
12.
In reply, respondent No.
I to 3 have pleaded that after due consideration of representation submitted by respondent No. 4, the Government gave him benefit of roster point No. 26 reserved for Backward Class and he has been treated as promoted on the post of Deputy Director w.e.f.
16101986.
Thereafter, he was promoted as Joint Director and Additional Director.
Contention of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 is that the circulars issued by the Government regarding reservation have overriding effect qua the Service Rules and as the instructions contained in Annexure P-9 have been issued under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India, they shall prevail over the Service Rules.
13.
First argument of Shri Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel for Dr. Puran Singh Jassi, is that in terms of the circular issued by the Government of Punjab carry forward rule should have been given effect to for giving benefit of reservation at roster point No. 22 to the petitioner and even if application of carry forward rule had the effect of increasing the percentage of reservation beyond 14%, there was no justification to deny benefit of roster point No. 22 to the petitioner.
Learned counsel argued that the petitioner should have been given promotion w.e.f.
2561986 when vacancy at that point became available and, therefore, the action of respondent No. 1 in promoting the petitioner as Deputy Director only w.e.f 9.5.1988 should be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
Shri Aggarwal relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Arati Ray Choudhury v. Union of India and others, AIR 1974 SC 532.
Learned counsel for the respondents argued that the petitioner is not entitled to challenge the legality of order dated 1321990 in a writ petition filed after almost four years of the issue of that order.
They argued that the petitioner is guilty of laches and, therefore, he should not be given relief by this Court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction.
Counsel for the respondents also argued that against the seven posts of Deputy Directors, benefit of reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes could be extended only to the extent of 14% and as soon as Dr. Ram Lal was promoted against vacancy No. 17 in lieu of reserved vacancy at point No. 15, the reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes was complete and, therefore, even if the vacancy at roster point No. 22 is treated as earmarked for Scheduled Castes, it was not available to be given to the petitioner out of turn by being treated as a member of Scheduled Caste.
Learned counsel for the respondents also argued that the petitioner did not have 10 years experience in PCMS-I as on 2561986 because the period between 1141980 to 25.2.1981 was treated as extraordinary leave.
Learned counsel pointed out that on the basis of his promotion as on 21121985, the petitioner could be treated to have completed 10 years experience on 6.11.1986 by excluding the aforesaid period of 320 days and, therefore, the vacancy which became available on 2561986 could not have been given to the petitioner.
14.
The writ petition has been filed by the petitioner on 1111994, i.e. after almost four years of the issue of the order Annexure P-1 by which the petitioner was treated as promoted on the post of Deputy Director, Health Services, w.e.f.
9.5.1988.
The only explanation tendered by the petitioner for this interregnum of four years between the date of issue of order of his retrospective promotion as Deputy Director and the date of filing of the writ petition is that he had been making representations to the Government from time to time.
The petitioner claims that the Government's failure to decide his representation for a period of three years should by itself be treated as sufficient to explain the delay of about four years.
In my opinion, the explanation offered by the petitioner for the delay of almost four years in the filing of the petition against the order dated 1321990 is not at all convincing and this delay cannot be overlooked while in making an adjudication of a petition which involves a claim for retrospective promotion having direct impact on the seniority of a large number of persons and which will also affect the settled position of a large number of persons in the cadre of Deputy Directors, Joint Directors, Additional Directors and even Directors.
As per petitioner's own showing he had made about a dozen representations between 21101988 and 21101989.
Order dated 1321990 was issued by the Government after due consideration of his representations.
It is, therefore, logical to conclude that with the issue of order dated 1321990, the petitioner became fully aware of the fact that the Government has not accepted his claim for promotion as Deputy Director w.e.f.
2561986.
Making of representations by the petitioner after the issue of order Annexure P-1 was a futile exercise and, therefore, he cannot take any benefit of the representations made after 1321990 for the purpose of explaining the delay.
Even if the Court was to give some latitude to the petitioner, his conduct of not approaching the Court within a reasonable time after the issue of order dated 1321990 certainly disentitled him from invoking jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Between 1321990 and 11.1.94 the petitioner as well as the respondents have been promoted to the post of Joint Director, Additional Directors and even Directors.
Absence of any challenge to those promotions for a period of more than three years could legitimately give rise to an expectation of security of a status to the respondents and others.
Issue of a writ in favour of the petitioner at this belated stage would certainly lead to unsettling of this settled position and I find a little justification for adopting-that course.
The very fact that the petitioner himself accepted promotions as Joint Director and then Additional Director in the year 1990 and 1991 respectively militates against his claim for quashing of Annexure P-1 at this belated stage.
15.
The rule that the delay defeats equity has been adopted by the Supreme Court and the High Courts for exercise of their writ jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 226 respectively of the Constitution of India.
Even in the absence of any statutory period of limitation prescribed for filing of a writ petition, the Courts have by and large taken the view that the writ petition filed after the expiry of a period of limitation prescribed for a civil suit should ordinarily be treated as belated and relief should be denied to the petitioner.
In the State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006, aforementioned proposition of law has been enunciated by the Supreme court.
In Trilok Chand Moti Lal v. HB Munshi, AIR 1970 SC 898, their Lordships held that even though there is no upper or lower limit for filing of a writ petition, the petitioner must offer plausible explanation for all the delays in the filing of the writ petition and in the absence of such explanation, relief can be denied to the petitioner.
In Kamini Kumar Das v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1972 SC 2060, the Supreme Court refused to interfere with a case of removal from service where the petition was filed after more than two years, In PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53, their Lordships held that delay of more than one year should ordinarily be sufficient to decline the relief where challenge to the promotion is involved.
The Supreme Court held :  "A person aggrieved by an order of promoting a junior over his head should approach the Court at least within six months or at the most a year of such promotion.
It is not that there is any period of limitation for the Courts to exercise their powers under Article 226 nor is it that there can never be a case where the Courts cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length of time.
But it would be a sound and wise exercise of discretion for the Courts to refuse to exercise their extra-ordinary powers under Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief and who stand by and allow things to happen and then approach the Court to put forward stale claims and try to unsettle settled matters,"  16.
In Roshan Lal v. International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1981 SC 597, writ petition filed in the year 1978 to challenge the appointment made on the post of Airport Officer in the year 1975 was held to be belated.
17.
If the petitioner was to file a civil suit on 1111994 to challenge the Legality of the order dated 1321990, the same would have been dismissed as barred by limitation.
By view of this and also in view of the fact that issue of a writ in a petition filed after almost four years of the issue of order Annexure P-1 would unsettle the settled service conditions of a large number of persons.
I do not find any justification to overlook the delay.
Rather I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner must be denied relief on the ground of laches.
18.
Even on merit, the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Deputy Director w.e.f.
25.1.1986 cannot be accepted.
From the perusal of the rival pleadings as well as the circular No. 1494-SWI-74/8105 dated 451974, it is borne out that roster point Nos. 1, 7, 15, 22, 30 etc. have to be treated as reserved for Scheduled Castes.
This roster has been prescribed in order to give proper effect to the reservation prescribed by the Government Vide circular No. 1097-SWI-74/23071 dated 19111974 carry forward rule was held to be applicable for giving effect to the hundred point running roster.
Percentage of reservation was also prescribed by the circular dated 451974 for Class-I and Class-II services.
Relevant extracts of circular dated 451974 prescribing percentage of reservation indicating reserved points and circular dated 19111974 are reproduced below for the purpose of ready reference -  "Cir.
No. 1494-SWI-74/8105 dated 4th May, 1974, Scheduled Castes  (ii) Vacancies filled by promotions to or within Class I and 11 services by selection or on seniority-cum-fitness etc., 14%, 2%  Vacancies occurring from time to time falling against the following serial numbers of the 100-point roster shall be treated as reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes  1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80, 87, 94 and so on.
Vacancies falling at serial numbers 26 and 76 shall be treated as reserved for the members of Backward Classes.
Cir.
No. 1097-SWI-74/23071, dated 19th November, 1974.
CARRYING FORWARD OF REVERVATIONS  1.
According to 100-point running roster system (previously known as appointments on formula of rotation-block system), vacancies specified as reserved (Chapter 111) should be filled by the members of Scheduled Caste/Backward Classes irrespective of their positions in the general merit/seniority, inter se the other category persons.
If required number of members of the reserved category are not available for appointments/promotions against reserved vacancies, such vacancies can be dereserved after following the prescribed procedure of de-reservation as in Chapter IV and thereafter those can be filled by candidates/officials of other category (OC) by the reservations shall be carried forward to subsequent appointments/promotions.
2.
The reservation should be carried forward from vacancy to vacancy in the same block until a Scheduled Caste or a Backward Class person, as the case may be, is appointed/promoted in the same block.
3.
If, all the vacancies in any block determined on the basis of prescribed roster are filled by other category of persons due to non-availability of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes persons, the reservation should be carried forward to the subsequent block.
Thus, the reservation should be carried forward from vacancy to vacancy in each block and from block to block until the carried forward vacancies are filled by the members of the Scheduled Castes or the Backward Classes.
4.
Only one reserved vacancy out of the carried forward vacancies should be filled in a block of appropriate roster in addition to the normal reserved point of that block.
In this manner all such carried forward vacancies should be adjusted subject to the above condition.
Note-I :- Appropriate rosters means rosters ,prescribed for direct recruitment in Class I , II, III and IV services, promotions in Class I and 11 services and promotions in Class III and IV services.
Separate 100-point running rosters have been prescribed as per Annexures VI, VII and VIII.
A block constitutes of vacancies from a reserved point to the last unreserved point immediately before the next reserved point with relation to the appropriate rosters prescribed.
Note-II :- The carry forward rule given above is applicable to direct appointments as well as in promotions."
A cumulative reading of the above-quoted provisions show that for giving effect to the reservation of 14% and 2% respectively for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, 100-point running roster is required to be maintained.
Carry forward rule is intended to benefit the members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes where required number of members of reserved categories are not available for promotion against reserved vacancies.
However, while giving effect to the roster and the carry forward rule, the substantive provisions regarding percentage of reservation cannot be overlooked.
As soon as the percentage of reservation fixed in respect of a particular cadre is fulfilled, the Government cannot make appointment by giving benefit of reservation to Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes merely because a particular vacancy falls at a particular reserved point of the roster.
This is evident from a plain reading of the Government's circulars and recent judgment of the Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 35 concludes the issue against the petitioner.
19.
Decision of the Supreme Court in Arati Ray Choudhury's case (supra) and Circular No. 5184-WI74/20947 dated 11101974 on which much emphasis has been placed by Shri Aggarwal do not have any bearing on the case of the petitioner.
In Arati Ray Choudhury's case (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court had considered an earlier decision in Devadasan v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 179, and observed that if in a particular recruitment year reserved vacancy is not filled due to non-availability of eligible candidates belonging to reserved categories but is filled by the appointment of an unreserved candidate, vacancy of the next year should be filled by appointment of reserved category candidate by applying the carry forward rule.
Neither their Lordships were dealing with a case in which prescribed percentage of reservation was being exceeded nor did their Lordships hold that by application of carry forward rule, the Government can benefit the reserved category candidates over and above the percentage of the reservation fixed for that category.
20.
In view of the above discussion, it is held that with the appointment of Dr. Ram Lal (SC) against the roster point No. 17 by giving him the benefit of 15th reserved point coupled with the application of carry forward rule, the required percentage of reservation (14% for Scheduled Castes) stood achieved and, therefore, even if 22nd roster-point is indicated to be reserved for Scheduled Castes, the same could not have been given to the petitioner because such an action on the part of the Government would have resulted in exceeding the percent age of reservation for the Scheduled Castes.
21.
Now I shall deal with the issue of eligibility of respondent-Baldev Raj Bhandari to be treated as a member of Backward Class for being given 26th point reserved for Backward Class.
Both Shri Aggarwal and Shri Nijjar argued with their usual tenacity that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari has misled the Government in passing the order dated 1/311994 giving him retrospective promotion as Deputy Director w.e.f.
16101986.
Learned counsel argued that Dr. Bhandari was not eligible to be treated as a member of Backward Class because his family income was more than Rs. 1,000/- per annum as in the year 1964.
Shri Aggarwal drew the Court's attention to various documents placed on the record of CWP No. 515 of 1994 and particularly Annexures P-4, P-4A, P-12, P-13, P-14 and R-1 to show that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari had filed contradictory and wholly unbelievable affidavits to claim eligibility as a Backward Class.
Shri Nijjar further pointed out that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari was recruited as a general category candidate and, therefore, he was not entitled to be given the benefit of reservation meant for Backward Class candidates.
Shri Nijjar relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney v. Union of India, 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) : JT 1992(6) SC 273 and argued that the criteria of economic backwardness is no more a valid criteria for giving benefit of reservation to the so-called Backward Classes.
Both Shri Aggarwal and Shri Nijjar further argued that before passing the impugned order, the respondent-Government should have heard the petitioners because they were admittedly senior to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari till the date of issue of the impugned order.
Shri Aggarwal placed before the Court the Gradation Lists of PCMS-I officers issued from time to time to demonstrate that the petitioners were throughout treated as senior to Dr. Bhandari and that the impugned order seriously impaired their rights.
Mrs. Charu Tuli argued that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari had been appointed as a member of Backward Class.
She produced the original application form submitted by Dr. Bhandari before the Public Service Commission prior to his recruitment to PCMS-11 to show that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari had in fact applied as a member of Backward Class.
She argued that the Government had considered the entire matter at length before taking a decision to give benefit of reservation to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari and, therefore, this Court should not interfere with the decision of the Government.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari, argued that benefit of reservation had been extended to his client as early as on 22121986 vide Annexure R-2/5 and as that order is not under challenge before the Court, subsequent order issued by the Government for extending the benefit of reservation to respondent-Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari is not open to be challenged.
Shri Atma Ram submitted that if order dated 22121986 was directly challenged in the writ petitions filed in the year 1994, the Court would have straightaway non-suited the petitioners on the ground of delay and laches.
Shri Atma Ram controverted the submission of Shri Nijjar regarding the applicability of Indira Sawhney's case (supra) by arguing that benefit of reservation had been given to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari almost six years prior to the decision of Indira Sawhney's case and, therefore, the same cannot affect the benefit already given to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
He also argued that the petitioners are guilty of concealment of material facts regarding the issue of order dated 22121986 and, therefore, the Court should not give any indulgence to the petitioners by considering their contentions on merits.
22.
A look at the roster produced by petitioner Dr. Puran Singh Jassi shows that first vacancy in the cadre of Deputy Director became available on 18.3.1975.
It was given to Dr. R.D.
Nar (SC) 2nd to 6th vacancies which became available between 18.3.1975 to 2581977 were unreserved and were given to general category candidates.
Seventh point was a reserved point and was given to Dr. SC Bedar (SC) on 1021978.
Eighth to 14th vacancies were unreserved and were given to the candidates belonging to general category.
15th point was reserved for Scheduled Caste but as on 2931983 no candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste was available for promotion, it was given to general category candidate Dr. BS Cheema.
The reserved vacancy was carried forward.
It was given to Dr. ,Ram Lal (SC) on 321986.
Dr. Ram Lal was promoted as Joint Director on 921988 and thereafter the petitioner Dr. Jassi was promoted after 9.5.1988 and he was given the benefit of reserved vacancy at point No. 22 though his promotion was in fact at point No. 34.
Admittedly, 22nd roster point was meant for reserved category but was given to the general category candidate.
26th point was reserved for Backward Class candidate.
By order dated 22121986 (Annexure R-2/5 in CWP No. 515 of 1994), this point was given to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
In this context, it is extremely important to note that before the issue of order (Annexure R-2/5) in favour of Dr. Bhandari, the Government had issued a general notice (Annexure R-2/3) dated 251985 and invited objections within two months.
Some persons sought documents from the Government and the same were made available to them as would appear from Annexure R-2/4 dated 1331986.
Thereafter, order dated 2212,1986 was issued, This order reads as under:  "GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE  (HEALTH BRANCH)  ORDER Whereas Dr. BR Bhandari (presently PCMS-I) who was recruited as PCMS Class 11, through Punjab Public Service Commission, during the year 1966 submitted a certificate of his being a member of Backward Class, which has been considered valid by the Department of Social Welfare.
2.
And whereas Dr. Bhandari has represented to the Government that he may be promoted to PCMS-I against the post reserved for Backward Class category in, accordance with the policy of the State Govt.  3.
And whereas no other candidate senior to him has established his claim against the post reserved for Backward Classes.
4.
Before the seniority of Dr. Bhandari was finalised, the affected officers were given an opportunity for.
filing their objections and claims if any within a period of two months from the date of circulation of tentative decision dated 251985 issued vide Endst.
No. 26/19/80-3HBI/9109 dated 2251985.
5.
The representations/objections and claims received from various affected doctors have been duly considered and it has been decided to promote Dr. BR Bhandari to PCMS-I post w.e.f.
141976 and fix his seniority against the reserved point at Sr. No. 31 of Roster (i.e. between Dr. Jagdish Raj Suri and Dr. Surjirt Singh Rakhar) which was available for him immediately after he completed the prescribed experience of 10 years of service as PCMS-II.
Sd/- S.S. Boparai  Secretary to Government, Punjab."
A bare perusal of the above-quoted order shows that Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari had claimed himself to be a member of Backward Class and his claim was accepted by the Government for giving him promotion to PCMS-I w.e.f.
141976.
Neither of the petitioners has come forward with a case that he/she was not aware of the notice Annexure R-2/3 or the order Annexure R-2/5 passed by the Government in favour of Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari and yet both of them have not challenged the legality of the order dated 22121986.
In fact, both the petitioners thought it convenient to withhold all the facts leading to the passing of the order dated 22121986.
After having given my thoughtful consideration to the matter, I am of the opinion that the petitioners are not entitled to question the eligibility of Dr. Bhandari to be treated as a member of Backward Class.
The conduct of the petitioners in concealing the facts relating to the notice (Annexure R-2/3) and the order (Annexure R-2/5) is by itself sufficient to discredit the case set up by them.
No explanation has been offered by the petitioners for their failure to disclose these facts to the Court.
Neither the petitioners have pleaded nor could it have been possible to accept their plea that they were not having knowledge of the action taken by the Government on the representation submitted by respondent- Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
Apparently, the petitioners thought if they were to disclose all the facts relating to order dated 22121986, the Court would straightaway ask them as to why they have not challenged that order and if at all they had challenged that order, the Court would have called upon them to explain the delay of more than seven years in the filing of the writ petition.
In order to avoid this scrutiny from the Court, the petitioners found it easiest to conceal these material facts.
This concealment of facts by the petitioner has resulted in the issue of notice of motion in favour of the petitioners and subsequent admission of their writ petitions.
23.
In Jai Bhagwan Jain v. Haryana State Electricity Board (CWP No. 15448 of 1993), a Division Bench of this Court has at length considered the impact of concealment of facts by a petitioner and after making reference to various decisions of the Supreme Court and the High Courts held:  "It is duty of the party seeking relief under Article 226 or 136 of the Constitution to make full and candid disclosure of all the facts and leave it to the Court to determine whether relief deserves to be given to the petitioner or not.
The petitioner is also under a duty to make all efforts to find out full facts of the case before filing the petition and he cannot be heard to say that he is not aware of the facts concerning him.
The petitioner has to demonstrate his bona fides before seeking relief from the Court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction.
It is not for the petitioner to decide as to which of the facts are relevant and which are not relevant.
The petitioner cannot become a judge on the question of relevancy of facts.
Non- disclosure of all the facts in a candid and straight forward manner will necessarily warrant dismissal of a petition."
The Court further held :  "We may further add that a petitioner will not be entitled to be heard on the merits of the case where lie is found guilty of concealment of facts or of making mis-statement before the Court only on the ground that no stay order has been passed by the Court.
It is to be remembered that the Court considers a petition with the assumption that the averments made in the petition are true and correct.
In a given situation, the Court may finally decide a petition ex parte where the non-petitioner does not appear despite service of notice.
If a party suppresses facts from the Court, such ex parte decision may be rendered on the basis of incorrect or incomplete facts.
Therefore, it is no answer to the charge of suppression of facts or mis-statement of facts before the Court to say that no interim relief has been given to the petitioner or that he had not derived any benefit.
In our opinion, the very issue of a notice on a petition is a benefit derived by the petitioner.
If subsequently it is found that the petitioner has misled the Court or persuaded it in issuing notice, by concealment of true facts of the case there will be ample justification for dismissing the petition."
In view of the above judgment and on the facts of this case, it has to be held that the petitioners have disentitled them from questioning the entitlement of Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari to the benefit of reservation as a member of Backward Class.
24.
Another ground for not entertaining this part of the grievance of the petitioners is that they have failed to challenge the initial order dated 22121986 issued by the Government giving benefit of reservation to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
This order was issued by the Government after inviting objections.
The impugned order dated 1/311994 has been issued by Government as a sequel to the acceptance of his claim as a member of Backward Class vide order dated 22121986 issued in favour of Dr. Bhandari and as that order is not under challenge, the legality of order dated 1/311994 cannot also be gone into.
In P Chitharanja Menon and others v. A Balakrishan and others, 1977(2) SLR 289, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that if the basic order of promotion is not challenged, a subsequent order determining the date of commencement of service cannot be challenged.
This principle is directly attracted in the cases of the petitioners and because of their failure to challenge the order dated 22121986, they are not entitled to question the eligibility of respondent - Dr. Bhandari as a member of Backward Class.
25.
Argument advanced by Shri Aggarwal with reference to two letters written by the Director, Health Services, Punjab, and the alleged defect in the affidavits filed by Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari appears to be plausible in the first blush but a close scrutiny of the same shows that a seriously disputed question of fact will have to be determined by the Court before recording a conclusion as to whether the documents produced by Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari were genuine or not and whether on the basis of such documents, he could be treated as a member of Backward Class.
In my opinion, the question relating to the genuineness or otherwise of the documents as well as the claim of the petitioners that the certificate produced by Dr. Bhandari are forged cannot appropriately be adjudicated upon in the writ jurisdiction.
Similarly, the issue as to whether the family income of Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari was less than Rs. 1,000/- per annum or not can be determined only on the basis of evidence oral as well as documentary to be produced by the parties and in the facts of this case, there is no justification for this Court to make an adjudication of such a controversial issue, particularly when the petitioners have failed to challenge the order dated 22121986 and if they were to file a suit in the year 1994 against the order dated 22121986, the same was bound to be dismissed as time barred.
26.
Argument of Shri Nijjar that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney's case (supra) economic backwardness can no longer be recorded as a valid criteria for declaring a particular person to be a member of Backward Class does not in any manner advance the cases of the petitioners.
Admittedly, the judgment in Indira Sawhney's case was pronounced on 16111992 and there is nothing in this judgment to indicate that the Supreme Court had intended re-opening of all cases where economic backwardness was treated as a criteria for declaring a person as a member of Backward Class.
27.
Another argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners were not given an opportunity of hearing before the issue of order dated 1/311994.
Shri Nijjar argued with vehemence that his client has been shown senior to Dr. Bhandari and, therefore, she should have been heard before disturbing-her seniority qua respondent - Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari.
He relied on the decision of this Court in Lekhu Singh v. Punjab Scheduled Castes Land Development and Finance Corporation, 1994(2) SCT 90 (P&H) : 1994(1) SLR 120.
Shri Atma Ram argued that petitioner Dr. Puran Singh Jassi was given an opportunity of hearing before the issue of the impugned order and, therefore, he cannot make any grievance against the retrospective promotion of respondent-Dr. Bhandari.
Regarding Dr. Manmohan Kaur, Shri Rajiv Atma Ram argued that she cannot have any lis with the respondent (Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari) because she is neither a member of Scheduled Caste nor a member of Backward Class and, therefore, grant of benefit or reserved point No. 26 to Dr. Bhandari does not in any manner affect the right of Dr. Manmohan Kaur and she can have no grievance against the impugned order.
A reappraisal of rival pleadings shows that claim of Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari to be treated as member of Backward Class was decided by the Government vide order dated 22121986 and before the issue of that order, the Government had invited objections from all other persons.
It is a different thing that the petitioners did not consider it necessary to file their objections.
Having failed to raise objections and having further failed to challenge the order dated 2212,1986, the petitioners cannot now make a grievance that they should have been heard before grant of benefit of reservation of Backward Class to Dr. Bhandari.
Moreover, so far as the petitioner (Dr. Puran Singh Jassi) is concerned, his representation was taken into consideration and he was heard by the Government on 11101993 before the issue of the impugned order.
In para 23 of the reply filed by respondent Nos. 1, 5 and 7 as also in the reply filed by respondent-Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari to the writ petition of Dr. Puran Singh Jassi, it has been averred that petitioner, Dr. Puran Singh Jassi, was heard before the passing of the impugned order.
It can, thus, be said that there is a serious dispute between the parties on the issues of hearing given to petitioner Dr. Jassi before the passing of the impugned order.
However, one thing which is significant is that Dr., Bhandari has been given roster point No. 26, meant for Backward Class candidate, and neither of the petitioners has claimed that he is member of Backward Class and is entitled to roster point No. 26.
That point has been given to Dr. Baldev Raj Bhandari in his own right as a member of Backward Class and as the Government's decision to treat him as a member of Backward Class is not under challenge, the petitioners, cannot make a grievance that they have not been heard before the passing of the impugned order.
Decision of this Court in Lekhu Singh's case (supra) is of no relevance to the controversy raised in this case.
That was a case involving reversion of the petitioner as a result of redetermination of seniority and not a case of giving benefit of reserved point to a candidate who had rightful claim to be given the reserved point.
Therefore, the principle laid down in Lekhu Singh's case is not at all applicable to the case in hand.
28.
This brings into focus the last controversy raised in Civil Writ Petition No. 515 of 1994.
Shri Aggarwal, learned counsel for the petitioner, argued that post of Director, ESI, should be treated as a part of the cadre and reservation should be given effect to by taking into consideration both the posts.
Shri Aggarwal argued that even though the post of Director, ESI, has not been shown in the Schedule appended to Rules of 1972, the very creation of the post under the Punjab Civil Medical Services should be treated as sufficient for en-cadrement of the post in the Rules.
Shri Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3, argued that mere creation of a post cannot make it part of the cadre in the absence of amendment in the Rules.
Learned counsel argued that by orders Annexures P-16 and P-17, the Government did nothing more than to sanction the upgradation of the post of Joint Director, ESI, to that of Director ESI and mere reference to the Punjab Civil Medical Service Class-I does not automatically result in en-cadrement of the post in the Rules.
Learned counsel further pointed out that expenditure of the post in ESI is shared by the Government of Punjab and the Employees State Insurance Corporation and, therefore, in the absence of specific amendment in the rules, the post of Director, ESI, cannot be treated as a part of the cadre under the Rules of 1972.
Shri Patwalia read out the averments made in paras 27 and 28 of the reply filed by respondents 1, 5 and 7 to show that expenditure for the post of Director, ESI, is shared by the Punjab Government and the ESI Corporation in the ratio of 1:7 and, therefore, that post should be treated as independent of the services.
29.
The word 'service' has been defined in Rule 2(e) of 1972 Rules.
It means the Punjab Civil Medical Service (Class-I).
Rule 3 of these Rules refers to the number and character of posts.
This Rule, in turn, makes a reference to Appendix 'A'.
As the Rules originally stood, Appendix 'A' contained 12 posts, the highest being post of the Deputy Director, Health Services.
Vide notification dated 451979, Rule 2(e) has been amended and now the word 'service' means the Punjab Civil Medical (State Service Class-I).
Appendix 'A' has also been amended.
The post of Director, Health Services, Joint Director, Health Services, and a number of other posts have been added.
At item No. 9, the post of Medical Superintendent, ESI Hospital, and at Item No. 20 the post of Medical Inspector, ESI Hospital, have been added.
By another notification dated 24.12.1993, the Rules have been further amended so as to encadre the post of Additional Director, Health Services, at item No. 1A.
A combined reading of the Rules as originally framed and as they stand after the amendments of 451979 and 24.12.1993, clearly shows that Punjab Civil Medical (State Service Class-I) comprises of the posts shown in Appendix 'A' with 'a power to Goverment to add or to reduce the number of such posts or create new post with a different designation and scales of pay whether permanently or temporarily.
It is also clearly revealed from Appendix 'A' that the post of Director, ESI has not been included in Appendix 'A, though by virtue of amendment dated 451979, the posts of Medical Superintendent, ESI Hospital, and Medical Inspector, ESI, have specifically been included in the Appendix 'A'.
Even when Appendix 'A' was amended vide notification dated 24.12.1993 and the post of Additional Director, Health Services, was added to Appendix 'A' the rule-making authority did not consider it appropriate to include the post of Director, ESI, in Appendix 'A'.
This is prima facie indicative of the intendment of the Government not to include the post of Director, ESI, as a part of the service.
This inference of mine is buttressed from the fact that for the post of Director, ESI, expenditure is shared by the Government of Punjab and the ESI Corporation in the ratio of 1:7 and the order Annexure P-17 nowhere shows that the Government has decided to make the post of Director, ESI, as a part of the cadre under the Rules of 1972.
If that was intended, the Government would have definitely consulted the ESI Corporation which has to bear 85% of the financial burden of the post.
30.
The judgment of this Court in Haryana State Co-operative Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors Association Rohtak v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 1 (P&H) : 1995(1) ILR 186, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for petitioner Dr. Puran Singh Jassi, does not really help the case of the petitioner.
The point which arose for consideration before the Division Bench was as to whether Statistical Assistants were entitled to be promoted as Class-II service, recruitment to which was regulated by the Punjab State Co- operative Service Class-II Rules, 1958 (as adopted by the Government of Haryana).
Facts of the case show that the Governor of Haryana had framed the Haryana Co-operative Department Group C (Executive) Rules, 1980, for regulating the recruitment to the post of Statistical Assistant and the posts of Statistical Assistants were treated as State Service Class-III.
On an interpretation of Rules of 1980, the Division Bench held that as the posts of Statistical Assistants have been included in the State Service Class-III (Executive) Branch, the holders of these posts are entitled to be considered for promotion to Class-II service.
After rejecting the argument that the governor had no power to enact 1980 Rules, the Division Bench also held that even though the post of Statistical Assistant was not specifically covered by the Punjab State Co-operative Subordinate Service Rules, 1936, the very creation of the post as State Service Class-III would lead to deemed amendment of the Appendix.
The Division Bench relied on a decision of the Single Bench in Anup Singh v. State of Haryana, 1969 SLR 850 and Dr. NC Singhal v. Union of India, 1980(2) SLR 118.
31.
A careful reading of the aforesaid decisions shows that primarily the Division Bench was concerned with the interpretation of 1980 Rules.
This is evident from perusal of para 13 of the judgment.
Therefore, even though in paras 8 and 9, the Division Bench has observed that creation of posts of Statistical Assistants in the State Service Class III would lead to an automatic amendment of the Appendix, in my opinion these observations cannot but be read as obiter, because that question did not directly arise for consideration before the Court.
Moreover, so far as Anup Singh's case (supra) is concerned, the same was decided on the basis of the peculiar facts placed before the Court and on the basis of the foot-note to the Appendix 'B' of the relevant Rules.
Dr. NC Singhal's case (supra) to which reference has been made by the Division Bench does not at all lay down a proposition that creation of any post by the Government will automatically lead to an addition to the cadre.
In Dr. Singha's case (supra) unspecified posts were converted into specified specialization posts for a particular speciality.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that whenever such conversion takes place and the unspecified specialization post is assigned to a speciality, it can be filled only from amongst those who fulfil the conditions of eligibility for recruitment to that speciality.
The Supreme Court also observed that when a post is created, it is an addition to the strength to that particular category.
With great respect to the Division Bench that proposition was wholly inapplicable to the facts placed before the Division Bench in the Haryana State Co-operative Inspectors' case (supra) and, therefore, no help could be derived from the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Singhal's case (supra) for holding that creation of a new post with different designation would automatically amount to en-cadrement of the post in the service.
32.
That apart, I find that in order Annexure P-17, there is no reference to the Punjab Civil Medical (State Service Class-I) and, therefore, in the backdrop of the facts of this case, order Annexure P-17 cannot be treated as an automatic addition of the post of Director, ESI to Appendix 'A'.
33.
Even if for a moment, the Court was to accept the argument of Shri Aggarwal that post of Director, ESI, should be treated as a part of the service, the petitioner cannot derive any benefit because against a single cadre post, there can be no reservation in favour of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe as held by the Supreme Court in Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar, 1988(2) SLR 119.
Shri Aggarwal's argument that the post of Director, ESI should be treated as a part of the cadre of Director, Health Services, is wholly based on a misconceived assumption that the creation of post of Director, ESI, will automatically result in addition to the cadre strength of the post of Director, Health Services.
The Government has neither issued such an order nor it is possible to assume that the order Annexure P-17 has the effect of increasing the strength of cadre of Director, Health Services.
34.
In addition to what has been observed above, it is important to take note of the fact that against the post of Director, ESI, Dr. Ram Lal had already been given promotion and even if the roster system was to be applied, the petitioner (Dr. Puran Singh Jassi) cannot, claim that he should be given benefit of the promotion on the basis of reservation because it has not been shown that in the post of Director, ESI, seven vacancies have become available.
For the reasons mentioned above, both the writ petitions fail and they are dismissed.
Since the petitioners have been found guilty of concealment of material facts, each one of them shall pay Rs. 2,000/(rupees two thousand) as costs to the respondent - State of Punjab.
Petitions dismissed.