RP Sethi, J - Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The appellant filed a petition for quashing of the order Annexure P/12 passed by respondent No. 1 and for directions to declare him senior than respondent No. 3.
He also prayed for the payment of consequential benefits admissible under the Rules from the back date.
2.
Vide Annexure P/12, the representation filed by the appellant was disposed of by holding :-  "After going through the record of the case, I have come to the conclusion that upto 13111967 when the State Govt. approved the mode of recruitment/qualifications to the post of Analyst, the cadres of Chemists and Junior/Senior Analytical Assistants were separate and promotion to the post of Analyst was to be made out of Senior Analytical Assistants.
On 13111967, Shri Anand already stood promoted w.e.f.
20.8.1966 in the scale of Rs. 200-450 and had thus become senior to Shri Harnal who carried the scale of Rs. 200-300 as Chemist.
Therefore, Shri Anand can legitimately claim his seniority in subsequent promotion over Shri Harnal and others on the basis of seniority in the rank based on pay scale.
However, action of Director, Health Services, in promoting Shri Rohilla, a Chemist who was admittedly junior to Shri Harnal and also was an ad hoc appointee, by ignoring the claim of Shri Harnal, was improper and unjustified.
Shri Harnal could not be ignored except after due consideration of basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Unfortunately, he was never considered for promotion and an ad hoc junior official of the same speciality was promoted by ignoring the claim of Shri Harnal.
Therefore, it would meet the ends of justice if Shri Harnal is promoted to the post of Analyst/Deputy Public Analyst subject to his record being good from the date from which his junior Shri Rohilla Chemist belonging to the same speciality was given promotion i.e. as Analyst on 7101966 (F.N.)
and Deputy Public Analyst on 6121979 (F.N.).
I order accordingly.
Since he was not worked against the post of Analyst/Deputy Public Analyst, he shall not get any arrears of pay but he can claim benefits in terms of seniority and pay fixation.
The representation of Shri VP Harnal is accepted to this extent."
On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that he had become eligible for promotion to the post of Analyst w.e.f.
20.8.1966 and that the action of the respondents in declining the arrears of salary to him was totally arbitrary.
Finding that the appellant had not challenged the promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Analayst for a period of 14 years his prayer to declare the aforesaid respondents junior to him was declined.
Similarly, his prayer for the grant of pay scales to the post of Analyst as also the arrears to pay was declined in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Paluru Ramkrishaniah v. UOI,' 1990(1) R.S.J.
238.
The Supreme Court in a subsequent case entitled UOI v. KV Jankiraman, AIR 1991 SC 2010 rejected the plea of `No work No Pay' and held :-  "We are not much impressed by the contentions advanced on behalf of the authorities.
The normal rule of "no work no pay" is not applicable to cases such as the present one where the employee although he is willing to work is kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his.
This is not a case where the employee remains away from work for his own reasons, although the work is offered to him..." A Division Bench of this Court in Bir Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 423 (P&H) : 1995 P.L.R.
379, to which the learned Single Judge who passed the judgment impugned in this appeal was a party, held that if a person is deemed to have been promoted with effect from a particular date, he should normally be deemed to have held and worked on the higher post and entitled to re-fixation of his pay and grant of salary.
The learned Division Bench further held :-  "...We cannot persuade ourselves to hold that even though the denial of promotion in the year 1980 or thereafter was wholly illegal, the officers shall not be entitled to arrears of salary because they were not permitted to work on the higher posts.
It would be adding insult to injury."
There is another principle.
Lord Asquith in East End Dwellings Co Ltd v. Finsbury Borough Council, (1932) A.C. 109 had observed at page 132 as under :-  "If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must surely, unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the consequences and incidents which, if the putative state of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or accompanied it.
The statute says that you must imagine a certain state of affairs; it does not say that having done so, you must cause or permit your imagination to boggle when it comes to the inevitable corollaries of that State of Affairs."
It is no doubt true that his Lordships was speaking of legal fiction in the construction of a statute.
However, there is no reason why this principle should not apply in the case of an order issued by the State Government.
If a person is deemed to have been promoted with effect from a particular date, he should normally be deemed to have held and worked on the higher post.
He should also be, thus, entitled to the payment of arrears of salary.
The right of the employee to get pay of the higher post has now been recognised by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in UOl v. KV Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2011.
Even the doubt which was created by the judgment in Paluru Ramkrishanaiah and others v. UOI (1990 (1) R,S,J 238) has now been clarified.
Accordingly, we hold that whenever a person is found entitled to the grant of retrospective promotion, he is entitled to the re-fixation of his pay and the grant of arrears salary.
The question posed at the threshold is answered accordingly.
3.
After the respondents held the appellant entitled for promotion to the post of Analyst w.e.f.
7101966 and as Deputy Public Analyst w.e.f.
6121979 they were not justified in directing that he shall not get any arrears and other benefits in terms of seniority and pay fixation.
The payment of arrears of salary could not be denied to him in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in KV Jankiraman's case (supra) and by this Court in Bir Singh's case (supra).
4.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondents that claim to the salary for the period a civil servant has not worked on the post could not be termed to be any legal right for which a petition could be filed or relief granted.
The argument has no force.
5.
The gram in the nature of pension, increments and salary were once considered to be in the discretion of the Government who had the exclusive power to pass appropriate orders with respect to the grant or refusal regarding such claims.
Salary of a civil servant cannot be termed to be a measure of grant or a bounty being in the discretion of the Government.
The salary is paid for the services rendered to which a civil servant is entitled as a matter of right under the service rules or the service contract.
The salary being a consideration of the services rendered is, in fact, a property which a civil servant cannot be deprived of without having recourse to the provisions of Constitution and the Service Rules applicable.
The mere fact that an employee serves the State in the discretion of the executive, cannot be made a basis for depriving him of the usufruct of the services and the labour rendered.
A civil servant cannot be forced to serve the executive ex-gratia and it cannot be held that his salary is in the nature of a bounty.
In State of Bihar v. Abdul Majid, AIR 1954 SC 245, it was held :-  "The rule that a civil servant holds office at the pleasure of the Crown has its origin in the Latin phrase "durante bene placito" (during pleasure) meaning that the tenure of office of a civil servant, except where it is otherwise provided by statute, can be terminated at any time without cause assigned.
The true scope and effect of this expression is that even if a special contract has been made with the civil servant the Crown is not bound thereby.
In other words, civil servants are liable to dismissal without notice and there is no right of action for wrongful dismissal, that is, that they cannot claim damages for premature termination of their services.
(See Fraser's Constitutional Law, p.126; Chalmer's Constitutional Law, p. 186 - `Shenton v. Smith, 1895 AC 229 at p. 234 (G) :- `Dunn v. The Queen' (1896) 1 Q.B.
116 (H).
This rule of English law has not been fully adopted in S. 240.
Section 240 itself places restrictions and limitations on the exercise of that pleasure and those restrictions must be given effect to.
They are imperative and mandatory.
It follows therefore that whenever there is a breach of restrictions imposed by the statute, by the Government or the Crown the matter is justiciable and the party aggrieved is entitled to suitable relief at the hands of the Court.
As pointed out earlier in this judgment, there is no warrant for the proposition that the relief must be limited to the declaration and cannot go beyond it.
To the extent that the rule that Government servants hold office during pleasure has been departed from the statute, the Government servants are entitled to relief like any other person under the ordinary law, and that relief therefore must be regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure."
The Supreme Court in that case dealt with the cases decided earlier and reported in Punjab Province v. Tara Chand, AIR 1947 FC 23; NWP Frontier Province v. Suraj Narain, AIR 1949 PC 112, and Shenton v. Smith, (1895) A.C. 229.
6.
In view of the aforesaid judgment and the law as developed in this democratic republic for about half a century now it is well settled that the rights conferred upon a civil servant are in no way concession or bounty.
The civil servant cannot be equated with the servants of private employers or personal property of any individual howsoever high he may be or be left at the mercy of a particular ruler in the country at a particular time.
Consistency and security of tenure of the civil servants is the basis of the fabric upon which rests the present administrative set up of the country.
The civil servants are entitled to various rights subject to specified obligations.
If the service career of a civil servant is left to the whim or caprice or unguided discretion of a particular ruler at a specific time, same may result in deterioration of standards in the civil services jeopardising the whole system and resulting in crumbling down of the whole of the administrative institutional system in the country.
The executive or the State or the Government of a particular time in this country have to be bound and governed by the rule of law as enshrined in the Constitution and interpreted by the Apex Court and various High Courts in the country.
Security of service cannot be allowed to be endangered by or termed to be in the absolute discretion of the executive.
7.
Similarly, the argument that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of emoluments on the principle of `No work, no pay' is apparently mis- conceived and based upon wrong notions of law.
If a civil servant is not offered the work to which he was legally entitled, he cannot be deprived of the wages for the post to which he subsequently is held entitled to.
Permitting such a course to be adopted would be encouraging the imposition of double penalty, that is, firstly by declining the civil servant his right of promotion and secondly by depriving him of the emoluments to which he would have been entitled to upon promotion which subsequently is considered in his favour.
Deprivation to work against the post to which a civil servant is entitled on promotion is always at the risk and responsibility of the State and cannot be made a basis for depriving such a civil servant of the emoluments to which he was entitled, had he been promoted in accordance with the rules at the time when he became eligible for such promotion.
The Courts cannot ignore the magnitude of the sufferings and the pains to which a civil servant is subjected on account of deprivation of the monetary benefits particularly in this age of skyrocketing prices and non-availability of essential requirements of livelihood.
The Court cannot shut its eyes and forget the holocast of economic deprivation to the petitioner and his dependants.
Such a deprivation might have upset the career of the dependants, depriving the society of the services of such youth and budding dependants or children of the petitioner.
The executive once being satisfied that a civil servant was entitled to the promotion with retrospective effect cannot deprive him of the benefits of salary accruing on account of such promotion from an early date without assigning valid, cogent and specific reasons.
The order impugned in this case by which the petitioner/appellant was deprived of his right to claim back wages is admittedly non-speaking without assigning any justification or cogent and specific reasons.
8.
In view of what has been stated hereinabove, it is held that the learned Single Judge was not justified in dismissing the writ petition and denying the relief regarding arrears of pay as claimed by the appellant/petitioner.
The appeal is accordingly accepted by setting aside the order of the learned Single Judge.
The impugned order is quashed in so far as it deprives the petitioner/appellant from getting the arrears of pay consequent upon his promotion as Analyst w.e.f.
7101966 and as Deputy Public Analyst w.e.f.
6121979.
In the light of this judgment, the respondents are directed that consequent upon his promotion as Analyst/Deputy Public Analyst, the petitioner/appellant shall be paid all consequential benefits including the arrears of pay within a period of three months from today.
No order as to costs.