SR Nayak, J - This writ petition is directed against the award dated 7th June, 1993 made in ID No. 267 of 1991 on the file of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Godavarikhani.
2.
The Respondent-Corporation held a departmental enquiry against the petitioner-workman alleging that he committed certain misconduct-failing to observe the rule `issue and start' and having failed to issue tickets to three adults and one chargeable child who were travelling from Timmareddypalli to Ranigunj despite collecting requisite fares from them and certain other charges.
On the basis of the report submitted by the enquiring authority the Corporation removed the petitioner from service by its order dated 30th August, 1978.
The matter was taken up before the Industrial Tribunal.
The workman did not contest the validity of the domestic enquiry held by the Corporation.
Under these circumstances the Industrial Tribunal proceeded to appreciate the evidence on record and dispose of the reference.
The Industrial Tribunal after appreciation of the evidence of record recorded its satisfaction that the charges framed against the delinquent workman were established by acceptable evidence and on that count it rejected the reference and approved the action of the Management.
The workman being aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court has filed this writ petition.
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner strenuously contended that the second charge relates to the petitioner having failed to issue tickets to three adults and one chargeable child who were travelling from Timmareddypalli to Ranigunj despite collecting the fares from them and he was issuing the tickets only on sighting the members of the checking squad and the evidence available on record, namely the statements recorded by the members of the checking squad at the time of checking does not support the second charge.
Therefore he submitted that the learned Judge ought to have noticed the discrepancy between charge No. 2 and the evidence available on record and should have held that charge No. 2 is not proved by acceptable evidence.
The learned counsel also submitted that the spot explanation of the petitioner is disbelieved by the learned Judge without assigning any reasons.
For these two grounds the learned counsel submitted that the award of the Labour Court is liable to be interfered with by this Court.
4.
I am unable to accept the contentions of the learned counsel.
There is no dispute and there cannot be any dispute that the petitioner is guilty of violating the mandatory rule ``issue and start''.
It is relevant to note that in a public Corporation like AP State Road Transport Corporation there is a reasonable and public interest in insisting that the conductor should adhere to the rule `issue and start'.
If this rule is not insisted upon, there is very likelihood and scope for pilferage of the public fund.
The conduct may not issue tickets when the passengers board the vehicle and whenever the members of the checking squad intercept the vehicle and check on sighting the members of the team he may issue tickets and escape the liability.
Therefore the Corporation has made this rule requiring the conductors to start the bus only after tickets are issued.
5.
In the present case admittedly this rule was not adhered to.
As regards second and third charges the passengers whose statements were recorded on the spot, have clearly stated that the petitioner collected the fares but did not issue the tickets.
This clearly goes to show that there was a clear intention on the part of the petitioner conductor to misappropriate the funds of the Corporation.
Added to this, in reviewing the awards made by the Industrial Tribunals, this court cannot take up the job of reappreciating the entire evidence on record and record a different finding.
Such an exercise is wholly unwarranted and not permissible in law also.
This court can only see whether the departmental enquiry is conducted in conformity with the Regulations of the Corporation and principles of natural justice and by competent authority and whether the award made by the disciplinary authority is based on some acceptable evidence.
This court cannot go into the sufficiency of insufficiency of the evidence on record to sustain the award.
None of these grounds are available to assail the correctness of the award.
6.
After insertion of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act the Industrial courts are armed with the power to reappreciate the evidence and record a finding.
In the present case also the Presiding Officer of the Industrial Tribunal after appreciation of the evidence on record, recorded its satisfaction that the charges levelled against the petitioner are proved.
For all these reasons I do not find any error or material irregularity in the award made by the Labour Court.
Consequently, the writ petition fails and is dismissed at the admission stage.
Petition dismissed.