GS Singhvi, J - In this joint petition filed by Shri Ravi Kumar, Mrs. Prem Shingari, Shri Balwinder Singh and Shri Vinod Kumar, the petitioners have questioned the legality of orders Annexures P.10 and P11 regarding the abolition of the four posts of Personal Assistants.
They have prayed for quashing of these two orders.
In the alternative, they have prayed that even if the abolition of the posts is held to be legal, continuance of respondent No. 4 on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman be declared as illegal and the respondent-Corporation be directed to promote Seniormost from amongst the petitioners as Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
2.
A brief narration of the facts is necessary for the purpose of proper appreciation of the controversy involved in the writ petition and the arguments made by the learned counsel for the parties.
3.
The four petitioners joined the service of the corporation as Steno- typists/Clerks between August, 1971 and February, 1975.
They were promoted as Junior Scale Stenographers with effect from 1261975, 28.10.1978 and 791977 respectively in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400 with special pay of Rs. 30 pm Each of the petitioners had passed the qualifying departmental test in Shorthand and Typing before his/her promotion as Junior Scale Stenographer.
Petitioners 2 to 4 were further promoted as Senior Scale Stenographers in the grade of Rs. 225-500 (revised to 600-1,200).
Likewise petitioner No. 1 was promoted as Assistant Grade I with effect from 761979.
4.
Respondent No. 4 who had joined service as a Clerk in the Agricultural Department in the year 1965 was appointed as a Steno-typist with effect from 12.4.1972 and he was then promoted as Junior Scale Stenographer with effect from 651977.
On 181977, the respondent was sent on deputation to the service of the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation (for short the Corporation).
While he was on deputation in the service to the Corporation, the respondent No. 4 was promoted as Statistical Assistant in his parent department in the scale of Rs. 200-500.
Taking note of his promotion as Statistical Assistant in the parent department, the Corporation passed an order on 3031978 and while retaining him on deputation, the Corporation posted respondent No. 4 as Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 200-500.
After 8 months, the respondent No. 4 was posted on ad hoc basis against the sanctioned post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman vide order Annexure P2 dated 30111978.
On 15.1.1979, Director, Agricultural Punjab issued order Annexure P.3 dated 15.1.1979 and cancelled the order dated 20.3.1978 by which the respondent No. 4 had been promoted as Statistical Assistant.
On 111981, Managing Director of the respondent-Corporation issued order Annexure P5 and absorbed respondent No. 4 in the service of the respondent-Corporation as Personal Assistant to the Chairman in the pay scale of Rs. 350-800 (revised as Rs. 800-1,400).
Against this order of promotion of respondent No. 4, the petitioners submitted their representation dated 2731984 and pleaded that being senior to the respondent No. 4 in the cadre of Junior Scale Stenographer as well as the Senior Scale Stenographers, they had a right to be promoted and the Corporation could not have absorbed respondent No. 4 as Personal Assistant to the Chairman without considering the cases of the petitioners.
This representation of the petitioners led to the creation of four additional posts of Personal Assistants equivalent in rank to that of Personal Assistant to the Chairman in the grade of Rs. 800-1,400 with effect from 1891978.
The respondent-Corporation passed a resolution Annexure P6 creation of these posts.
This was followed by order Annexure P.7 dated 3091986 whereby the four petitioners were promoted as Personal Assists in the grade of Rs. 800-1,400 with effect from 1891973.
5.
The petitioners have pleaded that after their motion, Ex. Chairman of the Corporation Shri Jasjit Singh Thiara wrote a letter Annexure P.8 to the then Chief Minister of the State of Punjab against the creation of four posts of Personal Assists.
Thereafter, Chairman of the Corporation (respondent No. 2) wrote a note that the advice of the Punjab Government contained in its memo.
dated 2271976 for abolition of four posts be taken in the next meeting of the Board of Directors.
The Board of Directors took a decision in its meeting dated 28.9.1986 that the four posts of Personal Assistants created with effect from 1891978 be abolished.
This led to the issue of order Annexure P11 for reversion of the four petitioners from the posts of Personal Assistants to that of Senior Scale Stenographers/Assistant Grade-I  6.
Petitioners have challenged the impugned action of the Corporation on the ground of arbitrariness and unfairness.
They have pleaded that the very promotion of the respondent No. 4 as Statistical Assistant in the parent department which was brought about vide order dated 2081978 was based on circular letter dated 20121977 which was in fact never issued by the Government.
This finding has been recorded by a Division Bench of the High Court while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 3070 of 1979 - Shalinder Pal and three others v. State of Punjab and others decided on 30101979.
The Division Bench was considering the claim made by the four petitioners for regular promotion who had been earlier promoted as Statistical Assistant on ad hoc basis alongwith the respondent No. 4.
The petitioners have stated that the respondent No. 4 was given notional promotion as Statistical Assistant in his parent department on the basis of alleged circular dated 20121977.
Therefore, in view of the High Court's order dated 30101979, all the benefits derived by respondent No. 4 on the basis of this pro-forma promotion in the parent department should have been withdrawn by the respondent-Corporation.
However, instead of doing that, the respondent-Corporation arbitrarily absorbed respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation ignoring the fact that he had not passed any departmental examination or any Shorthand/Typing test.
Petitioners have alleged that the respondent No. 4 was being paid salary in the grade of Rs. 200-500 while holding the post of Assistant but he was straightaway absorbed against the post carrying pay scale of Rs. 350-800 and this by itself is indicative of the favour shown to the respondent No. 4.
It has also been alleged in the writ petition that Ex. Chairman of the Corporation was unduly interested in the respondent No. 4 and when the petitioners were promoted as Personal Assistants with effect from 1891978, the Ex. Chairman persuaded the then Chief Minister to impress upon the Corporation to abolish the four posts of Personal Assistants.
It has also been stated that at the instance of the Ex. Chairman, respondent No. 2 took up the matter regarding the abolition of the posts and in furtherance of this object, the respondent No. 2 prepared a note Annexure P.9 dated 881986.
Respondent No. 2 sought advice of the Legal Remembrancer, Punjab who did not agree with the abolition of the posts.
The Chairman then asked for the return of the file without advice of the Legal Remembrancer.
He then secured the advice of the Joint Secretary, Irrigation and Power who gave clearance to the Corporation in the matter of abolition of posts.
The respondent No. 2 got prepared a note Annexure P10 which was contrary to the facts and he manipulated a resolution by the Board of Directors for the abolition of the posts.
Petitioners have contended that on the date of posting of the respondent No. 4 against the post of Personal Assistant, they were working as senior to him but without considering their cases, the respondent No. 4 was first posted as Personal Assistant and, thereafter, he manipulated the abolition of posts with the intervention of Ex. Chairman as well as the present Chairman of the Corporation.
7.
In its written statement, respondent No. 1 has pleaded that petitioner Ravi Kumar was appointed as a Junior Scale Stenographer in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400 with effect from 1261975 and he was allowed special pay with effect from 24.2.1977 and not with effect from 1261975 as claimed by him.
Petitioner Vinod Kumar was appointed as a Junior Scale Stenographer on 28101976 and he was given special pay of Rs. 30/- with effect from 24.2.1977.
Petitioner Mrs. Prem Kumari was appointed as a Junior Scale Stenographer on 791977 and was allowed special pay with effect from 891977.
Petitioner Balwinder Singh was appointed as Junior Scale Stenographer on 791977 and he was allowed special pay with effect from 891977.
The respondent No. 1 has not contested the petitioners statement regarding their promotion to the posts of Senior Scale Stenographer and Assistant Grade-I Regarding respondent No. 4, it has been stated that a whole time post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman was created in September, 1978 and as none of the petitioners was eligible to be appointed as Personal Assistant to the Chairman, respondent No. 4 was appointed on that post in his own pay scale of Rs. 140-300 with deputation allowance.
The petitioners were merely Junior Scale Stenographers in September, 1978 and, therefore, they were not qualified even for the post of Personal Assistant to the Managing Director, a post which was in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500.
Respondent No. 1 has then stated that respondent No. 4 was promoted in his parent department as a Statistical Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 200-500.
Consequently, he was promoted as Assistant in the Corporation vide order dated 3031978.
His order of promotion in the parent department was cancelled on 15.1.1979, due to non-joining but no order for cancelling his promotion in the service of the Corporation was issued.
Respondent No. 4 remained on deputation till 31.12.1980 and, thereafter, he was permanently absorbed on 111981 and till that date, there was no lis between the petitioners and respondent No. 4 in the matter of seniority.
Absorption of respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation has been described as one made in public interest.
While admitting that the petitioner No. 1 made a representation dated 2371984, respondent No. 1 has pleaded that this representation was made after considerable delay.
Facts relating to the passing of resolution by the Corporation for creation of four posts of Personal Assistants with effect from 1891978 and issue of the order of promotion of the petitioners with effect from that date have not been controverted.
This respondent has also stated that decision to abolish four posts of Personal Assistants was taken in view of the advice given by the Government vide letter dated 2271986 (Annexure R-1/2).
The Board of Directors of the Corporation considered the entire matter and then took a decision to abolish four posts of Personal Assistants.
It has been pleaded that not giving of advice by the Legal Remembrancer is wholly irrelevant and the decision taken by the Board of Directors cannot be termed as arbitrary or malicious.
Reversion of the petitioners has been justified on the ground of abolition of the posts.
8.
In his written statement, respondent No. 2 has denied the averments made in paras 25, 26 and 27 of the writ petition.
It has been denied that the matter was taken up at the behest of Ex. Chairman S Jasjit Singh Thiara.
Note dated 881986 was just to put up the case before respondent No. 2 and before the Board of Directors for the abolition of four posts in view of the Punjab Government letter dated 2271986.
Respondent No. 4 has been described by the respondent No. 2 to be the most suitable person for the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman due to his experience, academic qualification and conduct.
Respondent No. 2 has denied the allegation that he sought advice from the Legal Remembrancer, Punjab and then withdrew the file.
He has stated that the advice was sought by the then Managing Director of the Corporation.
He had, however, admitted that he had sent a note dated 2.7.1986 to the Legal Remembrancer that the file be returned as the full facts were not given.
9.
In a separate written statement, the respondent No. 4 has pleaded that power to create and abolish the posts vests with the Corporation and no exception can be taken by the petitioners to the decision taken by the Corporation.
He has given details relating to his deputation.
He has stated that with effect from 1991978, he has been working as a Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
The petitioners, according to respondent No. 4, joined the service as Clerks from 1971 to 1975 and on the date of his deputation to the Corporation's service, the petitioner Nos. 3 and 4 were not even holding the posts of Junior Scale Stenographers.
He has also narrated the facts regarding his absorption and has stated that none of the petitioners represented against his absorption till 2371984.
This, according to respondent No. 4, was done only when Shri J K Dhir, who was favourable to them became Managing Director of the Corporation.
Respondent No. 4 has pleaded that after a lapse of long time, it is not open to the petitioners to challenge his absorption and that in any case he was more qualified than the petitioners and had rendered 16 years service.
Moreover, he was selected for the appointment to the post of Statistical Assistant by the direct recruitment but did not join in view of the fact that he was already working as a Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
Subsequently, he resigned from the service of the parent department.
10.
In support to the writ petition, Shri Patwalia argued that action of the Corporation to abolish four posts of Personal Assistants suffers from mala fides and, therefore, Annexures P.10 and P11 should be quashed and the petitioners be ordered to be posted back as Personal Assistants.
He argued that after considering the grievance of the petitioners against the promotion and absorption of respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation, the respondent No. 1 took decision to create four posts of Personal Assistants and, thereby make room for promotion of the petitioners as Personal Assistants and therefore, subsequent abolition of the posts cannot in any manner be justified.
Shri Patwalia vehemently argued that respondent No. 2 had prepared a patently false note which was placed before the Board of Directors and the members of the Board of Directors passed the resolution Annexure P10 without applying the mind.
Learned counsel argued that the reasons given for abolition of the four posts are wholly irrelevant and extraneous and therefore, the action taken by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is vitiated by malice in fact as well as malice in law.
Another argument of Shri Patwalia is that even if the abolition of the posts is held to be justified, the absorption of respondent No. 4 on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman should be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
He pointed out that the respondent No. 4 was not even entitled to get benefit of his pro-forma promotion as a Statistical Assistant in the parent department because the same was cancelled by an order dated 15.1.1979 and while dismissing Civil Writ Petition No. 3070 of 1979, this Court recorded a finding that the circular dated 20121977 on the basis of which promotion orders had been issued, was a fake document.
He also pointed out that even if the respondent No. 4 could continue on the post of Assistant on the basis of order dated 3031978, he could not have been absorbed on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman which carried pay scale of Rs. 800-1,400 because as on 111981, the petitioner No. 1 was holding the post of Assistant Grade I and that post carried pay scale of Rs. 225-500 as against the pay scale of the post held by respondent No. 4 which was Rs. 200-500.
Shri Patwalia further argued that the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman was an ex-cadre post and the same could not have been filled without considering the cases of other eligible persons like the petitioners.
In substance, his argument is that the action of respondent No. 1 in absorbing the respondent No. 4 as Personal Assistant to the Chairman without considering the cases of the petitioners is contrary to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Lastly, he argued that at the time of reversion of the petitioners, the respondent-Corporation should have considered the cases of all persons who were holding the posts of Personal Assistants because all these posts were ex-cadre posts and were in the same time scale and were equivalent in rank to that of Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
11.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the respondent No. 1 and Shri H.S.
Mattewal, Senior Advocate appearing for respondent No. 4 argued in the first instance that the writ petition should be dismissed only on the ground of delay.
Learned counsel pointed out that against the order dated 111981, petitioner No. 1 had for the first time made a representation on 2371984 and there is no explanation for delay of more than three years and 5 months.
The petitioners were sleeping over their rights and, therefore, they must be deemed to have waived their grievance against the absorption of respondent No. 4.
Learned counsel further argued that there is no prayer for quashing of the order Annexure P5 by which respondent No. 4 was absorbed in the service of the Corporation and, therefore, the Court should not directly or indirectly invalidate the order of absorption of respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation.
On merits of the action of the respondent-Corporation to abolish the posts, Shri Rajiv Atma Ram argued that the very decision taken by the Board of Directors to create four posts of Personal Assistants was unjustified because there was no justification for four posts of Personal Assistants.
Learned counsel then argued that with the abolition of the posts, the petitioners had to be reverted to their substantive ranks as Senior Scale Stenographers/Assistant and, therefore, orders Annexure P10 and P11 cannot be characterised as arbitrary.
12.
Before examining other issues, I deem it proper to deal with the objection regarding delay in the filing of the writ petition.
The fact that the petitioner No. 1 made a representation on 2371984 is not in dispute.
Ordinarily, unexplained delay of such a long period would have justified dismissal of the writ petition only on the ground of laches in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in PS Sadashiva Swami v. State of Tamilnadu, 1976(1) S.L.R.
53 and Roshan Lal v. International Airport Authority of India, A.I.R. 1981 Supreme Court 597.
However, in the peculiar facts of this case of which reference shall be made hereafter, the petitioners cannot be non-suited on the ground of delay.
There is no controversy between the parties that after the petitioner No. 1 had made a representation dated 2371984 and other petitioners also made grievance against the absorption of the respondent No. 4 as Personal Assistant to the Chairman, the respondent-Corporation got the entire matter examined and after seeking legal advice, it decided to create four posts of Personal Assistant with effect from 1891978.
The Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation passed a resolution on 2791985 for creation of these posts.
This was followed by an order dated 3091985 promoting the petitioners as Personal Assistants in the grade of Rs. 800-1,400 with effect from 1891978.
These facts clearly show that the Corporation considered the grievances of the petitioners to be genuine and remedied it by promoting them with retrospective effect.
Of course, subsequently, it resolved to abolish the four posts of Personal Assistants and reverted the petitioners.
Whether the subsequent action of the respondent-Corporation is legal or not, and whether it is justified or not is a different issue.
But this much is certain that the Corporation did not reject the claim made by the petitioners on the ground of delay.
The Corporation did not take the stand that the petitioners cannot make a grievance against the absorption of respondent No. 4 as Personal Assistant to the Chairman because they have not represented to the Corporation before 2371984.
In my opinion, when the Corporation has itself taken a step to consider the grievance of the petitioners and has passed positive order in their favour, it is not open to the respondents to raise the objection of delay on laches.
The petitioners could not have approached this Court with any legitimate justification after the issue of order Annexure P.7.
If they had come to the Court in the year 1985, the Court would not non-suited them on the ground that their claim is under consideration of the Corporation.
They have come to the Court soon after the passing of the order of reversion (Annexure P11).
There is no time lag between the passing of order Annexure P11 and the filing of the writ petition.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot be non-suited on the ground of delay in the filing of the writ petition.
13.
Coming to the merits of the case, it may be mentioned that the petitioners had been appointed as Junior Scale Stenographers on 1261975, 28.10.1978 and 791977 respectively.
By that time, they had served the respondent-Corporation for 4 to 5 years.
As against this, the respondent No. 4 had joined service more than six years prior to the appointment of petitioner No. 1.
He was appointed as a Steno-typist on 12.4.1972 and then as a Junior Scale Stenographer with effect from 651977.
In so far as petitioner Nos. 2 to 4 are concerned, they cannot straightaway claim seniority over the respondent No. 4 on the basis of date of appointment/promotion as Junior Scale Stenographer.
The only ground on which they can claim a better status qua respondent No. 4 is that they were promoted in the pay scale of Rs. 150-400, whereas respondent No. 4 was promoted in the pay scale of Rs. 140-300.
However, there is no dispute between the parties that respondent No. 4 was given pro-forma promotion as Statistical Assistant in his parent department and on that basis, he was appointed as a Statistical Assistant against the post of Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 200-500.
Thereafter, he was posted as Personal Assistant to the Chairman and finally absorbed as a Personal Assistant to the Chairman vide Annexure P5.
As on 111981, only petitioner No. 1 was holding the post of Assistant Grade I.
Other petitioners were holding the posts as Junior Scale Stenographers.
As per their own admission, they were promoted as Senior Scale Stenographers with effect from 1291984, 24.2.1983 and 28.12.1983 respectively.
In the background all these facts, the question of abolition of the posts need a closer examination.
In Annexure P10, various facts have been set out relating to absorption of respondent No. 4 and promotion of the petitioners as Personal Assistants with effect from 1891978.
Shri Patwalia is correct in his criticism to the contents of the note Annexure P10 but that by itself is not sufficient to quash the decision of the Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation regarding abolition of the posts.
That decision has to be viewed in the context of the earlier decision taken for creation of four posts of Personal Assistants vide Annexure P6.
A look at Annexure P6 shows that the Board of Directors of the Corporation had accepted the position that absorption of respondent No. 4 as a Personal Assistant to the Chairman in the grade of Rs. 300-800 was irregular because it was done without considering the cases of senior persons.
However, in its zeal to remedy the wrong done to one of the persons in the service of the Corporation, the Board of Directors of the respondent No. 1 committed another wrong by creating four posts of Personal Assistants without examining the requirement of those posts for the service of the Corporation.
Therefore, the decision of the Board of Directors for creation of four additional posts of Personal Assistants was per se not in public interest.
Consequently, the subsequent decision taken by the respondent-Corporation to abolish the four posts cannot be characterised as arbitrary and unreasonable.
The fact that case for abolition of four posts was moved by the Ex. Chairman Shri Jasjit Singh Thiara does give an indication of his unwarranted interference in the working of the Corporation and the various actions taken by respondent No. 2 which include sending of the file to the Legal Remembrancer and then withdrawing it and preparing a note containing wrong facts cannot be appreciated but that by itself cannot be a ground for quashing the decision of the Board of Directors which is otherwise in public interest.
Therefore, argument of Shri Patwalia regarding illegality in the decision of the Board of Directors to abolish the posts cannot be accepted.
14.
The next issue which falls for consideration is as to whether the respondent-Corporation was justified in absorbing the respondent No. 4 as a Personal Assistant to the Chairman, a post which carried pay scale of Rs. 350-800 (revised as Rs. 800-1,400).
The facts which have come on record clearly show that the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman was sanctioned by the Government of Punjab without any indication about the source of recruitment and the qualifications for that post.
That post was not encadred by the bye-laws framed by the respondent-Corporation, and therefore, it was necessary for the respondent-Corporation to decide as to whether the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman should be filled by direct recruitment or by promotion or by transfer or by deputation.
The record which has been placed by Shri Rajiv Atma Ram before the Court show that no such decision was taken by the respondent-Corporation.
The only decision was taken by the respondent-Corporation was to absorb the respondent No. 4 straightaway on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
While taking that decision, the respondent-Corporation did not consider the case of any of its existing employees in the service of the Corporation.
Shri Patwalia is right in submitting that the Corporation was under an obligation to determine the source of recruitment to the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman and it was necessary for the Corporation to consider the cases of the in-service candidates before absorbing respondent No. 4.
He is also right in arguing that the respondent-Corporation has ignored various material facts while absorbing the respondent No. 4 as a Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
There is no dispute between the parties that respondent No. 4 was given an ad hoc notional promotion as a Statistical Assistant in the Agricultural Department on the basis of circular dated 20121977 which was a fake document and that his promotion in the parent department was cancelled on 15.1.1979.
The Corporation did not take any step to place the respondent No. 4 back on the post of Junior Scale Stenographer after the cancellation of his promotion in parent department.
The Corporation ignored the fact that a Division Bench of this Court had recorded a finding that circular dated 20121977 which constituted the basis of promotions to the posts of Statistical Assistant was not genuine and, therefore, no right could accrue to respondent No. 4 to take benefit at the time of his promotion in the parent department.
It is also a fact that petitioner No. 1 stood promoted as an Assistant Grade-I on 761979 and was available for consideration for appointment on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman on 111981.
15.
On the basis of above facts, the Court may have quashed the absorption of respondent No. 4 as Personal Assistant to the Chairman but in the absence of any challenge to the orders (Annexure P.1, P2 and P.5) and in the absence of any prayer made by the petitioners to quash these orders and particularly the absorption of respondent No. 4 in the service of the respondent-Corporation.
I do not find any justification to issue a writ to quash the orders (Annexures P.1, P2 and P.5).
Petitioner's failure to challenge the orders relating to appointment of respondent No. 4 as Assistant and his ultimate absorption in the service of the Corporation clearly disentitles them to claim a direction for quashing these orders, particularly in view of the fact that respondent No. 4 has already resigned from the service of the parent department.
Issue of a writ by the Court adversely affecting the absorption of respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation would do immense injustice to respondent No. 4.
16.
This brings me to the consideration of the last submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners, namely, that even if the abolition of posts is upheld and absorption of the respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation is not declared illegal, the Court should direct the respondent- Corporation to decide as to who is the senior-most in the cadre of Personal Assistant and who should be retained on the remaining posts of Personal Assistants.
Learned counsel argued that the resolution passed by the Board of Directors (Annexure P6) has not been completely rescinded.
By Annexure P6, four posts of Personal Assistants were created with effect from 1891978.
These posts carried pay scale identical to the pay scale of the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman and they were treated equivalent to as well as interchangeable with the post held by the respondent No. 4 and, therefore, the Corporation should have decided as to which one of the Personal Assistant should be retained after abolition of four posts.
17.
In order to appreciate the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel, it would be profitable to reproduce the decision of the Board of Directors regarding creation of four posts of Personal Assistants.
This decision reads as under :  Four No. additional posts of PA equivalent to the rank to that of PA to Chairman in the grade of Rs. 800-1,400 w.e.f.
18978 were sanctioned, so as to give retrospective promotions to S/Shri Ravi Kumar Sabharwal, Vinod Tandon, Prem Shingari and Balwinder Singh with a view to grant relief to the officials concerned, as they had suffered all these years due to no fault on their part subject to the conditions :  (i) that the posts will be vacated by the official/s concerned as and when his/their cadre is changed on account of promotion to some other post or their retirement.
(ii) the posts alongwith that held by Sh. Harjinder Singh, will be inter-changeable;  (iii) Responsibility for absorbing Sh. Harjinder Singh, in the grade of Rs. 5 hold permanently in the Corporation in complete disregard to the rights of the Sr. persons and observations dated 29580 of the then MD may be fixed and action taken against the person/persons at fault, be reported to the Committee/Board in due course of time.
18.
Once the Board of Directors decided to treat all the posts of Personal Assistants as equivalent and inter-changeable and in the subsequent decision, the Board of Directors has not altered this equivalence, it was imperative for the Board to have taken a decision as to who should be retained on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
At that stage, the respondent-Board ought to have examined the position of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondent No. 4.
The Board should have kept in mind that by virtue of Annexure P.7, all the petitioners were treated as Personal Assistants with effect from 1891978 and the respondent No. 4 was absorbed as Personal Assistant on 111981.
The record which has been produced before the Court does not show that the Board applied its mind on this aspect of the matter and then took a decision to retain respondent No. 4 on the post of Personal Assistant.
Therefore, a direction deserves to be given to the Board to reconsider the issue of retention of one person on the post of Personal Assistant from amongst the petitioners and respondent No. 4.
While doing so it shall be for the Board to decide as to who is the most suitable person to be retained on the post of personal Assistant.
19.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed in so far as it relates to Annexure P5 and Annexure P10.
Validity of Annexure P11 is also upheld but subject to a direction to the respondent-Corporation to decide afresh the question of continuance of one person on the post of Personal Assistant from amongst the petitioners and respondent No. 4.
It shall be open to the Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation to take note of the placement of the petitioners as well as respondent No. 4 in the service of the Corporation as on 31.12.1980 and while deciding as to who should be retained on the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman, it shall also be open to the respondent-Corporation to decide the suitability of the petitioners and respondent No. 4 to hold the post of Personal Assistant to the Chairman.
If the Corporation decides that the petitioners or any one of them is more suitable than respondent No. 4, an appropriate order should be issued to that effect.
However, in case the Corporation holds that respondent No. 4 is more suitable, no fresh order need be passed by the Corporation.
Costs made easy.
Petition dismissed.