Bakthavatsalam, J - This writ petition is directed against an order of dismissal of the petitioner from the post of Warehouse Manager Grade II of the respondent-Corporation by order dated 13121989.
2.
The facts are : On certain allegations made against the petitioner, disciplinary proceeding were initiated and four charges were framed against the petitioner as follows :-  ``.................Charge No. 1 ``that he acquired assets to a value of Rs. 1,20,63961 which is disproportionate to his known sources of income.''
Charge No. 2 : ``that he acquired the following immovable properties but failed to obtain the prior permission of the Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation in contravention to Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation General and Staff Regulations 1965 read with Rule 7(1) of the Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1960 as also amendment by Tamil Nadu Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1973''.
(i) House site measuring 2,328 sq.
ft. at Vellayagoundapalayam village at a cost of Rs. 1,95650 purchased on 26.1.1967 from Thiru D.A.
Srinivasan and others in his name.
(ii) Another house, site at Vellayagoundnpalayam village measuring 1,100 sq.
ft at a cost of Rs. 224350 purchased on 20273 from Thiru Vijayan in his name.
(iii) House site at Vellayagoundanpalayam village measuring 1,700 sq.
ft. at a cost of Rs. 4,81850 purchased on 26576 from Smt. Saraswathi and registered in the name of Smt. Gomathi, second wife of the delinquent.
(iv) Constructed a new house in the name of Smt. Gomathi, second wife of the Warehouse Manager at 55-A Nedumaran Nagar, Dharmapuri at a value of Rs. 38,000/- during the year 1977.
(v) Purchased a tiled house at Nedumaran Nagar, Dharmapuri at Door No. 32 in the name of his mother at a cost of Rs. 7,840/- from Thiru.
Paramasiva Gounder on 2961978.
(vi) Purchased a house site measuring 2,047 sq.
ft. at Vellayagoundanpalayam village from Smt. China Pappa on 11675 in the name of Smt. Gomathi, second wife of the delinquent and Smt. Nagaveni, concubine of the delinquent with equal share by investing Rs. 1,10550 towards half share.
Charge No. 3 : ``that he married Smt. Mala D/o Dhandauthapani, retired Inspector of Police, Salem during 1967 and he also married Smt. Gomathi, D/o Late Krishnamoorthy of Erode in or around 1974 while his first marriage with Smt. Mala was subsisting and thereby contravened Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation General and Staff Regulations, 1965 read with Rule 19(ii) of the Tamil Nadu Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1978''.
Charge No. 4 : ``that he developed illegal intimacy with Selvi Nagaveni who was working as Bill Clerk in Dharmapuri Warehouse of Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation for about 3 years from September, 75 by taking advantage of her poverty and that he ill-treated and tortured her and thus involved himself in an act of moral turpitude thereby causing embrassment and bringing discredit to the organisation in which he is working, and thus contravene Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation General and Staff Regulations, 1965 read with Rule 19(2) of Tamil Nadu Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1978.........'' One KR Ramaswamy, was appointed as Enquiry Officer on 4.2.1984.
The petitioner submitted his explanation on 24.4.1984 and by letter dated 7121984 he requested for certain documents to be perused and to take extracts of the same.
The petitioner was replied that the report of the Directorate of Vigilance and Anti-Corruption cannot be given to him and regarding item Nos. 6 and 8, mentioned in the application of petitioner, he was permitted to peruse and take zerox copies of the same and with regard to other items listed out in the letter, the concerned departments have been requested to make available the copies of documents requested by the petitioner.
On 611987, the petitioner made a representation to the respondent herein stating that the enquiry officer so appointed is raised and prejudiced against him and as such he enquiry officer is to be replaced by another officer in the interest of justice and fair play.
The said request of the petitioner was rejected by the management Corporation by letter dated 2711987.
The petitioner preferred an appeal to the Executive Committee against the order and the appeal was dismissed on 1331987.
The petitioner preferred a writ petition before this Court WP No. 9186 of 1987 praying for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the first respondent to change the enquiry officer to enquire de novo into the charge framed against the petitioner on 7.11.1983.
By order dated 2291987, Mohan, J (as he then was) while dismissing the writ petition, stated thus :  ``..........The Managing Director, the first respondent herein, will consider the above prayer having regard to the supporting affidavit of Mr. Muthukumaraswami counsel for the petitioner who attended the departmental enquiry to defend the writ petitioner and pass necessary orders on or before 15.10.87 on merits.
Subject to this direction the writ petition is dismissed........'' Consequently, it seems that an order has been passed on 14101987 stating that there is no reason to change the Enquiry Officer at that stage.
This was again challenged by the petitioner in WP No. 13006 of 1987 and Nainar Sundaram, J (as he then was) by order dated 22121987 dismissed the same, observing thus :  ``............It is not proper for this Court to sit in judgment at this juncture over the order passed by the 1st respondent for declining to change the inquiry officer.
After all, the departmental action has not culminated in any adverse order against the petitioner.
As and when the petitioner should have that misfortune, while agitating the matter further, the petitioner can certainly urge this aspect with regard to the decline on the part of the 1st respondent to change the inquiry officer and how far on that account, he was put to prejudice..........'' A letter was addressed to the petitioner on 2831988 stating that the job of enquiring various charges against the petitioner/accused has come to an end and the enquiry is closed and that the accused officer need not address the Enquiry Officer in the disciplinary case thereafter.
The enquiry officer submitted a report on 2241988 holding that all the charges were proved.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on 2061988.
On 1571988, the petitioner preferred a writ petition in WP No. 7796 of 1988 praying for the issue of writ of mandamus directing respondents to conduct a de novo enquiry on the charges framed against the petitioner.
Sivasubramaniam, J in that writ petition by order dated 1571988, ordered the writ petition in the following terms :  ``........The grievance of the petitioner is that he was not allowed to pursue certain records and adduce evidence on his side.
I find there was an earlier Writ Petition No. 9186/87 wherein this Court directed the Enquiry Officer to consider the supporting affidavit of one Mr. Muthukumaraswamy, counsel for the petitioner and pass necessary orders on or before 15101987 on merits.
Accordingly, an order was passed on 14101987 holding that there was no necessity to have a de novo enquiry.
In the circumstances, I do not know how the petitioner is entitled to file the present writ petition without seeking to set aside the order dated 14101987.
It shows that he has already submitted to the earlier order, and, therefore, he is not entitled to ask for de novo enquiry at the stage.
However, the real grievance appears to be that he was not allowed to examine his defence witnesses.
If that is so, certainly the Enquiry Officer will give reasonable opportunity to the petitioner to examine defence witnesses on his behalf, provided final orders have not been passed..............'' On 2671988, the above mentioned order was communicated to the Managing Director of the respondent Corporation by the petitioner herein.
On 2891988, the petitioner was asked to submit the explanations to the show cause notice, even though the petitioner has drawn the attention of the respondent- Corporation to the order passed by Sivasubramaniam, J in WP No. 7796 of 1988, mentioned above.
However, the petitioner challenged the said order dated 2891988 praying for the issuance of a writ of certified mandamus to quash the proceedings dated 2891988 and to give the petitioner an opportunity to examine the defence witness.
After hearing both sides, by order dated 3131989, allowed the writ petition, set aside the show cause notice dated 2891988 and remitted the case back to the respondent with a direction to give another opportunity to examine defence witness.
While holding so, the learned Judge gave certain directions to the following effect :  ``..........It is made clear that the petitioner is not entitled to an unlimited time for examining his witnesses, as the enquiry is kept pending for a long time at his instance.
The petitioner is directed to file a list of defence witnesses, whose evidence is absolutely necessary to prove his defence, within a week from this date.
On receipt of the same, the Enquiry Officer will fix the date of enquiry within two weeks thereafter he intimates the same to the petitioner by registered post acknowledgement due.
The Enquiry Officer will examine the defence witnesses and submit his report within four weeks thereafter.
It is further made clear that the petitioner will not be entitled to any adjournment on any of the hearings to be fixed by the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer is directed to complete the enquiry, whether the petitioner chooses to examine his defence witnesses or not, within the said period.
It is open to the Enquiry Officer to examine such of those defence witnesses whose evidence, according to his opinion, is relevant for the enquiry..................'' Five defence witnesses brought by the accused officer were examined at Salem Town Warehouse on 3041989 and six defence witnesses brought to Dharmapuri warehouse were enquired on 151989.
The petitioner asked for one more day to examine himself either at Madras or at Salem and it was also granted to him and his defence was over by 651989 at Head Office by the enquiry officer in the presence of defence lawyer and prosecutor for disciplinary proceedings.
On completion of the defence witnesses, the petitioner submitted a written statement on 2951989.
The Enquiry Officer gave his report dated 3151989 stating that all charges are proved.
The impugned order dated 13121989 came to be passed by the respondent herein/disciplinary authority finding all charges proved and inflicting a punishment of dismissal from service.
This order is challenged before this Court.
3.
The petitioner alleges in the affidavit that he was not given a reasonable opportunity inasmuch as he has not been furnished with a copy of preliminary report.
The petitioner further alleges that the order of punishment is based mainly on the report of one Thiru K Eswaran, who conducted the enquiry in total disregard to the principles of natural justice and as such the impugned order is laible to be set aside.
It is also alleged that the unusual lengthy preamble would show that the enquiry officer was greatly influenced by unwarranted and extraneous matters.
It is further stated that the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer to conclude the enquiry by treating the enquiry as closed even before the examination of defence witnesses had prejudiced the petitioner, though it was set aside later by this Court.
It has also alleged that the enquiry report itself has been written in such a way to create prejudice in the mind of the disciplinary authority against the petitioner paving the way for imposition of extreme punishment provided under the Rules.
It is also alleged that the enquiry officer has stated unnecessarily that the petitioner had tried to stall the enquiry and that it has been adjourned many times and that this would show that the enquiry officer has considered extraneous considerations in arriving at a conclusion.
The petitioner alleges that a special reference made by the enquiry officer to the position and conduct of the petitioner's wife and the alleged second wife subsequently examined as defence witnesses, is quite unwarranted.
It is also alleged that the long delay in concluding the enquiry cannot be attributed to the petitioner alone.
It is also pointed out that had the enquiry officer been changed at the request of the petitioner, the enquiry would have ended long back.
It is also alleged that calling upon the defence witnesses before the conclusion of prosecution witnesses is a clear violation of practice and procedure adopted in disciplinary proceedings and that inasmuch as the petitioner has been asked to give a list of defence witnesses would amount to violation of principles of natural justice.
The petitioner further alleges in the affidavit that the delay in making available the depositions of prosecution witnesses to the petitioner is fatal and that it offends the principles of natural justice.
It is also alleged in the affidavit and the findings of the enquiry officer on charge numbers 3 and 4 is perverse and based on no evidence.
It is also alleged that for the offence of bigamy the question of marriage must be strictly proved, that any inference could not be sufficient to prove the factum of marriage and that in the absence of any reliable evidence, it should be held that charge No. 3 is not proved.
So also that petitioner alleges that charges 1, 2 and 4 are also not proved.
The petitioner also alleges in the affidavit that the entire enquiry was vitiated for want of prosecution of the witnesses before the enquiry.
It is also alleged that the punishment inflicted is disproportionate to the gravity of misconduct and violated Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It is also alleged that there is no complaint in the performance of official duties and that the impugned order is bad in law.
With these allegations, the petitioner has come up before this Court.
4.
A counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondent, in which it is stated that Regulation 13 of the Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation General and Staff Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the ``Regulations'') provide for an appeal against the impugned order that the petitioner has not exhausted that right by way of appeal and as such this Court should dismiss this writ petition on this ground in limine.
It is also stated in the counter-affidavit that the charges framed against the petitioner are for serious misconduct, such as acquirement of assets disproportionate to his known source of income, bigamy and moral turpitude and as such it is incorrect to state that the charges are not connected with his official acts.
It is also claimed that it is not necessary to examine all the witnesses cited by the prosecution to prove the misconduct in the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner.
It is further claimed in the counter-affidavit that all the documents cited as basis for charges framed against the petitioner were supplied to him, that he was permitted to peruse the same.
It is also claimed in the counter-affidavit that the writ petition filed by the petitioner to quash all the proceedings emanating from the issue of charge memo dated 7111993 was dismissed with following observations :  ``...........The only argument advanced on behalf of the petitioner is that the documents called for were very relevant for the enquiry and that earlier the warehousing corporation agreed to give it when it wrote on 751985, later on it changed its stand on 6.11.1986 and therefore this is nothing but a denial of natural justice.
For my part, I am totally unable to agree.
I have already listed out the charges against the petitioner.
I have also given a catalogue of the documents prayed for by the petitioner.
No doubt, the Warehousing Corporation took the stand as regards items 6 and 8 he would be permitted to peruse.
Regarding other items the concerned departments have been requested to make them available.
But I do not think that the stand was correct.
It was only under these circumstances on 6.11.86, it was clearly stated to the petitioner as follows :- The issue was re-examined.
His attention is drawn to this office Memo first cited wherein copies of documents based on which charges were framed against his were already furnished.
The other records, required by him are not cited as basis for the charges framed against him and hence, him request to permit him to peruse and tax extracts of documents not cited as basis for the charges framed against him does not arise and his request is rejected.
This stand is well taken because whatever are relevant for the charges they alone were required to be produced and not each and every one of the documents which are not relevant.
It should be remembered in this connection, that the request for furnishing documents was turned down as early as 6.11.86 which will clearly show the object of the petitioner to baulk the enquiry and protract the proceedings.
Hence the writ petition is dismissed.............'' It is claimed in the counter-affidavit that in view of the orders of this Court mentioned above it is not open to the petitioner to contend that documents are not furnished to him.
It is also claimed in the counter- affidavit, that the copy of the proceedings of the said K Eswaran was served on the petitioner and that this court will not reappreciate the evidence in a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
A reference to the writ petition in WP No. 9186 of 1987 has been made in the counter-affidavit.
It is also stated that a provisional conclusion was arrived at on 2061988 and the petitioner was directed to show cause within 15 days from the date of receipt of notice.
It is also stated that a writ petition No. 7796 of 1988 has been filed by the petitioner for conducting de novo enquiry.
It is also stated that subsequently WP No. 12945 of 1988 has been filed by the petitioner and that in pursuance of the orders in the said writ petition, since the request of the petitioner for conducting de novo enquiry had been rejected, it is not open to the petitioner to raise the same issue once again, it is also claimed in the counter-affidavit that charges are all serious in nature and that the action of the respondent, dismissing the petitioner from service is justified.
5.
Mrs. Nalini Ganesh, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner referred to various documents and earlier orders of this Court in the disciplinary proceedings taken against the petitioner.
Learned counsel lays stress on the report of the enquiry officer and the method by which the enquiry had been conducted.
According to the learned counsel, the enquiry report has been drafted showing the biased mind of the enquiry officer and as such the impugned order has got to be set aside.
Knowing fully well about the limited jurisdiction of this Court in such matters, Mrs. Nalini Ganesh stressed the point about the quantum of punishment.
Learned counsel further contended that inasmuch as the charges framed against the petitioner are not connected with his official duties, extreme punishment of dismissal need not be inflicted on the petitioner.
Learned counsel relies upon the decision of a single Judge of Andhra Pradesh High Court in VV Guraviah v. Assistant Works Manager, APSRTC Tirupathi, 1989(2) Cur LR 44 is support of her contention.
6.
Per contra, Mr. G Devadoss, learned counsel appearing for the respondent contended that the jurisdiction of this Court in such matters is very limited and that this Court may not be pleased to re-appreciate the evidence.
According to the learned counsel for the respondent, there is ample evidence to prove the charges of the petitioner and this Court, sitting under Art. 226 of the Constitution need not interfere with in such findings arrived at by the disciplinary authority.
Learned counsel further points out that the enquiry authority is only a fact finding authority and it is settled law that it is open to the disciplinary authority to differ from the findings of the enquiry authority, that in this case the disciplinary authority accepted the findings of the enquiry authority and as such there is no infirmity in the order passed.
According to the learned counsel, the charges framed were all proved.
Learned counsel pointed out that charge No. 2 is framed under R 19 and charge No. 4 has been framed under Rules 19(2) and 20 and that inasmuch as the charges were proved against the petitioner on the basis of oral evidence, the petitioner cannot attack the findings of the enquiry officer in this writ petition.
According to the learned counsel for the respondent there is no violation of principle of natural justice, and the petitioner has come up before this Court at every stage and the impugned order has been passed, following the orders of Sivasubramaniam, J It is pointed out that the delay is on account of the fact that the petitioner has approached this Court at every stage.
It has been categorically contended that the petitioner has been given sufficient reasonable opportunity, that he had taken part in the enquiry and that all the documents have been perused and as such this Court need not be pleased to interfere with the impugned order.
With regard to quantum of punishment, learned counsel for the respondent contended that it has been repeatedly held that the quantum of punishment cannot be gone into in a writ petition, and that in this case, punishment has been inflicted on the petitioner under the provisions of the Service Rules.
7.
I have considered the arguments of Mrs. Nalini Ganesh, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and of Mr. G Devadoss, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent and have gone through the materials placed before this Court.
Here is a case, where the order of dismissal has been passed, after framing four charges and after conducting an enquiry to that effect.
It seems the petitioner has been stalling the proceedings at every stage and ultimately, Sivasubramaniam, J has passed an order in WP No. 12945 of 1988 dated 3131989.
In that, the original show cause notice was issued and the petitioner was given opportunity to examine the defence witnesses and then only the impugned order came to be passed.
It is not as if the petitioner has not been given a reasonable opportunity.
If a disciplinary action is taken against a delinquent, the principle of natural justice, viz, reasonable opportunity has to be given.
In this case, I am not able to find that the petitioner can make any complaint that the principle of natural justice has been violated.
I am of the view that the disciplinary authority is the final authority to pass an order of punishment.
The way in which the enquiry officer drafted the report will have no relevance at all.
It is well settled that the report of the enquiry officer is not binding upon the disciplinary authority.
When such is the case, I do not see as to how the method of drafting the enquiry report will affect the impugned order.
A reading of the enquiry report and the order of the disciplinary authority, will clearly show that the punishment has been inflicted on the petitioner, based on the evidence adduced.
It is well settled that a Court sitting under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India cannot re-value of re-appreciate the evidence and as such, I do not think that this Court can interfere with the findings arrived at both by the enquiry officer as well as by the disciplinary authority.
I am not able to accept the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the charges framed against the petitioner are not serious in nature, warranting the dismissal of the petitioner from the services of the respondent.
A reading of R 19 of the Tamil Nadu Government Servants' Conduct Rules, 1973 along with the Tamil Nadu Warehousing Corporation General and Staff Regulations, 1965 clearly shows that the charges framed are proper and the punishment inflicted on the petitioner is also proper.
The punishment imposed on the petitioner cannot be called excessive.
With respect, I am unable to agree with the decision of a learned single Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, which has been heavily relied upon by the learned counsel, reported in VV Gurraviah v. Assistant Works Manager, A.P.S.R.T.C., Tirupathi, 1989(2) Cur.LR 44.
In so far as the petitioner herein has involved in an act involving moral turpitude on his part including any unlawful act, which may cause embarrassment or which may bring discredit to the respondent Corporation, I am of the view that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner has got to be rejected.
It is not as if the Officer has got to be punished only if he is involved in unlawful acts in his official duties alone.
That is why, Rules are found in Tamil Nadu Government Servants' Conduct Rules, 1973.
On a reading of R 18, it is clear that Tamil Nadu Government Servants' Conduct Rules, 1973 would equally apply to the employees of the respondent Corporation.
So in my view, even if the conduct of the employee is in question, as in the present case, I do think that it can be said that the punishment so inflicted is excessive.
On a persual of the materials placed before this Court I am of the view that there is abundant evidence in this case against the petitioner.
It is well settled that this Court, sitting under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India, is not an appellate Court and this Court cannot go into the inadequacy or the reliability of the evidence on which the punishing authority has acted.
This Court cannot review the evidence and arrive at a different finding on facts.
Moreover, it is settled law that it is not for this Court to decide about the quantum of punishment.
When the Rules are framed, the disciplinary authority is vested with the power to impose such a punishment, taking into consideration all the facts into account, this Court surely in my view, cannot interfere with the same.
Looking at from any angle, I am of the view that there are no merits in this writ petition.
Accordingly, this writ petition shall stand dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.