TS Doabia, J - This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This arises out of the following facts.
2.
More than forty-four years ago, the petitioners joined the services of respondents as conductor.
After twelve years of his service, his services were terminated on the ground that an order of conviction was recorded against the petitioner in a criminal case No. 23 of 1962.
The order which was passed against the petitioner is Annexure P/2.
This reads as under :  "Services of Shri Y.V.
Gaad, Store-Keeper I and JK Batra, Store-Keeper II of Central Stores, Gwalior are hereby terminated with effect from 17862, as they have been convicted by the Additional District & Sessions Judge, Gwalior in criminal case No.
23/62."
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that he preferred an appeal against the order of conviction and this Court was pleased to reverse the judgment of conviction.
The conviction and sentences imposed against the petitioner under sections 417, 465 and 468 of the Indian Penal Code were set aside.
It is alleged that the petitioner made a prayer that he be reinstated but instead of reinstating by respondents, he sought to involve the petitioner in some other cases.
Taking shelter being pendency of the other cases the petitioner was not reinstated.
It is the further case of the petitioner that even the other cases ended in a smoke and the Metropolitan Magistrate observed that the trial was a biggest waste of time and money.
This order was passed on 19th December, 1990.
It is the further case of the petitioner that he preferred a representation before the respondents asking them to reinstate him but no order has been passed.
4.
It may be seen that during the pendency of this litigation, the petitioner had attained the age of superannuation.
According to him, the petitioner was entitled to reinstatement immediately after order Annexure P/3 was passed and for this delay on the part of the respondents the petitioner should not be made to suffer.
5.
The respondents have taken a preliminary objection that this writ petition is highly belated.
It is urged that the petitioner was dismissed from the service in the year 1962 and the present petition was filed after attaining the age of 64 years merits dismissal.
It has again been stated that the petitioner should have approached the Labour Court under the Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960.
6.
So far as the question of delay is concerned, the petitioner rightly submits that it was for the respondents to reinstate the petitioner once he was acquitted by this Court vide order Annexure P/3.
According to him, on 19th December, 1971, the respondents had taken a categoric stand that as other cases are still pending against the petitioner, the question of reinstatement does not arise.
It would be useful to note Annexure P/4 which reads as under :  "To  Shri JK Batra,  88/81, Hari Niwas  Gadwa ki Goth,  Gwalior-1  Sub : Re-instatement.
Ref : Your application dated 12871 addressed to the Chief Minister.
In reference to your above application, it is to inform you that since you are involved in other cases, which are still pending in the Court, the question of re-instatement does not arise, at is stage.
Chief Stores & Purchase Officer"  As such the plea taken by the respondents that this petition is highly belated is without any substance,  7.
A perusal of the order Annexure P/2 shows that service of the petitioner were terminated only on the ground that he was convicted.
This conviction was set aside.
Even otherwise the law is that a person could be removed from service if the competent authority comes to the conclusion that the conduct which lead to his conviction is such which renders him unfit for continuance in service.
8.
A Full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Om Prakash v. The Director Postal Services Posts and Telegraphs Deptt., Punjab Circle Ambala and others, AIR 1973 P&H 1, summarised its conclusions in para 21 and these conclusions in so far as they are relevant for the purposes of this case are as under :  "(i) the departmental punishment of removal or dismissal from Government service is not an essential and automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge;  (ii) the authority competent to take disciplinary action under the Rules against a Government servant convicted on a criminal charge has to consider all the circumstances of the case and then to decide (a) whether the conduct of the delinquent official which led to his conviction is such as to render his further retention in public service undesirable; (b) if so, whether to dismiss him or to remove him from service, or to compulsory retire him; and (c) if the said conduct of the official is not such which renders his further retention in service undesirable whether the minor punishment, if any, should be inflicted on him;  ****** ******  (iv) to be retained in Government service or to remain in service is not a qualification, but a right in certain circumstances subject to the relevant constitutional provisions and service rules;  ****** *******  (vi) the difference in the procedure prescribed for imposing any of the three major penalties for misconduct of a Government servant who has not been convicted by a Criminal Court for that conduct on the one hand and the procedure to be followed for imposing one of those penalties on an official who has been so convicted on the other, lies only in this that the purview of Article 311 (2) and the provisions of Rules 14 to 18 of the 1965 Rules apply to the first case, but do not apply to the second.
Rule 19 does not contain any disqualification in the same sense as Rules 14 to 18 do not contain any qualification.
(viii) Section 12 of the Act does not wash away or obliterate the conduct of the employee which has led to his conviction, and does not, therefore, give him any immunity against departmental proceedings, nor exonerates him from his liability to departmental punishment for such conduct if it amounts to misconduct under the relevant service rules;  Note : Section 12 refers to the Section as contained in Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
(ix) the original misconduct of a Government servant does not merge with his conviction so as to become non-existent after conviction;  ******* *********  (xii) an order of dismissal or removal or for compulsory retirement can be passed under the Rules without conforming to the procedure prescribed in the Rules not on the basis of the conviction, but only if the competent authority finds that the relevant misconduct of the concerned Government servant renders his further retention in public service undesirable; and  (xiii) an order imposing a punishment on a Government servant simply because of his conviction on a criminal charge without reference to the conduct which led to the conviction cannot be sustained."
9.
Again the supreme Court in the case of The Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway and another v. TR Challappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216 concluded as under :  "...In other words, the position is that the conviction of the delinquent employee would be taken as sufficient proof of misconduct and then the authority will have to embark upon a summary inquiry as to the nature and extent of the penalty to be imposed on the delinquent employee and in the course of the inquiry if the authority is of the opinion that the offence is too trivial or of a technical nature it may refuse to impose any penalty in spite of the conviction.
This is a very salutary provision which has been enshrined in these Rules and one of the purposes for conferring this power is that in cases where the disciplinary authority is satisfied that the delinquent employee is a youthful offender who is not convicted of any serious offence and shows poignant penitence or real repentence he may be dealt with as lightly as possible.
This appears to us to be the scope and ambit of this provision."
It was further observed :  "The statutory provision referred to above merely imports a rule of natural justice in enjoining that before taking final action in the matter the delinquent employee should be heard and the circumstances of the case may be objectively considered.
This is in keeping with the sense of justice and fair-play.
The disciplinary authority has the undoubted power after hearing the delinquent employee and considering the circumstances of the case to inflict any major penalty on the delinquent employee without any further departmental inquiry if the authority is of the opinion that the employee has been guilty of a serious offence involving moral turpitude and, therefore, it is not desirable or conducive in the interests of administration to retain such a person in service."
The above two cases dealt with the matter where conviction was upheld but the delinquent servant had been given the benefit of provisions of Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
Even in such a case, the Supreme Court and also the Full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court observed that it is only the conduct which led to conviction can be made the basis of conviction.
The present case is on a better footing as the concerned employee was exonerated and the judgment of conviction recorded against him was set aside.
Therefore he should have been reinstated.
10.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in the case of Managing Director E.C.E.L v. B Karunakar, 1994 Lab.
I.C.
762 that merely because hearing was not given would not entitle to the employee relief of automatic reinstatement.
In this case, the relief of reinstatement cannot be granted as the petitioner has attained the age of superannuation.
The only relief which can be conceived of in the present case is to compensate the petitioner by paying him same lump sum compensation.
11.
In HMT Limited v. Labour Court, Ernakulam (1994)2 SCC 38, the dispute related to dismissal and remained pending for 14 years.
The Supreme Court awarded 60% backwages.
12.
In the case of Dr. RC Tyagi, (1994)2 SCC 416, the Supreme Court granted backwages to the extent of 1/3rd.
13.
This Court while deciding Second Appeal No. 68 of 1993 in the case of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board and another v. Parvatsingh and another granted payment of one half backwages.
14.
This petition is allowed.
In view of the above discussion a direction is given to the respondents to pay 50% of the wages to the petitioner for the period he was wrongly kept out of employment.
Petition allowed.