GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against the order (Annexure P-1) dated January 1, 1993 issued by the Managing Director of the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Limited (for short the 'Corporation').
The petitioner has prayed that this order should be quashed and he should be ordered to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
Another prayer made by the petitioner is that he should be given an option for 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' as given to other employees of the Corporation.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was having good academic record as he had passed MA in Sociology, Post-Graduation Diploma in Business Management and Industrial Administration and had also secured diploma in UNO and International Understanding from the Institute of UN Studies, Delhi.
He served in managerial capacities in different organisations for a period of 10 years before joining the service of the respondent-Corporation as Manager (Personnel and Administration) in pursuance of the selection by a duly constituted Selection Committee which was followed by order dated 22nd December, 1984 (Annexure P-2).
In recognition of his excellent performance as Manager (Personnel & Administration), the Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation in its meeting held on January 29, 1987, decided to designate the petitioner as General Manager (Personnel & Administration) in its existing pay-scale with the further stipulation that the case of the petitioner for grant of pay-scale of Rs. 1700-2300 would be considered by the Board of Directors after completion of his three years' service with the Corporation.
He was confirmed as Manager (Personnel & Administration) by an order dated February 8, 1983 (Annexure P-4) issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation.
By another order of the same date (Annexure P-5) the petitioner was placed in the pay-scale of Rs. 1700-2300 w.e.f.
421988.
3.
The petitioner's assertion is that while holding the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) he discharged his duties without most efficiency and devotion to the duty and his work was appreciated by the Managing Director of the respondent-Corporation vide order dated June 18, 1991 (Annexure P-6).
However, on December 3, 1992, the Managing Director of the Corporation issued an order transferring the petitioner from the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) to the post of General Manager (Leather Centres) and the duties of the petitioner were ordered to be performed by Shri NK Malhotra, Manager Administration.
After about a month, the impugned order dated 111993 (Annexure P-1) was issued by the Managing Director terminating his services on the pretext or abolition of the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration).
4.
In questioning the action of the management terminating the services of the petitioner, the petitioner has asserted that a committee headed by the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab had considered the question of the various sick public sector units including the respondent-Corporation and in that meeting it was decided to wind up the respondent-Corporation in a phased manner.
In pursuance of the said decision of the Committee, the Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation, took a policy decision on July 30, 1992 to offer 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' to those employees who wanted to seek voluntary retirement.
This Golden Hand Shake Policy included 3 months' gross salary; 3 months' notice or salary in lieu thereof; Gratuity as per Service Rules and Retrenchment Compensation under Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
A list of surplus staff was also prepared for being sent to the Government for absorption/adjustment, but this did not include the post of General Manager.
The petitioner has pleaded that his transfer from the post of General Manager (Personnel and Administration) was engineered by the Managing Director of the Corporation who took charge on December 9, 1992.
Only on the next date the petitioner was transferred.
Even though the petitioner had brought to the notice of the Managing Director that he did not have the qualification for appointment on the post of General Manager (Leather Centres), the transfer order was not rescinded.
Not only this, the petitioners was not given the charge of the post of General Manager (Leather Centres).
On 29121992, one Mr. TS Saini, Assistant Manager of the respondent-Corporation informed the petitioner that he should immediately submit his resignation, failing which First Information Report would be lodged against him.
Thereafter the petitioner was directed to proceed on tour for Ist and 2nd January of 1993 as per the sanction given by the Managing Director.
When the petitioner came back from the tour, the impugned order dated 111993 (Annexure P-1) was served upon the petitioner and he was relieved on 411993.
The petitioner has given details of some of the employees of the respondent-Corporation including one Shri Narinder Ghai, General Manager (Marketing) who has been adjusted in the services of the Department of Finance as Treasury Officer.
According to the petitioner although in its meeting held on August 8, 1989, the Board of Directors of the Corporation had not taken any decision to abolish the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration), yet in the garb of the said resolution, the Managing Director has unauthorisedly passed the order of termination of the services of the petitioner.
5.
Another contention raised by the petitioner is that no seniority list of the General Managers serving the respondent-Corporation had been prepared in terms of Rule 321. of the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Limited Service Rules, 1982 and principle of 'Last come first go' has not been followed inasmuch as the persons junior to the petitioner in the cadre of General Managers have been retained in service.
The petitioner's further assertion is that the impugned action has been taken out of mala fides and the sole object of the Managing Director of the respondent-Corporation has been to shunt out the petitioner from service.
6.
In reply, the respondents have admitted the factum of appointment of the petitioner in its service as Manager (Personnel & Administration), but the respondent-Corporation has disputed the claim of the petitioner that he was promoted as General Manager (Personnel & Administration).
According to the respondents, it was a case of redesignation of the post from the post of Manager (Personnel & Administration) to that of General Manager (Personnel & Administration).
Initially this designation was changed in the pay scale which the petitioner was drawing while holding the post of Manager (Personnel & Administration).
Subsequently, higher pay-scale was given to him w.e.f 421988.
According to the respondents the petitioner's performance cannot be treated as 'Very Good/Outstanding'.
In fact, he has been censured by an order dated November 30, 1992 (Annexure R-1/A).
Further assertion of the respondent-Corporation is that a Committee headed by the Chief Secretary to the Government Punjab had reviewed the working of the Industries Department.
It was decided by Annexure R-1/2 to close down the Rural Centres.
A direction was given to send a list of the employees to be retrenched.
Nearly 50% employees have been given the benefit of 'Golden Hand Shake Scheme' and an equal number of employees have been adjusted in Government Departments, Boards and Corporations.
In its meeting held on July 30, 1992 (Annexure R-1/3), the Board of Directors approved the 'Golden Hand Shake Scheme'.
This scheme came into force after 921993 when it was approved by the Government of Punjab.
Further assertion of the respondent-Corporation is that since the petitioner stood terminated from the service of the Corporation w.e.f.
111993, he could not be given the benefit of inclusion in the list of surplus staff or the 'Golden Hand Shake Policy.'
The respondents have stated that the petitioner has been censured for the loss to the Corporation to the tune of Rs. 43,825/- and taking note of this fact, the petitioner was replaced by Shri NK Malhotra.
The petitioner was transferred as General Manager (Leather Centres) as 'stop-gap arrangement' and not with any oblique motive.
The allegation of the petitioner that the Managing Director of the respondent-Corporation or anybody on his behalf, had asked the petitioner to submit resignation on the threat of FIR, has been emphatically disputed and has been described as concoction on the part of the petitioner.
The respondents have stated that the posts of General Managers have been abolished with the approval of the Board of Directors and it was not an act of the Managing Director alone.
The Managing Director has merely carried out the order of the Board of Directors ie Appointing Authority of the petitioner.
A proposal for revamping and re-orientation of the Corporation was put up by the Managing Director of the respondent-Corporation to the Board of Directors.
In view of the approval given by the Board of Directors, the action of abolition of post of General Manager will be deemed to have been taken by the Board of Directors, according to the respondents.
7.
The first and foremost argument advanced by Shri Balram K Gupta, learned Counsel for the petitioner is that for the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration), the appointing authority is the Board of Directors and he was given re-designation as well as higher grade by the resolution of the Board of Directors and therefore, the order for abolition of the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) as also the action of the respondents terminating the services of the petitioner could have been taken only by the Board of Directors of the Company and the Managing Director of the Corporation could not have suo moto exercised the power of the Board of Directors.
Shri Gupta read out the provisions of Articles of the Association and Section 289 of the Companies Act and submitted that only a validly passed resolution by the Board of Directors could constitute the foundation of an action for abolition of the post of General Manager and consequential termination of service of the petitioner.
By inviting Court's attention to Annexures, R-1/8, R-1/9 and R-1/10.
Shri Gupta vehemently argued that the resolution of the Board of Directors dated 881989 cannot, in any manner, be construed as a resolution for abolition of the post of General Managers and, therefore, the same could not have been relied upon for passing the impugned order, Annexure P-1.
He further argued that the so-called resolution passed by circulation amongst the members of the Board of Directors was passed after 111993 and ex-post facto ratification of the action taken by the Managing Director cannot be treated as valid.
Mr. Gupta also argued that the resolution by circulation could have been recorded to only in case of emergency and no such emergency in fact existed.
He further contended that necessary papers were not sent to the members of the Board of Directors even when the Managing Director sought approval of his action by circulation and the resolution was not even sent to some of the members of the Board of Directors.
He placed reliance on the decision in Chander Kiran Maini v. The Punjab Agro Industries Corporation, 1993(2) SCT 111.
8.
On the other hand, Shri OP Goel, Sr. Advocate, appearing for the respondent-Corporation submitted that the resolution for abolition of the posts of General Managers had, in fact, been passed by the Board of Directors.
According to Shri Goel, resolution dated 881989 clearly postulated the retention of only 3 posts of General Managers out of a total of 5 and, therefore, the petitioner was never in doubt that two remaining posts including that of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) would be abolished.
Shri Goel further submitted that the proposal which was put up to the Managing Director by the two General Managers on December 30, 1992 was forwarded by the Managing Director to the Chairman of the Corporation on 111993 and the Chairman approved that proposal on 111993 itself.
The proposal itself postulated that ex-post facto approval of the Board of Directors be obtained and subsequently the resolution was sent to the Board of Directors along with copy of the order passed by the Managing Director and the same was approved by the Board of Directors by circulation.
Shri Goel further submitted that the action of the Board of Directors in according ex-post facto approval was in total in conformity with Section 289 of the Companies Act, 1956 and once the Board has ratified the action taken by the Managing Director taken with the approval of the Chairman, then ratification will relate back to the date of the passing of the order.
9.
A careful perusal of Resolution No. 4711 passed by the Board of Directors shows that the Board had taken note of the recommendations of the Committee regarding the posts of General Managers and took a policy decision that there should not be more than one post of General Manager at the Head Office and not more than two for its subsidiary units.
The following extract of the resolution passed by the Board of Directors deserves to be quoted below :  "The Board taking note of the recommendations of the Committee regarding posts of General Managers, decided that there should not be more than one post of General Manager at the Head Office and not more than two for its subsidiary units including training scheme in the field.
The other posts of functional Heads should be re-designated as Senior Managers.
However, the designation of the existing General Managers be made personnel to them.
This designation will cease to exist in the event of their retirement or departure from the service of the corporation due to resignation or any other reason."
It is clear from the abovesaid extract of the resolution passed by the Board of Directors that in all, 3 posts of General Managers were to be retained and this obviously did not include the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) and General Manager (Leather Centres).
The argument of Shri Gupta that the resolution of the Board of Directors was only for resignation of the General Manager and the other post of General Manager is not at all borne out from the resolution of the Board of Directors dated 881989.
Reference to the other posts of functional Heads is obviously in regard to the post other than that of General Manager.
Acceptance of that submission would mean that the Board of Directors had ordered re-designation of the post of General Manager even though in the immediate preceding lines of the resolution, the decision had been taken not to keep two posts of General Manager.
10.
A close look at Annexures R-1/9, R-1/10, originals of which were placed before me by Shri Goel together with other original papers, shows that in tune with the Policy decision taken by the Government in the meeting of the Committee which was chaired by the Chief Secretary on June 13, 1992, it was noted that the Corporation was running into heavy losses and 24 out of total of 27 centres had already been closed down.
A list of 130 officials had been sent to the Government of Punjab for adjustment.
A proposal to abolish the post of General Managers, Personnel & Administration and Leather Centres with a view to bring about the economy was prepared and a note was put up before the Managing Director for approval by the Chairman and the Board of Directors.
The original papers further show that the Chairman accorded approval to the proposal of the Managing Director and directed that ex-post facto approval of the Board of Directors be obtained.
Thereafter the order was issued on 111993.
On that very day, the Managing Director submitted a proposal that the resolution sent for approval of the Board of Directors by circulation.
Copy of the order abolishing the post was sent to the members of the Board for approval by circulation and 5 of the members of the Board of Directors did approve the action which had been taken by the Managing Director with the approval of the Chairman.
In my opinion, once the Board of Directors of the Corporation has ratified the action taken by the Managing Director with the approval of the Chairman, then ratification will have retrospective effect i.e. the date on which orders were issued by the Managing Director.
This proposition of law clearly emerges from the decision of the Supreme Court in Parmeshwari Prasad Gupta v. The Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 2389 wherein the Supreme Court was considering the more or less similar action of ratification.
Their Lordships observed in para 14 of the judgment :  "The agenda of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on December 23, 1953 shows that one item of business was the confirmation of the minutes of the meeting of the Directors held on December 16, 1953.
The confirmation of the minutes of the meeting of the Directors held on 16121953, would not in any way show that the Board of Directors adopted the resolution to terminate the services of the appellant passed on December 16, 1953.
It only shows that the Board passed the minutes of the proceedings of meeting held on December 16, 1953.
But the resolution of the Board of Directors to confirm the action of the Chairman to terminate the services of the appellant by his telegram and letter dated December 17, 1953, would show that the Board ratified the action of the Chairman.
Even if it be assumed that the telegram and the letter terminating the services of the appellant by the Chairman was in pursuance to the invalid resolution of the Board of Directors passed on December 16, 1953 to terminate his services, it would not follow that the action of the Chairman could not be ratified in a regularly convened meeting of the Board of Directors.
The point is that even assuming that the Chairman was not legally authorised to terminate the services of the appellant, he was acting on behalf of the Company in doing so, because he purported to act in pursuance of the invalid resolution.
Therefore, it was open to a regularly constituted meeting of the Board of Directors to ratify that action which, though unauthorised, was done on behalf of the Company Ratification would always relate back to the date of the act ratified and so it must be held that the services of the appellant were validly terminated on December 17, 1953.
The appellant was not entitled to the declaration prayed for by him and the trial Court as well as the High Court was right in dismissing the claim."
11.
The argument of Shri Gupta that the resolution passed by the Board of Directors is contrary to Article 99 of the Articles of Association or Section 289 of the Companies Act is also without merit.
The records which have been placed before me clearly indicate that while sending the proposal for abolition of the post, the Managing Director had made it clear that ex-post facto approval of the action be obtained from the Board of Directors.
The Chairman of the Corporation had approved the proposal of the Managing Director and then the papers were submitted to the Board of Directors together with the resolution.
Section 289 or for that reason Article 99 of the Articles of Association do not contain any condition precedent which was required to be satisfied before a resolution could be passed by circulation.
The only requirement is that the papers must be placed before the members of the Board of Directors.
The rationale of this condition is that the members must be aware of the action taken and they must be able to apply their minds.
As already mentioned above, in the case in hand, papers had, in fact, been sent to the Members of the Board of Directors and they approved the same.
Thus there has been no violation of Section 289 of the Companies Act.
12.
The second submission of Mr. Gupta is that while terminating the services of the petitioner, the respondent-Corporation has not followed the principle of 'Last come first go'.
Mr. Gupta made reference to Rule 41 and also relied upon the decision in Chander Kiran Maini v. The Punjab Agro Industries Corporation (supra).
He further submitted that the respondent-Corporation was duty bound to prepare a seniority list of the General Managers and should have terminated the services of the junior-most amongst the General Managers.
According to Shri Gupta even if the seniority list had not been drawn, the length of service of General Managers should have been taken into consideration for determination as to who are the juniormost personnel.
Mr. Goel countered this submission by arguing that all the posts of General Managers were different and therefore mere identity of pay scales cannot justify preparation of a common seniority list.
In my considered opinion, the submission of the Counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted.
It is the petitioner's own case that qualification for the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) are different than that of General Manager (Leather Centres).
In fact the learned counsel for the petitioner could not show that the qualifications for all the posts of General Managers were identical.
Thus it can be said that each of the posts of General Manager was to be separately created with separate qualifications and recruitment to these posts could also be made separately.
In fact, the transfer of the petitioner from the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) to that of General Manager (Leather Centres) was itself open to challenge because petitioner did not have the qualifications for the post of General Manager (Leather Centres) when all posts are different having different qualifications, it could not have been possible for the respondent- Corporation to prepare a common seniority list.
Rule 41 which contemplates seniority of the employees according to their pay scales has to be interpreted in such a manner that it does not lead to absurd results.
If the court was to take the view that seniority of the employees should be determined irrespective of their qualifications and such seniority should be adhered to by the respondent-Corporation at the time of declaring the staff surplus, it would result to anomalous situation.
The Corporation may decide to abolish a particular post and the employee holding another post may have to be rendered surplus according to the principle of 'Last come first go' or 'First come last go'.
In my opinion, Rule 41 can be read as contemplating seniority on the basis of length of service only amongst those persons who hold posts in one cadre or group.
This principle of common seniority cannot be applied to persons holding different posts having different qualifications.
13.
The third submission of Shri Gupta is that abolition of the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) is vitiated on account of malice and colourable exercise of power.
He argued in substance that only the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) had been abolished because so far as the post of General Manager (Leather Centres) is concerned the functionaries of the respondent-Corporation were conscious of the fact that Shri GS Kaler, who was holding that post, would be retiring on 31st of January, 1993.
Therefore by virtue of abolition of post of General Manager, only the intention of the respondent-Corporation was to shunt out the petitioner.
Learned counsel submitted that the Managing Director of the Corporation, who took over charge of that post on 9121992 had manipulated the exercise of abolition of that post and according to the counsel in fact no economy has been brought about by the abolition of that post.
Shri Gupta pointed out that as many as 172 employees were serving the corporation on that day when the post of General Manager was abolished and even as on the date of filing of the writ petition a large number of employees are working in the Personnel Department, and the work of the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) continuing.
Moreover Shri NK Malhotra, was designated as General Manager (Personnel & Administration) as is evident from Annexure P-7.
Shri Gupta also argued that when the post of Manager (Personnel & Administration) could be continued, there was no justification, whatsoever, for taking out one post.
Lastly Mr. Gupta contended that before abolishing the post, the entire structure of the service of the Corporation should have been considered and then the decision could have been taken by the respondent-Corporation, to abolish a particular post or a number of posts.
This has not been done by the respondent Corporation argued Shri Gupta and, therefore, the Court must have declared the abolition of the post of General Manager arbitrary, irrational and mala fide.
14.
I have given my serious and thoughtful consideration to the submissions of Mr. Gupta.
The jurisdiction of the Court to interfere with the action of the employer to create or abolish the post is limited.
Proved malice or patent arbitrariness or violation or Statutory provisions are few grounds on which action of the employer to abolish the post can be interfered with.
The Courts have repeatedly recognised the prerogative of the employer to create posts or cadres or to abolish one or more than one posts.
What is the requirement of manpower for a particular service is a matter which primarily falls within the domain of the employer and the Courts cannot ordinarily substitute their opinion for that of the employee.
Where the employee challenges action of the employer for abolition of post which may have adverse effect on the service of the employee, burden lies upon him to establish the breach of the constitutional provisions or statutory provisions or malice against the employer.
Vague allegation of arbitrariness or malice cannot furnish valid basis for interference by the Court.
More serious are the allegations of mala fide, heavier is the burden on the petitioner to produce material before the court for substantiating such allegations.
It is not possible for the Court to draw dubious inference on the basis of incomplete or scanty facts or evidence.
15.
In the case of the petitioner, it is important to bear in mind that though the petitioner has chosen to level allegation of mala fide against the incumbent of the post of Managing Director, he has not made that Managing Director as party to the writ petition by name.
The Corporation has been impleaded as a party through the Managing Director, but that is not sufficient for entitling the Court to make a detailed investigation on the issue of mala fides.
The court cannot record any finding of mala fide against an individual, who has not been made a party to the writ petition in person and who has not been given an opportunity to admit on rebut the allegations of mala fide.
This is first serious snag in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Moreover, I find that in order to bring about the structural reforms in the department of Industries which controls various industrial undertakings of the Government including respondent-Corporation, a Committee consisting of as many as 20 Officers of the Government had made a detailed examination in its meeting held on 13.6.1992.
The Committee noted that losses suffered by the respondent-corporation were alarming.
A decision was taken to close down rural centres and send the lists of surplusage of the staff to the Chief Secretary for employment or adjustment against future vacancies.
A decision was also taken to further examine the question of winding up the Corporation in a phased manner.
Thereafter 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' was formulated and it was approved by the Government in February, 1993.
It would have been more appropriate for the respondent-Corporation to examine the question of abolition of the post of General Manager in the light of the policy decision of the Govt. coupled with the resolution of the Board of Directors dated August 8, 1939.
However, the failure of the Corporation to immediately go for abolition of the post of General Manager cannot be a ground for recording a conclusion that the subsequent decision taken by the Corporation in December, 1992/January, 1993 suffers from any malice or arbitrariness.
Even the petitioner has not been able to dispute the fact that the respondent-Corporation was suffering huge losses in the past and Rural Centres run by the Corporation have been closed down resulting in surplusage of a large number of employees.
This being the situation, the respondent-Corporation had every justification to take a decision to abolish one or more than one post which obviously included the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration).
In the totality of the circumstances, the decision of the respondent- Corporation to abolish the post of General Manager can neither be termed as arbitrary nor malicious.
It has not been shown to the Court as to how the decision is contrary to constitutional provisions or any legal provision.
Thus the decision of the respondent-Corporation to abolish the post cannot be set at naught by the Court.
16.
Lastly Shri Gupta argued that even if the petitioner was to be declared surplus, the Corporation should have sent his name to the Government for absorption on a suitable post commensurate with his qualification and in any case the petitioner should have been given option for the 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' Shri Goel appearing for the respondent-Corporation submitted that the petitioner's name could not have been included in the list of surplus employees as the list of surplus employees had already been sent to the Government before a decision was taken to abolish the post of General Manager (Personnel Administration).
He further submitted that acceptance of the monetary benefits by the petitioner without any protest is conclusive of the fact that the petitioner had waived his right.
Shri Goel argued that 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' prepared by the Corporation was approved by the Government only on 821993 and, therefore, benefit of the said policy could not be given to the petitioner who stood terminated with effect from 111993.
17.
In my considered view the objection of Shri Goel regarding waiver of right by the petitioner is wholly untenable.
When the petitioner was being removed from his post, he had little option but to accept the amount offered to him.
The petitioner cannot be charged with the allegation that he had accepted the amount knowing fully well the consequences of it and also of his right to challenge the termination of service.
Therefore, plea of waiver and acquiescence raised by Shri Goel is rejected.
18.
In the instance case, it is clear from the record that the petitioner was holding a sufficiently high position in the service of the Corporation on the date of termination of his service.
If the Corporation had taken a decision to abolish the post of General Manager (Personnel & Administration) some time in September or October, name of the petitioner would have definitely been included in the list of surplus employees which was sent to the Government for their absorption in other departments.
Mere delay on the part of the Corporation in taking a decision to abolish the post of General Manager cannot be taken as a ground to deny an opportunity to the petitioner to be absorbed on an alternative post in the service of Government as was done in the cases of other employees.
In my opinion, there is no valid justification to deprive the petitioner of his right to be considered for absorption in the Government Service.
Likewise there is no rational justification for not giving the benefit of 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' to the petitioner on the ground that he did not opt for the same.
As a matter of fact the petitioner had no opportunity to submit his option for the 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' because the said policy of the Corporation was approved by the Government on 921993 and more than a month before that, the services of the petitioner had been terminated.
In so far as the Corporation is concerned it had formulated the policy in December, 1992 and but for the delay on the part of the Government to approve the said policy, the Corporation could not have denied an opportunity to the petitioner to opt for the 'Golden Hand Shake Policy'.
It is, therefore, reasonable to direct that the Corporation should forward the name of the petitioner for consideration by the Government of Punjab for absorption on an alternative post in any of its department or atleast to give an option to the petitioner to avail the benefit under the 'Golden Hand Shake Policy'.
19.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed in so far as it relates to the impugned order.
However, the respondent-Corporation is directed to send the name of the petitioner for consideration by the Government of Punjab for his absorption on any alternative post in any of the Government departments.
The Corporation should send the name of the petitioner within one month and the Government of Punjab should take a decision within next three months, on the question as to whether the petitioner can be absorbed on an alternative post.
An alternative option should be given by the Corporation to petitioner to avail the benefit of 'Golden Hand Shake Policy'.
Should the petitioner decide to avail the benefit of 'Golden Hand Shake Policy', it will not be necessary for the Corporation to send his name to the Government for absorption.
In case the petitioner opts for 'Golden Hand Shake Policy' benefit under that policy should be given to him within one month.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.