RP Sethi, J - In all the three Civil Writ Petitions bearing numbers C.W.P.
No. 8623 of 1988, C.W.P.
No. 14665 of 1989 and Civil Writ Petition No 4447 of 1993 the common question involved is as to whether the punishment of stoppage of annual grade increment with cumulative effect could be passed by the disciplinary authority without providing the delinquent official a copy of the report and affording him an opportunity of being heard.
Some facts for appreciating the controversy involved are necessary to be noticed.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No 14665 of 1989 the petitioner Sarab Dayal Rai an employee of the Public Health Department of Punjab Government was charge-sheeted for having some water works got done from the agency of contractors during the plantation of hedges which was stated to be below specification with the allegation that the said work was not practicable to be executed within the short time shown by the said officer.
It was further submitted that in violation of the directions the payments were made to the contractor within a period of one year.
The work was of original nature but the costs were debited to the maintenance estimates.
At the time of calling quotations copies of the notices inviting tenders/quotations were stated to have been simultaneously sent to the Divisional Office.
After serving show-cause notice, obtaining the reply from the official and holding of enquiry, the order impugned of stoppage of three annual grade increments with cumulative effect was passed against the official.
3.
In Civil Writ Petition No 4447 of 1993 the petitioner, an employee of the Revenue Department, was charged of having made a demand of Rs. 2,000/- as bribe from Shri Sham Singh, Sarpanch, Gram Panchayat Ratta Khera for getting the mutation sanctioned through the Naib Tehsildar of the area.
It may be mentioned that the writ petitioner at that time was Patwari of the Halqa Man Singh Wala, Tehsil Ferozepore.
The Enquiry Officer came to the conclusion that, "demand of Rs. 2,000/- was made by the Patwari from Sham Singh, Sarpanch is proved but any amount being paid by Sham Singh, Sarpanch, to the Patwari or paid back is not proved."
The Collector, District Ferozepore vide order impugned in that petition directed the stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect against the said Patwari.
4.
In Civil Writ Petition No 8623 of 1988 the petitioner, a judicial employed, was served with the following charge-sheet :  "(1).
That you were posted as Translator in the court of Shri SS Grewal, III Add.
Distt.
and Sessions Judge, Ferozepor in the month of June, 1986, and you were also entrusted with the duties of attestation of copies and supervision of the Copying Agency under the control of Senior Sub Judge, Ferozepore.
(2).
That you remained absent from duty without leave on 3061986 and a report dated 1.7.1986 was made by Sh. Baldev Krishan, Clerk of the Court in the office of Senior Sub Judge, Ferozepore.
(3).
That Shri JS Korey, Addl.
Senior Sub Judge, Ferozepore, who was Officer-in-charge of Copying Agency in those days as Senior Sub Judge, Ferozepore, was on vacations, recorded the statements of Sarvshri Baldev Krishan, GOC, Dalip Chand and Raj Kumar, Clerks Judicial Copying Agency, Ferozepore on 1.7.1986 regarding your absence and fabrication of documents for your defence and forwarded the same along with confidential letter No. SPI dated 771986.
(4).
That you did not attend the office on 3061986 but you attested the copies on 1.7.1986 antedating the date as 3061986."
The Enquiry Officer appointed in the case held that the delinquent official did not attend the office on 3061986 and fabricated the documents by antedating the date as 3061986 for evidence for his defence.
The disciplinary authority imposed a penalty of withholding one annual grade increment with cumulative effect.
5.
In all these petitions it has been submitted that the impugned orders are liable to be quashed inasmuch as the said orders have not been passed under any provisions of the law.
It is contended that under the rules applicable no punishment of, "withholding increment of annual grade with cumulative effect" is provided.
It is conceded by the learned counsel for the respondents that this statement of fact made by the petitioner is correct but it is contended that even though withholding of increment simpliciter is minor penalty under Clause IV of Rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment & Appeal) Rules yet the same is covered under clause V providing for reduction to lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period.
The submission of the learned counsel for the respondents is based upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh v. State or Punjab, 1990(6) S.L.R.
73 : 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC), wherein it has been observed by the Supreme Court as under :  "Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter undoubtedly is a minor penalty within the meaning of Rule 5(iv).
But sub-rule (v) postulates reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee shall earn increments of pay during the period of such reductions and whether on the expiry of such period the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of this pay.
It is an independent head of penalty and it could be imposed as punishment in an appropriate case.
It is one of the major penalties.
The impugned order of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect whether would fall within the meaning of Rule 5(v) ?
If it so falls, Rules 8 and 9 of the Rules require conducting of regular enquiry.
The contention of Shri Nayar, learned counsel for the State is that withholding two increments with cumulative effect is only a minor penalty as it does not amount to reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay.
We find it extremely difficult to countenance the contention.
Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter without any hedge over it certainly comes within the meaning of Rule 5(iv) of the Rules.
But then penalty was imposed withholding two increments i.e. for two years with cumulative effect, it would indisputably means that the two increments earned by the employee was cut off as a measure of penalty for ever in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
In other words the clock is put back to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay and on expiry of two years the clock starts working from that stage afresh.
The insidious effect of the impugned order by necessary implication, is that the appellant employee is reduced in his time-scale by two places, and it is in perpetuity during the rest of the tenure of his service with a direction that two years' increments would not be counted in his time-scale of pay as a measure of penalty.
The words are the skin to the language which if peeled off its true colour or its resultant effects would become apparent.
When we broach the problem from this perspective the effect is as envisaged under Rule 5(v) of the Rules.
It is undoubted that the Division Bench in Sawran Singh v. State of Punjab and Ors., ILR 1985(2) P & H 193 speaking for the Division Bench, while considering similar question, in paragraph 8 held that the stoppage of increments with cumulative effect, by no stretch of imagination falls within clause (v) of Rule 5 or in rule 412 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
It was further held that under clause (v) of Rule 5 there has to be a reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay by the competent authority as a measure of penalty for the period for which such a reduction is to be effective has to be stated and on restoration it has further to be specified whether the reduction shall operate to postpone the future increments of his pay.
In such cases withholding of the increments without cumulative effect does not at all arise.
In case where the increments are withheld with or without cumulative effect the Government employee is never reduced to a lower stage of time-scale of pay.
Accordingly it was held that clause (iv) of Rule 5 is applicable to the facts of that case.
With respect we are unable to agree with the High Court.
If the literal interpretation is adopted, the learned Judges may be right to arrive at that conclusion.
But if the effect is kept at the back of the mind, it would always be so, the result will be the conclusion as we have arrived at.
If the reasoning of the High Court is given acceptance, it would empower the disciplinary authority to impose, under the garb of stoppage of increments, of earning future increments in the time-scale of pay even permanently with expressly stating so.
These preposterous consequences cannot be permitted to be permitted.
Rule 5(XV) does not empower the disciplinary authority to impose penalty of withholding increments of pay with cumulative effect except after holding inquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
Then the order would be without jurisdiction or authority of law, and it would be per se void.
Considering from this angle, we have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule 5(v) of the Rules; it is a major penalty and imposition of the impugned penalty without Enquiry is per se illegal."
6.
It is also not disputed that the enquiry officer and the disciplinary authority in all these petitions were different and that the delinquent officials were not furnished the copy of the enquiry report before passing the order of major penalty in terms of Clause V of Rule 5 of the Rules as is required under the mandate of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as held in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, A.I.R. 1991 SC 471 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) holding :  "Where the disciplinary authority himself is the Inquiry Officer there is no report.
He becomes the first assessing authority to consider the evidence directly for finding out whether the delinquent is guilty and liable to be punished.
Thus while the delinquent is not entitled to report when the inquiry is conducted by the disciplinary authority, he is entitled to copy of report when inquiry is conducted by the Inquiry Officer.
This does not, however, mean that Article 14 would be violated on ground that in one set of cases arising out of disciplinary proceedings furnishing of the copy of the inquiry report would be insisted upon while in the other it would not be.
Even otherwise, the inquiries which are directly handled by the disciplinary authority and those which are allowed to be handled by the Inquiry Officer ran easily be classified in two separate groups one, where there is no inquiry report on account of the fact.
that the disciplinary authority is the Inquiry Officer and inquiries where there is a report on account of the fact that an officer other than the disciplinary authority has been constituted as the Inquiry Officer.
That itself would be a reasonable classification keeping away the application of Article 14 of the Constitution."
7.
In the case of Sham Lal, petitioner, the position is different, inasmuch as there is no provision in the rules applicable to him corresponding to sub-rule 5 of Rule 5 of the Rules.
8.
After going through the whole of the record of the cases, we have come to the conclusion that the disciplinary authority had in fact intended to award the petitioners punishment of withholding of increment only without any cumulative effect.
To arrive at this conclusion, we had to peruse the nature of the charges levelled against the delinquent officials and the report of the Inquiry Officers.
The petitions can be disposed of appropriately with a direction of punishment to be simpliciter withholding of increment for the period specified in the orders impugned before us without having cumulative effect.
9.
Otherwise also non-supply of the copy of the enquiry report would not in any way render the whole of the proceedings to be a nullity but require only issuance of a direction to the authorities for compliance of the mandate of the Hon'ble Supreme Court with direction to pass fresh appropriate orders.
We do not agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner for quashing the whole of the proceedings even if we accept their contention.
It is true that we while exercising our writ jurisdiction cannot direct the substitution of punishment awarded to an officer but in view of the fact that we have held that punishment awarded was required to be deemed to be a punishment of withholding of increment simpliciter, no question would arise for subsisting of the punishment.
Even if it be so, we have been persuaded by the judgment of the Supreme Court delivered in Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, 1983(1) S.L.R.
626, wherein it has been held that :  "The question is, once we quash the order, is it open to us to give any direction which would not permit a fresh inquiry to be held ?
After all what is the purpose of holding a fresh inquiry ?
Obviously, it must be to impose some penalty.
It is equally true that the penalty imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct, and that any penalty disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct would violat Article 14 of the Constitution.
Having been influenced by all these relevant considerations, we are of the opinion that no useful purpose would be served by a fresh inquiry.
What option is open to us in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 136 to make an appropriate order.
We believe that justice and fair play demand that we make an order of minor penalty here and now without being unduly technical apart jurisdiction we are fortified in this view by the decision of this Court in Hindustan Steels Ltd, Rourkela v. AK Roy and others, 1970(3) SCR 343, where this Court after quashing the order of reinstatement proceeded to examine whether the party should be left to pursue further remedy.
Other alternative was to demand the matter that being a case of an industrial dispute to the Tribunal.
It is possible that on such a remand, this Court further observed, that the Tribunal may pass an appropriate order but that would mean prolonging the dispute which would hardly be fair to or conducive to the interest of the parties.
This court in such circumstances proceeded to make appropriate order by awarding compensation.
We may adopt the same approach.
Keeping in view, the nature of misconduct, gravity of charge and no consequential loss, a penalty of withholding his increment with further effect will meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, two increments with future effect of the appellant be withheld and he must be paid 50% of the arrears from the date of termination till the date of reinstatement."
10.
Under the circumstances, the petitions are disposed of by holding that the orders impugned by which the petitioners were awarded the punishment of withholding of increment with cumulative effect would stand modified and be deemed to be orders of withholding of increment simpliciter.
To make it more clear it is held that the writ petitioners Sham Lal and Ved Parkash in C.W.P.
No. 8623 of 1988 and 4447 of 1993 respectively shall be deemed to have been awarded punishment of stoppage of one annual grade increment without cumulative effect and petitioner Sarab Dayal Rai in C.W.P.
No. 14665 of 1989 withholding of three annual grade increments.
Ordered accordingly.