NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of three writ petitions Nos. 4490, 12730 and 16954 of 1991 which involve common questions of law and fact and were ordered by the Motion Bench to be heard together.
Since the main arguments were advanced in civil writ petition 12730 of 1991, facts are being taken from his petition.
2.
The minimum qualifications for a General Science Master in Schools in the State of Punjab have always been B.Sc./M.
Sc./B.T./B.Ed.
It is common case of the parties that Science Teachers with these qualifications were not available for appointment in the year 1959-60 and for sometime thereafter.
The then Director of Public Instructions, Punjab proposed to the State Government to make up the deficiency of Science teachers by recruiting F.Sc.
Diploma holders who would be required to undergo diploma training for two years at their own expense and thereafter, if their work and conduct was considered satisfactory, they would be given the regular scale admissible to B Sc/BT/B Ed. Science Teachers.
The proposal was accepted by the State Government and the then Governor of Punjab accorded his approval which was communicated to the then Director of Public Instructions, Punjab as per letter dated March 22, 1960 (Annexure P-3 with the writ petition).
Some Science Teachers including the petitioners were then recruited.
Petitioner No. 1 was appointed as General Science Master on November 18, 1961 and he possessed the following qualifications :-  "F.Sc.
and Diploma in Teaching General Science (D.G.Sc.)."
Petitioner No.2 was appointed as a Science Teacher in G.N.P.
High School, Majitha District Amritsar which school was taken over by the Punjab Government on January 23, 1962 and he was absorbed in Government service as a General Science Teacher.
He also did not possess the qualification of B.Sc./B.T./B.Ed.
To begin with, their conditions of service were governed by the Punjab Educational Service Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955 (for short, 'The 1955 Rules') which were later replaced in the year 1978 and were replaced by the Punjab State Education Class III (School Cadre) Service Rules, 1978 (hereinafter called as 'the 1978 Rules').
It is not disputed that the petitioners are continuing to work as General Science Masters eversince their appointment and have had no chance of promotion in their careers.
The next promotional post to which Masters like the petitioners can be promoted is that the Head Master and the qualifications for this post are prescribed by the 1978 Rules and they are as under :-  "Degree of a recognised University with B.T./B.Ed.
or Senior Basic Training with the following minimum experience :-  (i) In the case of MA or MSc.
or M.Ed.
six years;  (ii) In the case of MA or MSc., BEd/BT 7 years;  (iii) In the case of BA or B.Sc.
and B.T./B.Ed.
8 years;  (iv) In the case of DP Ed. and BP Ed. 8 years from the date of Physical Education was introduced compulsory in the Schools.
(v) In the case of BA/B.
Sc.
M.Ed.
7 years.
Admittedly, the petitioners do not possess any of these qualifications.
They, however, passed the BA examination after the pre-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab November, 1966 and before the 1978 Rules were promulgated.
They had been appointed as Masters at a time when F.Sc.
diploma-holders were recruited because of paucity of Science Teachers with BSc/BT/B Ed. qualifications.
Even though the petitioners did not possess the basic qualifications prescribed for the post of a master they were all through treated as part and parcel of that cadre and were granted the regular pay scale admissible to the masters and their inter se seniority was also fixed in the cadre of Masters.
3.
In the year 1988, about 350 posts of Head Masters/Head Mistresses were lying vacant in the Government High Schools in the State which had to be filled up in terms of the 1978 Rules by direct appointment as well as by promotion from amongst the Masters and the Mistresses for which a requisition had been sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Pending regular selection by the Commission, the department decided to temporarily fill up the vacant posts from amongst the Masters/Mistresses on purely ad hoc basis and according to their seniority for a period of six months or till regular selections were made, whichever was earlier.
Accordingly, by an order dated August 8, 1988 (Annexure P-4 with the writ petition), a large number of Masters were temporarily promoted including the two petitioners.
The concerned District Education Officers were directed to verify that the Masters who were being promoted possessed the qualification of B.T./B.Ed.
In pursuance of the aforesaid order, the petitioners joined as Head Masters and started working as such and continued working till July, 1991.
One Amarjit Sharma who is petitioner in Civil Writ Petition 4490 of 1991 had not been promoted presumably on the ground that he did not possess the qualifications of B.T./B.Ed.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No. 15607 of 1990 in this Court which was disposed of with a direction that the respondents therein should decide the representation filed by the petitioner therein.
Shri Amarjit Sharma alleged discrimination on the ground that the two petitioners herein who also did not possess the qualification of B.T./B.Ed.
had been promoted as Head Masters.
It was thereafter that the department issued a show cause notice in July, 1991 to the petitioners (Annexure P-6 with the writ petition) requiring them to show cause they be not reverted as they did not possess the qualification of B.T./B.Ed.
It was then that the present writ petition was filed challenging the said show cause notice.
The Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition stayed the reversion of the petitioners and it is under the orders of this Court that they are presently working as Head Masters.
Their primary grievance is that having worked as Masters for the last more than 30 days they are not being promoted as Head Masters and that they should be provided with atleast one promotional opportunity during their entire service.
4.
The fact that the petitioners are not eligible for promotion to the post of Headmaster is not disputed.
They did not possess the qualifications prescribed for the post of Head Master under the 1978 Rules.
Their learned counsel, however, has challenged the impugned show cause notice on the following grounds :-  (i) That the petitioners have been working as Masters in the State of Punjab prior to its reorganisation in the year 1966 and their conditions of service which were earlier governed by the 1955 Rules have been altered to their prejudice by the 1978 Rules inasmuch as some qualifications have been prescribed which they do not possess.
As the 1978 Rules were framed without obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government they violated the proviso to Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (hereinafter called the Act.
);  (ii) That since the petitioners have not been provided with any promotional opportunity, the 1978 Rules and the action of the respondents in not promoting them deserve to be quashed;  (iii) That in the circumstances of the present case the respondents be directed to relax the provisions of the 1978 Rules and promote the petitioners as Head Masters.
In reply, it has been submitted on behalf of the respondents that no specific prior approval of the Central Government for framing the 1978 Rules was necessary in view of the general approval granted by the Central Government as per its memorandum No. 5/6/57-SR(S) dated March 27, 1957 received from the Deputy Secretary to Government of India and addressed to all the State Governments, the relevant part of which reads as under :-  "The decisions contained in paragraph 2 above follow the agreed conclusions reached at the December Conference of Chief Secretaries and other State representatives.
It will be recalled that at the December conference of State representatives, in addition to the items dealt with in paragraph 2, the question whether any protection should be given in respect of rules and conditions applicable to Government servants affected by re-organisation immediately before the date of re-organisation in the matter of travelling allowance, discipline, control, classification, appeal, conduct, probation and departmental promotion was also considered.
The Government of India, agree with the view expressed on behalf of the State representatives that it would not be appropriate to provide for any protection in the matter of these conditions."
It was also contended on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners cannot be provided with any further channel of promotion as they do not possess the requisite qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules for promotion and that it is not open to this Court to issue a mandamus, to the respondents to grant promotion after relaxing the aforesaid Rules.
5.
I have heard Shri G.S.
Bal, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners and Shri AK Walia, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab on behalf of the respondents.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions of the parties, I find no merit in the submissions of learned counsel for the petitioners.
6.
Assuming that the 1978 Rules had altered the conditions service of the petitioners to their prejudice by prescribing qualifications which they do not possess.
I am of the opinion that no specific prior approval of the Central Government was necessary in view of the memorandum dated March 27, 1957 received by the State Government from the Deputy Secretary to Government of India granting general approval, the relevant part of which has been reproduced above.
The Central Government pointed out in this memorandum that the question of protection to be afforded in the matter of various service conditions to personnel affected by the reorganisation was discussed with the State Representatives at conferences held in December, 1956 and after a careful consideration of the views expressed at those conferences the Government India had decided that the conditions of service applicable to personnel affected by reorganisation immediately before the date of reorganisation should be protected.
It was also stated that in respect of such conditions of service as have been specifically dealt with in the memorandum it will be open to the State Governments to take action in accordance with the decisions conveyed therein and so long as the State Government act in conformity to those decisions, they may assume the Central Government's approval in terms of the proviso to sub-section (7) of Section 115 of the States Reorganisation Act.
A bare perusal of the relevant part of the memorandum reproduced above makes it clear that in the matter of promotions it was decided that no protection was to be provided.
It is true that this memorandum pertains to the approval granted under sub-section (7) of Section 115 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and cannot possibly refer to the corresponding provisions contained in the proviso to sub-section (6) of Section 82 of the Act.
However, by a subsequent letter of February, 1986 the Central Government communicated to the Chief Secretary to the Government of Punjab the decision of the Central Government in the following words :  (2) Subject :- Reorganisation of Punjab - Protection of Service Conditions to be afforded to State Service Personnel.
I am directed to refer to the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act which lays down that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to any person referred to in sub-section (1) of sub-section (2) of the section, shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
The question of protection to be afforded in the matter of various service conditions to personnel affected by the Punjab Reorganisation Act has been considered and it has been decided that the protection of service conditions as laid down in this Ministry's letter No5/6/57/SR(S) dated the 27th March, 1957 in connection with the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Copy enclosed) should be made available to the personnel affected by the Punjab Reorganisation Act also.
I am to request that appropriate instructions may be issued accordingly to all concerned.
(3) The receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged."
In view of this letter from the Central Government, there is no basis to contend that earlier approval granted by the Central Government could not be treated as approval under the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 82 of the Act.
Neither of the parties has placed these letters on the record and they have been taken from the Board of LPA 319 of 1974 copies of which are being placed on the record of these cases as Annexures C-1 and C-2.
For the reasons stated above I hold that no specific prior approval was necessary to be obtained from the Central Government for promulgating the 1978 Rules.
7.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
Proviso to sub-section (6) of section 82 of the Act reads as under  82(1) to (5) xx xx xx  (6) xx xx xx xx xx  Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government."
It envisages that the conditions of service which were applicable immediately before the appointed day i.e. November 1, 1966 to any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 82 of the Act could not be varied to his disadvantage without previous approval of the Central Government.
Before the petitioners can take advantage of the proviso they have to show that they were eligible to hold the promotional posts immediately before the appointed day.
Admittedly, they were not eligible to hold even the post of a Master on the said date as they all passed their BA examination after November 1, 1966.
It may be observed that BA was an essential requirement for the post of a Master and a Head Master under the 1955 Rules and the only qualification which the petitioners possessed on that day was F.Sc.
and Diploma in Teaching of General Science (D.G.Sc.).
When the petitioners were not eligible for the promotional post immediately before November 1, 1960 how can they complain that the 1955 Rules were amended to their disadvantage in the year 1978 as under the 1978 rules also they are ineligible to hold the promotional post.
This is what Their Lordships of' the Supreme Court said in an almost similar situation arising in Amar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1979 SC 729.
"The question that had to be considered first was whether the appellant possessed the qualification prescribed for promotion to the post of Viadya on 111.
1966 the date of coming into force of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
If he did not possess the prescribed qualification on that date he could not complain against the prescription of a different qualification in 1972 under which also he was not eligible to be considered for promotion."
For this reason as well, the petitioners cannot challenge the higher qualifications prescribed in the 1978 Rules to contented that their conditions of service had been varied to their disadvantage.
8.
The other two contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners are equally devoid of merit.
It is true that Their Lordships of the Supreme Court had observed in Ragunath Prasad Singh v. The Secretary, Home Department and others, AIR 1988 SC 1033 that reasonable promotional opportunity should be available in every wing of public service but this has been provided under the 1955 Rules and also under the 1978 Rules.
The petitioners, however, not possessing the requisite qualifications under the 1978 Rules cannot complain that they have not been provided with any promotional opportunity.
9.
It was then urged that the State Government be directed to relax the 1978 Rules in the case of the petitioners and promote them as Head Masters.
I am afraid I cannot accept this contention.
Rule 19 of the 1978 Rules gives a power to the Government to relax any of he provisions contained in the Rules except the educational qualification and experience with respect to any class or category of persons.
As already observed earlier, the petitioners are not eligible to hold the promotional post of a Head Master as they did not possess the requisite educational qualifications prescribed by the 1978 Rules.
No such direction can, therefore, be issued to the Government to relax these conditions.
10.
Mr. Satya Pal Jain, Advocate appearing for the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition 4490 of 1991 submitted that the State Government while appointing the petitioners had imposed as per its communication dated March 22, 1900 (Annexure P-3 with the petition) a condition on persons like the petitioners to undergo a two-year Diploma training after passing the F.Sc.
examination which they all did and, therefore, the Government should treat the same as equivalent to B.Ed.
and consequently, the petitioners to be deemed to be eligible for promotion to the post of Head Masters.
This contention too when examined in depth is without merit.
The condition of 2 years Diploma training was imposed by the State Government in the year 1960 because Science Teachers with B.Sc./B.T./B.Ed.
qualifications were not available.
It was never the intention of the State Government to treat the said training as equivalent to B.Ed.
qualification.
Faced with this difficulty, the counsel contended that this court may declare the training to be equivalent to B.Ed.
qualification and hold that the petitioners are eligible for promotion.
It is not for this court to hold whether the Diploma training undertaken by the petitioners is equivalent to B.Ed.
qualification.
These are matters for the University and other educational bodies to decide about the equivalence of degrees, qualifications and courses.
The Court is obviously handicapped inasmuch as it does not possess the requisite expertise in this sphere.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petitions which stand dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.