R P Sethi, J - Secretary to Government Haryana, Education Department vide his Memo No. 10/6/79-Edu.III(4) dated 521980 addressed to the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana, Chandigarh, communicated that consequent upon the judgment of this Court, the following decisions have been taken :  "(i) Services of the teachers falling under category 2 of the undertaking given before the Hon'ble High Court by the Sr. Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, in Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979 deregularisation of their services is required to be served on the teachers concerned.
(ii) Such de-regularised teachers may be retained in service as ad hoc teachers."
The Director of Public Instructions, Haryana, was requested to take immediate action in the matter.
Consequently vide another Memo dated 171980 the Secretary to Government Haryana, Education Department addressed to the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana, on the subject of regularisation of teacher/master/mistress of Education Department working on ad hoc basis intimated that a decision had been taken that services of ad hoc teacher/master/mistress working in the Haryana Education Department be regularised with effect from 111980 and only such teachers/masters/mistresses shall be eligible for regularisation for their services who had completed a minimum of two years' service upto 31121970.
Regularisation was to be made subject to the terms and conditions as specified in the aforesaid memo.
The petitioners have asserted that they were working on ad hoc basis when the Teachers Union of Haryana went on strike in support of their demands with effect from 12.2.1973.
The Teachers Union and the Haryana Government entered into a compromise and all those teachers who were on strike were permitted to join their duties in the year 1977 vide Annexure P/1.
In the month of December, 1978 the respondent-State Government is stated to have decided as a matter of policy to regularise the services of all the stipendiary teachers like the petitioners vide Annexure P/2.
Consequently, services of all the teachers were regularised with effect from 111979 vide Annexure P/3.
Some teachers are stated to have filed Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979 in this Court in which the petitioners were not impleaded as respondents.
Claiming to be implementing the judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 783 of 1979, the respondents issued Annexure P/4 indicating the decision of the Government regarding deregularisation of ineligible stipendiary teachers.
Orders of deregularisation of services of the petitioners and others were issued with the result that thousands of teachers in the State of Haryana who were affected resulting in their termination of services approached this Court and at the time of final hearing of the case, the learned Advocate General, Haryana, submitted that the government had taken a decision by which the services of the petitioners were likely to be regularised except 24 teachers and 16 masters.
This Court is stated to have passed specific orders that cases of those 24 teachers and 16 masters be also considered on merits and if they were the petitioners in the petitions which were being disposed of their cases shall also be re-heard.
In the month of July, 1980 the Government of Haryana issued a letter intimating that services of all the teachers who had completed two years' service between 1111966 to 31121979, shall be regularised.
Respondent No. 3 is again stated to have issued a memo dated 331981 by which all those teachers who had not completed two years of service upto 31121979 were directed to be posted as ordinary ad hoc teachers.
Petitioners apprehended that respondents were contemplating to pass termination orders against them acting upon the memo allegedly issued in compliance of the Court directions.
It is submitted that as the petitioners were not a party in the earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979 so the judgment was not binding upon them and respondents were estopped from taking any action of termination of services of the petitioners.
The impugned order is alleged to be violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India besides being discriminatory in as much as number of other teachers similarly situated as the petitioners are have been regularised.
It has been prayed that the offending memo be quashed and the petitioner be declared to be in service and entitled to all consequential reliefs.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents it is submitted that as the orders have been issued in compliance of the judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979, no writ can be issued against the respondents.
It is further submitted that the petitioners were not eligible for regularisation of their services under policy decision dated 171980.
As was the matter in controversy in C.W.P.
No. 1561 of 1980, it is stated that the teachers/masters who did not fulfil the conditions contained in letter dated 171980 were not eligible for regularisation with the result that all such teachers were treated as ad hoc employees.
It is further submitted that apprehension of the petitioner that respondents were contemplating of passing of termination orders against them was wrong and baseless.
A person working on ad hoc basis does not acquire any right to the post and his services are termination at any time without assigning any reason.
It is again contended that in compliance to the directions of the Court the termination of services of the petitioners have been stayed till further orders.
3.
While arguing the case the counsel for the respondents submitted that services of the petitioners are liable to be terminated consequent upon the judgment of this Court for which no directions can be issued against the respondents.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgment of this Court delivered in Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979.
In order to appreciate the consequences of the orders passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 783 of 1979 it is pertinent to have a careful perusal of the order sought to be relied upon by the respondents, which is reproduced below :  "Mr. Naubat Singh, learned Sr. Dy.
Advocate General, Haryana, states as under :- (i) That the stipendiary teachers, who were recruited on ad hoc basis before 1979 and during the strike period of 1973 and who are still continuing in service, alone shall be entitled to the regularisation of their service as a class in preference to other ad hoc teachers.
(ii) That any Master who was employed for a short period during the strike but was relieved of his post after the coming of an end of the strike and was re-employed not as a result of notional break but otherwise, then he would not be treated as a stipendiary teacher and would be treated only as an ordinary teacher.
(iii) That such ad hoc teachers who were either employed before the strike and continued to work during the strike or those who were for the first time recruited on ad hoc basis during the strike, they would form one class of stipendiary teachers and their services shall be regularised in preference to other ad hoc teachers.
(iv) That any seats which would fall vacant because of non- fulfilment of conditions (i), (ii) and (iii) than against these posts the claim of all eligible persons be considered by the appropriate authority; and  (v) That all these teachers would be taken back in service on ad hoc basis who were relieved of their post in order to accommodate the stipendiary teachers who were junior to those persons and did not fulfil the criteria under clause (i), (ii) and (iii) for being regularised, as if there had not been any break for the purpose of authority of ad hoc teacher.
In view of what has been stated by Mr. Naubat Singh, Mr. Prem Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners, do not press this petition.
Accordingly, we dispose of the same without there being any order as to costs."
4.
A perusal of the above order clearly indicates that no right of the parties was adjudicated but directions were issued consequent upon the concession of the learned State Counsel which were accepted by the counsel for the petitioners in those petitions and the Court disposed of the aforesaid petition by observing :  "In view of what has been stated by Mr. Naubat Singh, Mr. Prem Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners, do not press this petition.
Accordingly, we dispose of the same without there being any order as to costs."
5.
Whether the case of the petitioners was covered by the aforesaid judgment or not is a question which could have been determined had the petitioners been afforded an opportunity of being heard before taking action of intended termination of their services.
Without issuing notice of show-cause or compliance of the principles of natural justice, the respondents were not justified in initiating any action for the termination of services of the petitioners.
The contradictory stand of the respondents is writ large in view of the submissions made in their reply.
On the one hand it is submitted "However, the contention of the petitioners that respondents are now contemplating of passing of termination orders of petitioners is totally wrong and false" and on the other hand they have stated that "however, in case of the petitioners their termination has been stayed in terms of the High Court order dated 5.5.1981".
The contradictory pleas raised by the respondents in their written statement clearly reflect their confused state of mind and presumbly exhibit the doubt existing about the implementation of the judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979 so far as the petitioners are concerned.
The respondents have tried to show that the present petition was not maintainable as according to them no fundamental or legal right of the petitioners was infringed.
However, no serious effort was made to substantiate such a plea raised in the written statement.
Otherwise also the petitioners had acquired a right to remain in service and their services could not be terminated without affording them an opportunity of being heard or compliance of the principles of natural justice.
6.
Under similar circumstances a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1657 of 1981 Nirmal Rajpal v. State of Haryana etc. decided on 991981 where the service of the petitioner was desired to be deregularised held;  ".....The petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging the deregularisation of her services.
It is admitted that the impugned order Annexure P/8 was passed without affording an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
The order of deregularisation does not affect the petitioner's career adversely.
In our opinion, she should have been afforded an opportunity of being heard before such an order was passed.
Since the order Annexure P/8 was passed without hearing the petitioner, the same is liable to be quashed on this ground....."  7.
In view of what has been stated herein above this writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs by quashing the impugned memos with a direction that the petitioners shall be deemed to be in regular service of the State on the basis of the letter (Annexure P/6).
The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to pass appropriate orders, if they still so desire, allegedly for compliance of the Court directions, only after serving show cause notice to the petitioners and affording them an opportunity of being heard.
Petition allowed.