Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was posted as a Nazir in the Court of Senior Subordinate Judge, Sangrur, was ordered to be removed from service by the District & Sessions Judge, Sangrur on March 3, 1988.
He filed an appeal which was dismissed by the learned single Judge of this Court vide order dated January 19, 1988.
Aggrieved by the orders of removal from service and the dismissal of his appeal, the petitioner has approached this court through this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Inspection Clerk.
On April 30, 1974, his services were terminated for want of vacancy.
On the retirement of one Mr. Basant Lal, the petitioner was reappointed by the Distt.
& Sessions Judge on purely temporary basis and posted as a copyist vide order dated May 22, 1974.
In the year 1986, the petitioner was working as a Nazir in the Court of Senior Subordinate Judge, Sangrur.
In February 1986, a charge-sheet dated January 30, 1986 was served on the petitioner.
This was followed by another charge sheet dated February 27, 1986.
The primary charge levelled against the petitioner in both the chargesheets related to his absence from duty.
On February 28, 1986 the petitioner was placed under suspension.
He submitted his reply.
An enquiry was held.
Ultimately, vide order dated December 15, 1986, the Senior Subordinate Judge, Sangrur ordered the petitioner to be 'dismissed' from service.
He filed an appeal before the District & Sessions Judge.
Finding that "the appellant was appointed by the District Judge, as a Copyist in the general line on 22.5.74...", it was held that the order passed by the Senior Subordinate Judge who was admittedly lower in rank to the appointing authority was not legal and valid and the order of dismissal was set aside.
It was further observed that the case be remitted "to the Additional Senior Subordinate, Judge, Sangrur... with the directions that he should initiate the enquiry proceedings with regard to both the charge-sheets dated 3011986 and 2721986 respectively afresh and submit his report to me within two months from the date of receipt of this order."
It was further observed that the suspension order dated 2821986, issued by the Senior Sub Judge, of the appellant, shall be deemed to have continued in force from the date of original order of dismissal and shall remain in force until further orders  3.
The proceedings were held de-novo.
The enquiry officer found that the charges levelled against the petitioner were proved.
The matter was then considered.
A show cause notice was given to the petitioner.
He submitted his reply on September 7, 1987.
After considering the matter in detail, the learned District & Sessions Judge, Sangrur vide her order dated March 3, 1988 ordered the petitioner's removal from service.
He filed an appeal against this order.
It was placed for consideration before a learned Single Judge of this Court.
Vide order dated July 19, 1988, the appeal was dismissed as "the official had not given any compelling circumstances justifying his absence from duty without prior sanction of the leave and the official has deliberately absented himself as is evident from the facts narrated..." Aggrieved by the order of his removal from service, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-20 with the writ petition as well as by the order by which the petitioner's appeal was dismissed, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The orders have been challenged primarily on the ground that the petitioner "ought to have been reinstated in service before lawful initiation of the fresh enquiry.
Since the petitioner was not reinstated and paid full pay and allowances the impugned orders dated 331988 (Annexure P-20) passed by the respondent No. 1 and further the appellate order dated 1971988 (Annexures P-24) passed by respondent No. 2 are wholly void and illegal and also violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India."
4.
A written statement has been filed by Mr. Gurjit Singh Sandhu, District & Sessions Judge, Sangrur on behalf of the respondents.
The factual position has been fully explained and it has been averred that the "reply of the petitioner was found to be unsatisfactory and virtually he had confessed his guilt with a prayer to take intent view so that impugned order was passed by the answering respondent considering all the facts of the case and the petitioner was duly informed about the said order."
It has been further averred that "it was not the case of fresh enquiry but de novo proceedings were ordered on account of technical ground and on getting the report of the de novo proceedings, the petitioner was legally proceeded with and as such, he was not entitled to get full pay and allowances."
On these premises, the impugned orders have been sought to be justified.
5.
I have heard Mr. CB Kukar, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, AAG, Punjab has appeared for the respondents.
6.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Kukar is that the action of the authorities in proceeding de novo with the enquiry without reinstating the petitioner vitiates the entire proceedings.
An anciliary submission has also been -raised that the order of the District Judge that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued under suspension from the date of his dismissal is also illegal.
On these premises, learned.
counsel his contended that the impugned orders are vitiated.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
The sequence of events as delineated above shows that the petitioner was ordered to be dismissed from service vide order dated December 15, 1986.
The learned District Judge, Sangrur accepted the petitioner's appeal and set aside the order of dismissal.
She further ordered that "the suspension order dated 2821986, issued by the Senior Sub Judge, of the appellant, shall be deemed to have continued in force from the date of original order of dismissal and shall remain in force until further orders".
The petitioner did not challenge this order either by filing any appeal against it or in any proceedings before a Court.
He acquiesced in this order.
He took his chance and participated in the enquiry proceedings.
He was found guilty.
He was given a show-cause notice.
He submitted his reply.
No objection with regard to the validity of the proceedings on the ground that the suspension was illegal, was raised.
He was ordered to be removed from service.
Even his appeal was dismissed.
Thereafter, the present writ petition was filed on March 7, 1989.
It is almost after the lapse of about two years that a grievance has been made to the effect that the order of the learned District Judge that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued under suspension is invalid.
The petitioner is estopped from raising this plea not only on account of his conduct and acquaintance but also because the grievance is highly belated.
Even otherwise, on merits, no prejudice whatsoever is shown have been caused to the petitioner.
Admitted the petitioner had been placed under suspension on February 28, 1986.
He was ordered to be dismissed from service vide order dated December 15, 1986.
This order was set aside by the learned District Judge on March 25, 1987.
Even if it is assumed that with the passing of the order of dismissal, the order of suspension had ceased to be operative.
It is conceded by Mr. Kukar that learned District & Sessions Judge could have ordered the suspension of the petitioner afresh on March 25, 1987.
In that event, no grievance could have been made against the validity of the proceedings held against the petitioner.
The mere fact that the suspension was ordered w.e.f.
December 15, 1986 has in no way materially affected the disciplinary proceedings held against the petitioner.
No prejudice whatsoever is shown to have been caused to the petitioner insofar as the conduct of the disciplinary proceedings is concerned.
8.
Mr. Kukar has placed reliance on the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Anand Narain Shukla v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1979 SC 1923 to contend that the action of the respondents in proceeding with the departmental enquiry without reinstating the petitioner is vitiated.
9.
In this case, two contentions had been raised before their Lordships viz. (1) "that after the earlier order of reversion was quashed by the High Court and after the appellant was reinstated, no second enquiry on the very same charges could be held and no second order of reversion could be legally and validly made and (2) that appellant was entitled to the full salary for the period of suspension."
Their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :  "We find no substance in either of the points urged on behalf of the appellant.
The earlier order was quashed on a technical ground.
On merits a second enquiry could be held.
It was rightly held.
The order of reinstatement does not bring about any distinction in that regard.
The Government had to pass that because the earlier order of reversion had been quashed by the High Court.
Without reinstating the appellant, it would have been difficult perhaps unlawful, to start a fresh enquiry against the appellant.
The observations of this Court in the last paragraph of the judgment in State of Assam v. JN Roy Biswas, (1976) 2 SCR 128 are not applicable to the facts of the present case and do not help the appellant at all."
10.
Mr. Kukar submits that according to their Lordships, it would be "unlawful" to initiate fresh enquiry without reinstating the employees.
I am unable to accept this contention.
11.
It has no doubt been observed by their Lordships that it would have been "perhaps unlawful" to start a fresh enquiry.
With utmost respect, I am unable to read this observation to mean that failure to reinstate an employee would vitiate the proceedings even though no objections whatsoever has been raised by the employee and he has been afforded a due and reasonable opportunity.
In fact, under the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1957, a specific provision providing inter alia that where a penalty of dismissal etc. from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside or declared or rendered void in consequence of or by a decision of Court of law and that the disciplinary authority on the consideration of the circumstances of the case decides to hold a further enquiry on the allegations on which the penalty was originally imposed, "the Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by the appointing authority from the date of the original order of dismissal... and shall continue to remain under suspension till further orders" exist.
The validity of this rule was challenged.
The matter was considered by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Khem Chand v. Union of India and others, AIR 1963 SC 687.
The rule was held to be valid.
The claim made by the employee was rejected.
12.
The position in the present case is in no way different.
Mr. Kukar submits that the case of Khem Chand is clearly distinguishable as in that case, Rule 12 specifically provided for "the deemed suspension" while in the present case no such provision exists.
Even if it be so, it really makes no difference.
It has been conceded before me that the competent authority could have reinstated the petitioner on March 25, 1987 and passed another order at the same time placing him under suspension.
If such an action is permissible, the mere fact that the authority allowed the old order of suspension to be revived, has really made no difference to the disciplinary proceedings which were conducted against the petitioner.
At best, he could have made a prayer for the payment of certain amount of money.
Such a prayer has not been made in the petition.
No other point has been urged.
13.
Even otherwise, the petitioner was employed in the District Court.
He has admittedly shown complete lack of discipline.
He has remained absent from duty in spite of the fact that his request for leave had been declined.
In the exercise of my discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, I find no ground to interfere with the impugned orders.
14.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I made no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed