Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who has retired as a member of the Indian Armed Forces (Medical Corps) prays for the issue of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents to change his date of birth from September 5, 1932 to November 14, 1933.
The respondents viz. the Union of India and others have contested this claim.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that he was born in village Lassara, Tehsil Phillaur, District Jullundur on November 14, 1933.
He has another brother who was born on October 27, 1936.
The petitioner's father was a doctor.
He was posted in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The petitioner started primary education at DAV School, Walterganj, district Basti (UP).
This place is now called Gobind Nagar.
In the year 1943, the petitioner's father joined the Armed Forces.
Accordingly, the petitioner had to shift to his permanent parental place in village Shankar, Tehsil Nakodar.
He was admitted to a school at Nakodar.
In the year 1944, the petitioner's father suddenly expired.
On account of his father's death, the petitioner was shifted to his maternal uncle's place who was then serving as a Manager of Coal Mines at Makerwal, District Mianwali which is now a part of Pakistan.
He was admitted to a school at Sultan Khel.
The petitioner's maternal uncle resigned from his post and shifted to Dhanbad.
Even the petitioner had to shift.
He was brought to Jullundur where he was admitted to a school.
He passed his Matriculation examination from Sain Dass AS High School, Jullundur City.
Ultimately, he passed the MBBS Course from Bombay and joined service with the Punjab Govt.
In the year 1961, the petitioner joined the Army as a Commissioned Officer in the Medical Corps.
3.
Due to the frequent shifting and transfers from one place to another, necessitated by the death of his father, the petitioner could not keep track of record which remained at his ancestral house.
The necessity for mentioning the date of birth arose at the time of filling up of the form for the Matriculation examination.
On account of the death of his father, there was no one to guide him.
He had no record in his possession and no knowledge about his birth certificate.
Accordingly, a wrong date of birth viz. September 5, 1992 was mentioned.
This date was consequently entered in his Matriculation certificate.
During the year 1979 while the petitioner was posted at Ladakh he shifted his family to Jullundur Cantonment.
At that time he happened to go through the old letters and records kept by his father.
He came across his Primary School Certificate and a certificate from the Civil Surgeon dated March 14, 1944.
At that stage, he learnt that his actual date of Birth was November 14, 1933 and not September 5, 1932.
Copies of the school leaving certificate as well as the document issued by the civil surgeon have been produced as Annexures P-1 and P-2.
On having got this information, the petitioner submitted an application dated May 22, 1980 to the Army authorities for the change of his date of birth.
Vide letter dated March 3, 1981 (a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5) the petitioner was informed that his date of birth "has already been verified as 05 Sept 1932 on the basis of his matriculation certificate.
In view of the above, it is not possible to change the same at this stage on the basis of Birth Certificate and affidavit.
The officer may, however, please be advised to get the date of birth changed in his matriculation certificate from the University authorities concerned and submit the amended certificate to this HQ."
Accordingly, the petitioner applied to the Panjab University, Chandigarh, for the correction of his date of birth.
Vide letter dated January 6, 1986 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition, the petitioner was informed that "the Syndicate of this University vide para 2 of its proceedings dated 24121985, has allowed correction in your date of birth from 591932 to 14111933 (Fourteenth Nov one thousand nine hundred and thirty three)."
He again approached the Army authorities vide his letter dated January 8, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7.
Since the petitioner did not hear anything from the Army Headquarters and his date of retirement was approaching, he filed the present writ petition in this Court on April, 27, 1987.
The petitioner avers that the respondents had allowed the change in date of birth in a number of cases and their failure to do so in his case was arbitrary and suffered from the vice of discrimination.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that keeping in view the size of the establishment in the Indian Army, instructions have been issued vide letters dated June 23, 1954 (Annexure R-1), April 21, 1964 (Annexure R-2) and Army Order 663/73 appendix 'A' (Annexure R-3), to regulate the procedure regarding the change of date of birth.
According to these orders and instructions, the date of birth recorded at the time of enrolment "shall be binding and no alterations/amendments thereto shall be carried out except with the prior sanction of the competent authority."
It has been further mentioned that such requests "at the time of superannuation/after release/retirement will not be entertained.
Such requests when accepted on merits would have no retrospective financial benefits."
On merits of the controversy, it has been mentioned that the petitioner joined the Army Medical Corps on March 12, 1961.
The frequent shifting from one place to another has no bearing on the case.
At the time of his admission to AS Higher Secondary School, Nakodar, the petitioner was in possession of a school-leaving certificate issued by DAV Middle School, Walterganj in which date of birth was recorded as 14111993.
In spite of this, his date of birth was actually recorded as September 5, 1932 in the records of the school and the Matriculation certificate.
It has also been pointed out that the petitioner's name in DK Vaid while according to the affidavit filed by his mother, the petitioner was initially named as Inderjeet.
It has been further averred that the explanation given by the petitioner is not convincing and that being a late entrant in service, the effort was to gain about 1 year and 2 months of service and also get next promotion to the rank of Colonel.
It has also been stated that the petitioner took about 5 years to get his date of birth changed in the Matriculation certificate.
5.
It has been further mentioned that the change of date of birth "can be made provided officer applied within two years of Commission under existing Govt. orders issued vide Ministry of Defence Memorandum No. 757/D (MS/504-M/D (Coord) dated 23 June, 1954 attached as Annexure R-1 and Memo No. --- dated 21 April, 1964 attached as Annexure R-2, under the provisions of these letters request for change of date of birth will not be entertained after the lapse of two years from the date of grant of Commission in the case of Commissioned Officers ----."
It has been further mentioned that the officer took about 5 years to get his date of birth changed in Matriculation certificate.
However, the case was examined but the change in date of birth "is not admissible under the rules and the officer was informed ----" vide letter dated May 27, 1987, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R- 7.
With regard to the averment that the authorities have permitted the change of date of birth in several cases, it has been stated that the change was permitted in those cases as the facts and circumstances were different.
On these premises, the petitioner's claim has been contested.
6.
I have heard Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SK Pipat, Senior Standing Counsel for the Union of India.
Mr. Randhawa has contended that the Panjab University having accepted the petitioner's request for change of birth, the respondents have erred in rejecting the petitioner's representation.
Primary reliance has been placed by Mr. Randhawa on the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Brigadier Prithvi Raj v. The Union of India, 1986(1) SLR 754.
On the other hand, Mr. SK Pipat has contended that the representation had not been submitted by the petitioner within the period prescribed by the Government and his request being belated was rightly rejected by the authorities.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties it appears there are three documents which require consideration.
The first of these documents is the entry in the Register of Births.
A copy of the extract from the Register has been produced as Annexure P2.
A perusal of this document shows that a male child named Inderjeet was born on November 15, 1933.
The second document is the school-leaving certificate (Annexure P-1) dated July 1, 1943 wherein the name of the student has been mentioned as Devinder Kumar and his date of birth is recorded as November 14, 1933.
In spite of the existence of these two documents, the petitioner's date of birth as initially shown in his Matriculation certificate was September 5, 1932.
It is no doubt correct that the Panjab University has permitted the correction.
The respondents are not ipso facto bound by the decision of the University.
In order to effectively decide the matter, it is necessary to record and appreciate evidence.
This is normally not the function of the writ court.
The appropriate forum is the civil court.
This is all the more so in the present case as even the entry in the birth register does not clearly show that it relates to the petitioner.
The name of the child mentioned in the register in Inderjit.
Does it relate to the petitioner?
This has to be found out by examination of evidence.
In this situation, the present petition does not appear to be the appropriate remedy.
8.
Mr. Randhawa has placed strong reliance on the decision, in Brig.
Prithvi Raj's case (supra).
He further points out that even an appeal against this judgment was dismissed in limine.
It may be so.
However, I find that in Ram Singh Arora v. State of Punjab, 1989(1) PLR 124, a Division Bench of this Court has expressed reservations about the view taken in Brig Prithvi Raj's case.
In fact, their Lordships held that a writ of mandamus could not be issued directing the authority to change the date of birth and the petitioner was relegated to the remedy of a civil suit.
Similarly, in another case Jiwan Dass v. The State of Haryana, 1989(1) RSJ 250, a Division Bench of this Court has inter alia held that "we are of the considered opinion that the questions of authenticity etc. of the documents produced and the other allied matters discussed earlier essentially involve and relate to questions of fact, which can be decided only after examining and assessing the supporting and corroborative evidence.
This court, being a Court of Record, is thus not the appropriate forum to adjudicate on these matters in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
We are further of the view that the proper forum to seek the remedy is a civil court of competent jurisdiction.
To this extent, the view taken in Sohan Singh Bawa's case (supra) that the date of birth is a valuable right is correct but the proper forum to decide the same will be the civil court.
The same could not be decided either departmentally or in writ jurisdiction."
In view of the above and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, I consider it appropriate to relegate the petitioner to the remedy of a civil suit where the whole case would be decided after proper appreciation of evidence.
9.
Accordingly, this writ petition is dismissed.
The petitioner, if so advised, may resort to the remedy of a civil suit.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.