G R Majithia, J - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 11417 of 1991, 12284 of 1991, 11944 of 1992 and 11946 of 1992.
Challenge has been made in these petitions to the orders passed under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (as applicable to the State of Haryana).
2.
A reference to the relevant facts for adjudication of the question of law raised in these petitions has been made from the pleadings in C.W.P.
No. 11417 of 1991.
3.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable in the Haryana Police.
On his successful completion of training, he was allotted Constabulary No. 904 and was posted at Madhuban (Karnal).
He was discharged from service under the provisions of Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 as applicable to the State of Haryana (for short, the Police Rules) as it was found that he was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
The impugned order apparently carries no stigma, but the petitioner says that it has been passed for the reason that the Matriculation Examination passed by him from Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala was not treated as equivalent to the Matriculation Examination of the Haryana School Education Board.
The authorities, instead of asking the petitioner to prove that the Matriculation Certificate produced by him at the time of recruitment was valid proceeded to terminate his services under Rule 1221 of the Police Rules.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 2 and 3, viz., Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh and Commandant 2nd Battalion, H.A.P.
Madhuban, it is stated that before passing the impugned order of discharge, the service record of the petitioner was examined and it revealed that he was a habitual absentee from duty and during his short span of service, he absented from duty on many occasions.
He was also awarded 10 days' punishment drill on September 8, 1990 and 5 days' punishment drill on March 18, 1991 and that he was also awarded a punishment of 'Censure' on March 11, 1991.
An anonymous complaint was received on December 17, 1990, saying that the Matriculation Certificate produced by the petitioner at the time of recruitment was not valid.
The Matriculation Certificate indicates that the petitioner passed the Matriculation Examination conducted by the Varansey Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaya, which is not equivalent to the Matriculation Examination of the Haryana School of Education Board.
These facts prima facie show that the petitioner was not likely to prove an efficient police officer and he was discharged from service under Rule 1221 of the Police Rules.
It is also stated that a preliminary enquiry was held to ascertain whether the certificate produced by the petitioner is equivalent to the Matriculation Examination of the Haryana School Education Board and the petitioner was not associated in that preliminary enquiry.
Rule 1221 of the Police Rules reads as under :-  "12.21 Discharge of inefficients :- A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule."
A perusal of this Rule indicates that the Superintendent of Police can discharge a constable at any time within three years of his enrolment if he comes to the conclusion that he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
The discretion is unfettered.
The decision to discharge a police constable from service has to be arrived at on the basis of the material available on record.
The decision has to be arrived at on the objective analysis of the service record of the concerned police official.
If no material is available on the record to form an opinion under Rule 1221 of the Police Rules, the order of discharge can be quashed on the ground that the decision is arrived at without any basis.
The Court can direct the Superintendent of Police to disclose the material on the basis of which he formed an opinion that a particular police officer was not likely to prove an efficient police officer.
If the material is found to be irrelevant for the purpose of forming the opinion under Rule 1221 of the Police Rules, the Court may not sustain the order on the ground that irrelevant matter was taken into consideration while passing the order.
The respondents in their wisdom thought it fit to disclose the material on the basis of which the competent authority had arrived at the decision that the petitioners were not likely to prove efficient police officers.
The material was disclosed in the written statement to enable the Court to satisfy itself that the decision of the Superintendent of Police was not without any basis.
The disclosure of the material in the written statement will not lead to an inference that the impugned order determining employment is, in reality, a cloak for an order of punishment.
It is correct that the form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is by way of punishment and that even an innocuously worded order terminating the services may, in the facts and circumstances of the case, established that it was passed in infraction of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The Court can lift the veil to find out the real purpose of the order.
The discharge has been ordered under Rule 1221 of the Rules on the ground that the petitioners are not likely to prove efficient police officers.
The action has been taken under the service rules.
The service rules provide for taking punitive action against a police official for the acts of omission, commission and misconduct.
If the Competent Authority decides to discharge the police officials on the ground of unsuitability under the relevant service rules and the action is not punitive, it is not obligatory to hold a formal inquiry by framing charges and giving opportunity to the Government servant in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution or the service rules.
In the instant case, the Competent Authority has not decided to take punitive action against the petitioners, but decided to discharge them from the services under the service rules on account of their unsuitability for the post.
The petitioners have no right to hold the post and their services can be terminated in accordance with the relevant service rules and the terms of the contract of service.
On perusal of the record of the service of the petitioners, the competent authority formed an opinion that they be discharged from service under the rules when they are not suitable for the post.
The discharge has been ordered under the rules and no exception can be taken to such an order of discharge.
In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SLR 606 : 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC), the Apex Court laid down that a temporary Government servant has no right to hold the post and his services are liable to be terminated by giving one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary Government servant.
The Apex Court after referring to the decision rendered by the Constitution Bench in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, 1958 SCR 828, reiterated by the Apex Court in The State of Orissa v. Ram Narayan Das, 1961(1) SCR 606; R C Lacy v. The State of Bihar, CA No. 590/62, decided on 23-10- 1963, Champaklal Chimanlal Shah v. The Union of India, 1964(5) SCR 190; Jagdish Mitter v. The Union of India, AIR 1964 Supreme Court 449; A G Benjamin v Union of India, CA No. 1341/66, decided on 13.12.1966; Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, 1975(1) SCR 814 and State of Punjab v. Shri Sukh Raj Bahadur, 1968(3) SCR 234 observed thus :  "In Jagdish Mitter's case (supra) a Constitution Bench of this Court held that every order terminating the services of temporary public servant does not amount to dismissal or removal from service merely because an inquiry was held before the order of termination was passed.
The Court observed that the appropriate authority has power to terminate a temporary public servant either by discharging him under the terms of contract or the relevant rules or by holding departmental discipline inquiry and dismissing him from service.
Before passing order of termination the competent authority may hold inquiry in fairness to ascertain whether the temporary servant should be continued in service or not.
While discussing the nature of preliminary inquiry the Court observed as under :  There is no element of punitive proceedings in such an enquiry; the idea in holding such an enquiry is not to punish the temporary servant but just to decide whether he deserves to be continued in service or not.
If as a result of such an enquiry, the authority comes to the conclusion that the temporary servant is not suitable to be continued, it may pass a simple order of discharge by virtue of the powers conferred on it by the contract or the relevant rule; in such a case, it would not be open to the temporary servant to invoke the protection of Article 311 for the simple reason that the enquiry which ultimately led to his discharge was held only for the purpose of deciding whether the power under the contract or the relevant rule should be exercised and the temporary servant discharged."
In Champaklal Chimanlal Shah's case (supra) the appellant therein was a temporary employee of the Union Government.
His services were terminated without assigning any reasons and without affording him opportunity of showing-cause.
Before passing the order of termination, the competent authority had issued a notice to Champaklal Chimanlal Shah calling upon him to explain certain irregularities and to show cause why disciplinary action should not be taken against him.
In response to the notice, he submitted his explanation thereupon, certain preliminary enquiries were held, but he was not given opportunity to place his case during the preliminary enquiry.
However, after the preliminary enquiry no regular departmental enquiry was held instead proceedings for departmental enquiry were dropped and the services of Chimanlal Shah were terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of service of a temporary Govt. servant.
The termination order was assailed on the ground that the order of termination was in substance an order of punishment.
The Constitution Bench held that the order of termination was not an order of punishment and the appellant was not entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The Court emphasised that when a preliminary enquiry is held against a temporary Govt. employee, it must not be confused with the regular departmental enquiry which usually follows the preliminary enquiry, after the Govt. decides to frame charges and to get a departmental enquiry made, with a view to inflict one of the three major punishments on the Govt. servant.
So far as the preliminary enquiry is concerned, there is no question of it being governed by Article 311(2) of the Constitution, as it is made for the purpose of collection of facts to enable the competent authority to decide whether punitive action should be taken or action should be taken in terms and under the contract of service or the rules applicable to temporary Govt. servant.
A Government servant has no right to insist for affording him opportunity during such enquiry and as such, an ex parte enquiry is not initiated in law in view of the purpose and object of preliminary enquiry.
On an elaborate discussion, the Court observed as under :  'In short a preliminary enquiry for the purpose of collection of facts in regard to the conduct and work of a Govt. servant in which he may or may not be associated so that the authority concerned may decide whether or not to subject the servant concerned to the enquiry necessary under Article 311 for inflicting one of the three major punishments mentioned therein.
Such a preliminary enquiry may even be held ex parte for it is merely for the satisfaction of Govt. though usually for the sake of fairness, explanation is taken from the servant concerned even at such an enquiry.
But at that stage, he had no right to be heard for the enquiry is merely for the satisfaction of Government, and it is only when the Govt. decides to hold regular departmental enquiry for the purposes of inflicting one of the three major punishments that the Govt. servant gets the protection of Article 311 and all the rights that protection implies as already indicated above.
There must, therefore, be no confusion between the two enquiries and it is only when the Government proceed to hold a departmental enquiry for the purpose of inflicting on the Govt. servant one of three major punishments indicated in Article 311 that the Govt. servant is entitled to the protection of that Article.
That is why, this Court emphasised in Parshottam Lal Dhingra' case (supra) and in Shymanlal v. The State of Uttar Pradesh (1955(1) SCR 26) that the motive or the inducing factor which influences the Government to take action under the terms of the contract of employment or the specific service rules is irrelevant."
The above principles were reiterated by another Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of R C Lacy's case (supra) dealing with the case of reversion of a permanent Govt. servant officiating on a higher post.
The Bench observed that the Government might find it necessary to terminate the services of temporary employee if it is not satisfied with the conduct or work of an employee and the same reasoning applies to a public servant who is reverted from a higher post to his substantive lower post, if the higher post was held in a temporary nature.
Before terminating the services of a temporary Govt. servant or reverting the person officiating in a higher post to his substantive post, the Government may hold a preliminary enquiry to form the requisite satisfaction of the continuance of officiating Govt. servant.
Such an enquiry does not change the nature of order of the termination or reversion.
5.
In AG Benjamin's case (supra), the appellant was temporarily employed as a Store Officer in the Central Tractor Organisation, his services were terminated under the Central Civil Service (Temporary Service) Rules, 1949 by granting him one month's salary in lieu of notice.
A G Benjamin contended that the order of punishment which had been passed without affording him the protection under Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
In that case before the issue of termination order, a notice had been issued to Benjamin for showing cause as to why disciplinary action should not be taken on the allegations made against him in respect of which the charges had been framed and an enquiry officer had been appointed.
After the charges were framed and the explanation of Benjamin was obtained, the Chairman of the Central Tractor Organisation submitted a note to the Government that the departmental proceedings may take much longer time and he was not sure that after going through all the formalities of departmental enquiry Benjamin will be dealt in the way he deserved, therefore, he suggested that action should be taken under Rule 5 of the Central Civil Service (Temporary Service) Rules, 1949 for terminating his services by giving him one month's salary in lieu of notice as he was a temporary Govt. servant.
The Minister concerned accepted the recommendations whereupon order of termination was issued terminating the services of Benjamin.
While assailing the order of termination, he was seriously contended before this Court that in view of the charges being framed and the enquiry officer having been appointed, the order of termination in substance was an order of punishment and the recourse to the temporary service rules had been taken only to circumvent Article 311 of the Constitution The Constitution Bench repelled the contention and held that the preliminary enquiry held against the Govt. servant must not be taken to mean that the Govt. had taken decision to inflict major punishment on Benjamin.
The Court held that no Government servant is entitled to opportunity in the preliminary enquiry as "there is no element of punitive proceedings in such an inquiry, the idea in holding such an enquiry is not to punish the temporary Govt. servant but just to decide whether he deserved to be continued in service or not."
Further the Constitution Bench held that even if formal departmental enquiry is initiated against the temporary Govt. servant, it is open to the competent authority to drop further proceedings in the departmental enquiry against the temporary Govt. servant and to have recourse to rules applicable to a temporary Govt. servant for terminating his services.
The Court observed as under :  "If therefore, the authority decides for some reason, to drop the formal departmental enquiry even though it had been initiated against the temporary Government servant, it is still open to the authority to make an order of discharge simpliciter in terms of the contract of service or the relevant statutory rules.
In such cases, the order of termination of services of temporary Government servant which in form and in substance is no more than his discharge effected under the terms of contract or the relevant rules, in law, be regarded as his dismissal, because the appointing authority was actuated by the motive that the said servant did not deserve to be continued in service for some alleged insufficiency or misconduct.
We have referred to the above decision in detail to dispel any doubt about the correct position of law.
It is erroneous to hold that where a preliminary enquiry into allegations against a temporary government servant is held or where a disciplinary enquiry is held but dropped or abandoned before the issue of order of termination, such order is necessarily punitive in nature."
(Emphasis supplied)  6.
Similar view was taken in The Governing Council of Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology, Bangalore v. Dr. Pandurang Godwalkar, 1992(5) SLR 661 : 1993(1) SCT 267.
The respondent before the Apex Court was appointed as a Lecturer in Surgical Oncology on 3rd July, 1981.
He was to be on probation for a period of one year from the date of his appointment which period could have been extended at the discretion of the competent authority.
One of the conditions provided was as follows :-  "Failure to complete the period of probation to the satisfaction of the competent authority will render you liable to be discharged from service."
Before the expiry of one year, the petitioner's services were terminated.
He challenged the order on the ground that the order of termination from service is, in fact, an order of dismissal.
Some complaints were made against him to the Director of the Institute who instead of initiating a departmental proceeding on basis of charges levelled against him, put up the matter before the Governing Council of the Institute for terminating his service during the period of probation.
The High Court held that order of termination, in fact, amounts to removal from service for the misconduct alleged against him.
On appeal, the Apex Court set aside the judgment of the High Court observing thus :-  "When an appointment is made on probation, it presupposes that the conduct, performance, ability and the capacity of the employee concerned have to be watched and examined during the period of probation.
He is to be confirmed after the expiry of probation only when his service during the period of probation is found to be satisfactory and he is considered suitable for the post against which he has been appointed.
The principle of tearing of the veil for finding out the real nature of the order shall be applicable only in a case where the Court is satisfied that there is a direct nexus between the charge so levelled and the action taken.
If the decision is taken, to terminate the service of an employee during the period of probation, after taking into consideration the overall performance and some action or inaction on the part of such employee then it cannot be said that it amounts to his removal from service as punishment.
It need not be said that the appointing authority at the stage of confirmation or while examining the question as to whether the service of such employee be terminated during the continuance of the period of probation, is entitled to look into any complaint made in respect of such employee while discharging his duties for purpose of making assessment of the performance of such employee.
7.
Even if such employee while questioning the validity of an order of termination simpliciter brings on the record that some preliminary enquiry on examination of some allegations had been made, that will not vitiate the order of termination.
Reference in this connection may be made to the case of Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Dr. Mohd.
S. Iskender Ali, 1980(2) SLR 792 (SC) : AIR 1980 (SC) 1242, where it was pointed out that a temporary employee is appointed on probation for a particular period "only in order to test whether his conduct is good and satisfactory so that he may be retained."
It was also said that even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency may be the motive or the influencing factor which induced the employer to terminate the service of the employee which such employer admittedly had under the terms of the appointment, such termination cannot be held to be penalty or punishment.
Same view has been reiterated in connection with appointment on temporary or ad-hoc basis in the cases of Ravindra Kumar Misra v. UP State Handloom Corporation Ltd (1987) Suppl.
SCC 739 : AIR 1987 (SC) 2408; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SLR 606 (SC) : 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) and Triveni Shankar Saxena v. State of UP, judgments Today, 1992(1) SC 37 : AIR 1984 (SC) 636 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
165."
(Emphasis supplied).
Before the Apex Court, reliance was placed on Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India, 1984(1) S.L.R.
426 (SC) by the respondent.
The Apex Court distinguished the judgment observing thus :  "In that case the service of the appellant had been terminated during the period of probation.
On the materials on record, it was held by this Court that the order of termination really amounted to punishment because the real foundation of the action against the appellant was the act of misconduct on June 22, 1981.
The aforesaid judgment is of no help to the respondent because in that case a clear finding was recorded by this Court that the service of the appellant had been terminated because of a particular misconduct alleged against him which had never been enquired into.
So far the facts of the present case are concerned, the Governing Council examined the different reports in respect of the respondent during the period of probation and considered the question as to whether he should be allowed to continue in the service of the Institute.
The decision appears to have been taken by the Governing Council on the total and overall assessment of the performance of the respondent, in terms of the condition of the appointment and Rule 4 aforesaid."
8.
On behalf of the petitioner, strong reliance has been placed on Hardeep Singh v. State of Haryana, 1987(4) S.L.R.
576 : 1987 Supp SCC 295 : 1987(2) Scale 431.
The facts, in brief, in that case were that the petitioner was a member of an unregistered Haryana Police Association.
The said association had been canvassing for improvement in the service conditions of the Police.
A call was given by the association to all its members to participate in "a non-taking of fool campaign" which was to take place on 15th August, 1982.
16000 police personnels attended to their duties, but they did not take their food in the Mess.
The protest was peaceful, but the State of Haryana issued order of dismissal/removal against 425 policemen under Rule 1221 of the Police Rules.
About 154 of such policemen challenged the order of dismissal/removal from service in writ petitions before the Apex Court.
The Apex Court on the material placed on record came to the conclusion that the impugned order cast a stigma on the service career of the petitioner and the order was made by way of punishment.
It will be relevant to reproduce the observations made in para No. 9 of the judgment of the Apex Court :  "There is no doubt the impugned order casts a stigma on the service career of the petitioner and the order being made by way of punishment, the petitioner is entitled to the protection afforded by the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution as well as by the provisions of Rule 1624(IX)(b) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
The petitioner has not been served with any charges of misconduct in discharging of his duties as a police constable nor has he ever been asked to show cause against the said charges.
The order of removal from service was made because of his union activities namely participating in the call for expressing the protest of the association for improvement in service conditions by abstaining from taking meals in the Mess on 15th August, 1982 although the petitioner like other members of the association performed his duties on that day and did not abstain from duty.
It cannot be said in the facts and circumstances of the case that the impugned order is an order simpliciter of removal from service of probationer in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service.
The impugned order undoubtedly, tentamounts to dismissal from service by reason of misconduct of the petitioner in discharge of the official duties as police constable.
This matter is fully covered by the decision dated October 17, 1984 of the Constitution Bench in Ajit Singh & Ors. v. State of Haryana (W.P. No. 9345-9498/1983) and we are bound to follow the same."
These observations clearly indicate that the order passed in that case was not treated as an order of discharge simpliciter, but as an order casting stigma on the service career of the petitioner.
This is not the position in the instant case.
The order of discharge is in accordance with relevant Rule 1221 of the Rules.
The order cannot be assumed to be punitive in nature.
9.
Reliance was also placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State, 1986(3) S.L.R.
78 : AIR 1986(SC) 1790.
In that case, the order of discharge was passed in terms of Rule 1221 of the Police Rules, but the Apex Court found that the order of discharge was on the ground of misconduct and as such, cast a stigma on her service career.
This conclusion flow from the following observations made in para No. 6 of the judgment of the Apex Court :-  "It is not disputed that the enquiry was made without serving her charge sheet and without giving her any opportunity to explain the charges and the allegations levelled against her.
The enquiry was conducted behind her back and on the basis of the result of the investigation, she was discharged from service.
Therefore, in these circumstances, it does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to submit before this Court that the order is innocuous one and it is an order made simply in accordance with the conditions of her services under Rule 1221 of the said Rules.
On the other hand, in the background of these facts and circumstances, it is crystal clear that the impugned order of discharge from service of the appellant was made on the ground of her misconduct and it is penal in nature as it casts a stigma on the service career of the appellant."
The above observations indicate that in view of the peculiar facts of the case, the Apex Court found that there was direct nexus between the charge so levelled and the action taken.
Where there is nexus between the charge levelled and the action taken, the order will be punitive in nature and not the one envisaged by Rule 1221 of the Rules.
This distinction was highlighted by the Apex Court in Dr. Pandurang Godwalkar's case.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also placed reliance on Punjab State v. Smt. Kamlesh Kumari, 1988(1) S.L.R.
614.
Smt. Kamlesh Kumari was a lady constable in the Punjab Police.
She challenged the order of discharge passed under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules in the Civil Court.
The Civil Court on evidence came to the conclusion that the order of discharge was based on the report of misconduct and was passed without notice to the plaintiff.
After so holding, the order of discharge was set aside.
The State came up in appeal.
The appeal was dismissed holding thus :  "No error has been pointed out in the conclusion of fact concurrently arrived at by the Courts below that the order passed though apparently innocuous was in reality punitive in nature."
These observations indicate that the learned Judge concurred with the conclusion arrived at the trial Judge that the order of discharge was punitive in nature.
This judgment has no relevance to the facts of the instant case and is distinguishable in facts.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied upon Om Parkash v. State of Haryana, 1991(2) SCT 758.
Om Parkash challenged the order of discharge under Rule 1221 of the Police Rules.
It was alleged in the petition that the petitioner while undergoing Commando training course at Panchkula, fell down from a hillock and sustained multiple injuries and fracture of leg.
In spite of these injuries the petitioner was sent to the Battalion Headquarters Police Lines, Ambala and on 10th October, 1987, he got himself medically examined from the Chief Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Ambala City, as the doctor in the Battalion was not available.
The Chief Medical Officer advised him rest.
The petitioner remained confined in his barrack at Police Lines with effect from 10th October, 1987 to 24th October, 1987 and during this period, he was being continuously marked present in the meals register maintained by the Battalion Mess and the order of discharge was passed on October 20, 1987.
In the written statement, it was pleaded that the petitioner has abandoned the job and had absented himself without leave.
The learned Single Judge after referring to the judgment reported in Rajinder Kaur's and Hardeep Singh's case (supra) in para No. 5 of the judgment arrived at the following conclusion :  "Without going into the merits of the fact whether the petitioner had absented himself unauthorisedly or was in fact under medical treatment and what is the evidentiary value of letters like Annexures P-3 and P-4, I am of the view that the impugned order though couched in simple language is in fact by way of punishment as the whole basis is the misconduct of the petitioner of having absented unauthorisedly during the training course.
Admittedly, no enquiry was held prior to passing the order of discharge."
12.
The learned Single Judge after referring to the medical evidence produced on record came to the conclusion that the order of discharge was although couched in simple language, but, in fact, was passed by way of punishment.
With respect, the view taken by the learned Judge runs counter to the view taken by the Apex Court in Dr. Pandurang Godwalkar's (supra).
The Court has specifically held that even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency were the influencing factors, which induced the employer to terminate the service of the employee, but if the termination was made in terms of the Service Rules, such termination cannot be held to be punitive or by way of punishment.
With respect to the learned Judge, the view taken by him cannot be approved and the same is accordingly overruled.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petitions fail and are dismissed.