Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The ten petitioners in these three petitions viz. Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 3734, 3871 of 1984 and 11399 of 1988 are aggrieved by the award dated 721984 given by the Labour Court.
The Court has found that the References had not been made by the appropriate Government.
The short question that arises in this case is : which is the 'appropriate Government" in relation to the employees of the Sainik School, Kapurthala ?
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners were working at the Sainik School, Kapurthala.
Their services having been terminated, they approached the state Government under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
The Government made separate references to the Labour Court, Jalandhar.
When the matter came up before the Court, the management raised an objection that the references were illegal and invalid in as much as these had not been made by the 'appropriate Government'.
According to the respondents, the Central Government alone was the appropriate Government.
This argument having been accepted by the learned Labour Court, the ten workmen have filed these three petitioners.
Is the order of the Labour Court valid ?
3.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the Sainik School, Kapurthala is not an Industry being carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government.
Accordingly, he submits that the State of Punjab was the appropriate Government and the references had been validly made.
On the other hand, Mr. Arun Nehra, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submits that "Sainik School at Kapurthala and the Sainik Schools in other States are under the control and supervision of the Defence Ministry, Government of India" and as such the view taken by the Labour Court is correct.
The Sainik School at Kapurthala has been set up by the Sainik School Society which has its Head Office in Sena Bhawan, New Delhi.
The Society was set up primarily to establish Sainik School education of a high standard with the aim of preparing boys academically and physically for entry into National Defence Academy.
It is performing in substance the governmental function of imparting special education and training to young boys for joining armed forces for defending the orders of the country.
The Governing Body of the Society consists of Union Minister of Defence as the Chairman and the Cheif Minister and/or Education Ministers of various states, Chairman, University Grants Commission, New Delhi.
On these premises, it is contended that the Central Government alone was competent to make the reference.
4.
According to Section 2(a) (i), Central Government is the 'appropriate Government' in relation to an industrial dispute "concerning any industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government."
In all other cases, the State Government is the 'appropriate Government'.
Is the Sainik School, Kapurthala being "carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government." ?
5.
It is the admitted position that the School has been established and is controlled by the Society.
Nothing has been place on record to show that the Central Government has established the School or is running it.
There is no evidence on record to even indicate that the School is being run under the authority of the Central Government.
Apparently, therefore, the appropriate Government in the case of this School is the State Government.
The mere fact that while constituting the Society, certain authorities/officers of the Central Government like the Defence Minister of India, the Defence Secretary etc. have been included, does not mean that the institution is being run 'by or under the authority of the Central Government.'
It is being run by the Society only.
It is well to notice that in Section 2(a) (i) itself, various institutions and organisations have been mentioned.
The list may not be exhaustive.
it is certainly illustrative.
The school in question is not even akin to any of institutions mentioned in this provision.
6.
Mr. Arun Nehra, learned counsel for respondent No. 1, placed strong reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in All India Sainik Schools Employees Association v. The Defence Minister-cum-Chairman, Board of Governors Sainik School Society, New Delhi and others, AIR 1989 SC 88 to contend that the School is being run under the authority of the Central Government.
This was a case where the All India Sainik Schools Employees Association had approached the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution with a prayer that the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission be implemented in the Sainik Schools and all benefits given to the employees of the Kendriya Vidyalaya as be also given to the members of the association.
In the context of this controversy, it was observed by their Lordships that the Sainik School Society is "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution as "the entire funding is by the State Governments and the Central Govt.".
This is so.
However, it is not tantamount to saying that the 'Society' is the Central Government.
Consequently, the decision is of no assistance to the learned counsel for the respondent.
Mr. Nehra also relied on a Division Bench judgment of Madras High Court in Administrative Officer, Central Electro Chemical Research Institute, Karaikudi v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, 1990(2) Lab.
I.C.
1815.
In this case, it was held as under :-  "The Central Government had expressly stated in the above notification that CSIR is a Society owned or controlled by the Government.
In view of above notification, it may be safely taken that it is a concern carried on under the authority of the Central Government for the purpose of Industrial Dispute.
This is made clear by an order of reference issued by the Central Government on 2141987 in connection with a dispute between the management of Central Scientific Instrument Organisation and the Workman".
The view taken is indisputable.
However, situation in the present case is entirely different.
There is no notification by the Central Government which may indicate that the Sainik School, Kapurthala is being run by under the authority of the Central Government.
The plea is, therefore, without any merit."
7.
Accordingly, the contention raised by the learned counsel for respondent No. 1 and the view taken by the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
8.
Mr. Nehra, however, raised an objection that Civil Writ Petition No. 11399 of 1988 had been filed by five petitioners after a lapse of more than four years after the award had been given by the Labour Court.
He consequently submitted that the petition is highly belated and it deserved to be dismissed on the short ground of delay.
9.
It is undoubtedly correct that the five petitioners in this case did not approach the Court immediately after the award was given by the Labour Court.
However, learned counsel for the petitioners has pointed out that Civil Writ Petition No. 3871 of 1984 had been filed soon after the award had been given by the Labour Court.
This petition has remained pending in this Court for all these years.
Still further, according to the learned counsel, the petitioners were under the genuine belief that the whole case having been decided by the Labour Court by one order, their claim would automatically be governed by the order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 3734 of 1984.
It was only by way of abundant caution that they have filed the present petition.
10.
This submission is not without merit.
Once the award is set aside, the labour Court shall have to answer the ten references made to it by the appropriate government.
Even otherwise, taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it does not appear to be just and reasonable to decline the claim of the petitioners in this petition only on the ground of delay.
Consequently, the objection is rejected.
11.
It may be noticed that the practice of giving piecemeal awards has been deprecated by the Apex Court in DP Maheshwari v. Delhi Administration and ors., AIR 1984 SC 153.
Such awards result in avoidable delay of the final settlement or decision of the dispute.
Such a practice should be avoided.
12.
Accordingly, these petitions are allowed.
The impugned award of the Labour Court dated February 7, 1984, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 in Civil Writ Petition No. 3734 of 1984, is set aside.
The case is remanded to the Labour Court, Jalandhar for decision.
The dispute between the workmen and the respondents has been pending for a long time.
It would be appreciated if the Labour Court decided it expeditiously.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.