SS Grewal, J (Oral) - The main purpose of this contempt petition is that the petitioners, 18 in number, want regularisation of their services.
Earlier they were working as work-charge employees with Municipal Committee, Thanesar.
They filed Civil Writ Petition No 1882 of 1988 for regularisation of their services and Division Bench of this Court disposed of the writ petition in terms of the orders passed in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana (C.W.P.
No. 72 of 1988).
The Special Leave Petition filed by the State against the order in Piara Singh's case was admitted by the apex Court and the order passed by this Court in the said petition was stayed.
According to the counsel for the respondents the respondents have also filed Special Leave Petition in the apex Court.
2.
In these circumstances mere fact that the petitioners were not regularised in terms of the orders passed in Piara Singh's case (supra) to my mind would not amount to wilful disobedience of the orders passed by this Court.
In Piara Singh's case, the apex Court reiterated that the workcharge employees or the casual labourers, who have been working for 2/3 years efforts should be made for their regularisation.
The learned counsel for the respondents states at the bar that efforts for regularisation of the petitioners are being made.
It was further stated that the recent instructions dated 6th of April, 1990 were for regularisation of the work-charge or daily wagers who had already put in 10 years service on 30th of September, 1988.
These instructions obviously were issued before the apex Court decided Special Leave Petition in Piara Singh's case 1992(2) Speed Post Judgment 1.
In order to comply with the directions of the apex Court in Piara Singh's case (supra), the instructions referred to above may, if necessary, be modified by the State and efforts be made to grant appropriate relief to the petitioners expeditiously, in case adequate number of posts and other facilities are available for this purpose in terms of the orders of the apex Court in Piara Singh's case.
At present there is no material on record to hold that the respondents have deliberately violated the orders passed by this Court earlier on in C.W.P.
No. 1882 of 1988.
This petition is accordingly disposed of.
Rule already issued is discharged.