PLN Sarma, J - The point has to be decided in this batch of writ petitions is :-  "When persons holding the posts of Examiner, Copyist, Reader in the AP Judicial Ministerial Service are promoted to the post of Junior Assistant (LDC) carrying the same time - scale of pay, they are entitled to have their pay fixed in the promotion post at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at by increasing their pay in the lower post by one increment as per FR 22-B."
2.
The relevant facts leading to the reference to the Full Bench are as follows :  3.
Petitioners in these writ petitions were holding the posts of Examiner, Copyist and Reader in the AP Judicial Ministerial Service governed by AP Judicial Ministerial Service Rules, 1964", (hereinafter referred as the "the Service Rules"), and promoted some of them as Junior Assistants (LDCs.)
and some as Typists and others as Steno-Typists between the years from 1981 to 1989 ie, after 1.4.1978.
4.
Posts of Junior Assistants (LDCs.
), Steno-Typists and Typists are in Category 5 of Division IV of `the Service Rules'.
Posts Examiners are included in Category 6 of Division IV of `the Service Rules'.
Post of Readers, among others, in the Muffasal Courts are included in Division V, while the posts of Copyists are included in Division VI.
Categories 5 and 6 in Division IV and Divisions V and VI are under :-  "Category 5:- Junior Assistants, including III Grade Clerks in the Offices of Public Prosecutors and Government Pleaders in Telangana area, Assistant Nazir, Junior Superintendents of Copyists, III Grade Clerks in Courts in Telengana area, Typists, including III Grade Typists in Courts in Telangana area and Steno-typists.
Category 6 :- Assistant Superintendents of Copyists; Examiners.
Division V :
Muffasal Courts.
Category : 1, Amins, 2.
Readers.
Division VI :
(Muffasal Courts)
Copyists."
5.
Earlier, time-scale of pay for the posts of Junior Assistants and others in Category 5 is Rs. 250-10-430 higher than the time-scale of pay attached to the posts of Examiner, Copyist and Reader i.e., Rs. 240-10-420 as per GOMs.
No. 180 Finance dated 1571975.
Later on, revised pay scales were introduced as a consequence of the recommendations of the Pay Revision Commissioner in GOMs.No.
235 Finance, (PRC-I) dated 1791979 fixing identical scale of pay of Rs. 425-10-455-15-650 for the posts is not only Junior Assistant.
Typist and Steno-typist but also for the post of Examiner, Copyist and Reader.
Revised scales of pay came to be applied with effect from 1.4.1978.
The result is that with effect from 1.4.1978, time-scales of pay attached to the posts of Junior Assistant (L.D.C).
Typist, Steno-typist, Examiner, Copyist and Reader were equalised and made identical.
However, in the hierarchy of the posts, the same position is maintained, viz., the posts of Junior Assistant, Typist and Steno-Typist remained in Category 5 of Division IV and continued to be promotion posts for person holding the posts of Examiner, Copyist and Reader.
In the year 1986, the identical scales of pay were revised to Rs. 910-30-1240-35-1625.
6.
In this batch of writ petitions, petitioners who are all holding the posts of Examiner, Copyist and Reader were promoted to the posts of Junior Assistant etc., which are in category 5 (Promotion Posts) between the years 1981 to 1989.
They claim that since they are promoted from a lower post to a higher post they are entitled to have their pay fixed in terms of FR 22-B of the "Service Rules."
For this purpose, they relied upon the language of the said rule to the effect that if Government servants holding posts in a substantive, officiating or temporary capacity are promoted or appointed in a substantive, officiating or temporary capacity to another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance,they are entitled to have their pay fixed in the higher post after arriving notionally at their pay in the lower post by stepping up the same by one increment.
7.
Originally, person similarly situated approached this Court by way of a Writ Petition No 7811 of 1984.
The said writ petition was disposed of on 2061988 by K Ramaswamy, J (as he then was).
The learned Judge thought that at the relevant time the scales of pay attached to the post of Junior Assistant (LDC) etc., and the post of Examiner, Reader and Copyist were distinct and separate.
We will deal with this judgment at a later stage.
Suffice to say that factually the assumption is not correct.
The said judgment was followed by the same learned judge while disposing of Writ Petition No. 11469 of 1984 dated 2461988.
However, the same point arose in Writ Petition No. 10733 of 1983 which came up before A Raghuvir, J The learned Judge by his order dated 27111987 dismissed the same without going into merits of the case.
In the said writ petition, a communication of the Registrar of the High Court to the District Judges to verify as to the fixation of pay to the LDCs.
who were promoted from the category of Examiners after April 1, 1978 and refix their pay and if any excess amount was paid, the same may be recovered, was questioned.
The learned Judge while dismissing the writ petition stated as follows :  "All that is directed in the impugned order is to verify what amount the petitioners were paid and only in the event of excess payments, the excess be recovered.
The order is unexceptionable.
The writ petition is dismissed.
No costs."
Obviously, this judgment was not brought to the notice of K Ramaswamy, J, when the learned Judge was disposing of the writ petitions referred to above.
The judgment of A Raghuvir, J, in Writ Petition No. 10633 of 1983 dated 27111987 was carried in Writ Appeal No. 1321 of 1988 by the petitioners in the writ petition to a Division Bench of this Court.
The said writ appeal was dismissed by the then Hon'ble Chief Justice and M Jaganadha Rao, J, on 12121988 in the following words :  "In view of rule 30(2) of the Fundamental Rules, the writ petitioners are not entitled to any increments on being posted as Lower Division Clerks (Junior Assistants) because the pay scale of both the LDCs (JAs.)
and the Examiners are the same.
The Writ Appeal is consequently dismissed."
While so, another writ petition No. 9093 of 1989 raising the same question came up before Sardar Ali Khan, J the learned Judge, on 1991989, following the Judgments of K Ramaswamy, J, in Writ Petition Nos. 7811 and 11469 of 1984, held that the petitioners are entitled to the benefits of FR 22-B.
However, it is significant to notice that the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Writ Appeal No. 1321 of 1988 was not brought to the notice of the learned Judge.
While things stood thus, this batch of writ petitions came up before V Sivaraman Nair, J All the conflicting decision of this court referred to above have been brought to the notice of the learned Judge.
The learned Judge felt that the essential aspect to be satisfied for the application of FR 22-B of Fundamental Rules is that the post to which the Government servant is promoted shall carry duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post held by him.
The learned Judge felt that the promotion of a Government servant to a superior post, does not by itself justify the application of Rule 22-B of the Fundamental Rules unless the promoted post carries with it the duties and responsibilities of greater importance.
The learned Judge seems to be of the opinion that irrespective of the fact whether the scales of pay are the same for the lower post as well as promoted post and whether the promotion is to a superior post to enable the applicant to claim the benefit of FR 22-B, the superior post.
to which is promoted should carry duties and responsibilities of greater importance.
The learned Judge was also of the view that FR 30(2) only applies to the promotions made for officiating appointments and may not apply to the promotions made otherwise.
The learned Judge being of the view that it is necessary to reconcile the conflicting views contained in the judgments referred to above, directed the papers to be placed before the Hon'ble, the Chief Justice for taking orders to have the matter heard by a Division Bench, by his order dated 19101990.
8.
Accordingly, the matters were placed before a Division Bench consisting of Sardar Ali Khan and Y Bhaskar Rao, JJ The learned Judges of the Division Bench were not inclined to agree with the view expressed by the Division Bench in Writ Appeal No. 1321 of 1988 dated 12121988 and felt that this batch of writ petitions deserves to be referred to a Full Bench for a final and authoritative pronouncement on the subject.
Accordingly, the matters are referred to the Full Bench and that is how they have come up before us.
9.
Sri.
M. Panduranga Rao and Sri J Venugopala Rao, learned counsel addressed argument on behalf of the petitioners in these writ petitions.
The main contention raised by the learned counsel is that the posts of Examiner, Reader and Copyist are in Category 6 of Division IV, and Divisions V and VI respectively, while the posts of Junior Assistant (LDC), Typist and Steno- Typist are in category 5 of Division IV.
The posts of Junior Assistant, Typist and Steno-Typist are in the higher category and they are promotion posts for the persons holding the posts of Examiner, Reader and Copyist.
Promotion Posts i.e., Junior Assistants etc., carry duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post of Examiner Reader and Copyist and therefore, on a plain reading of FR 22-B, all the petitioners are entitled to have their pay fixed in the higher post, viz., Junior Assistant etc., at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at by increasing their pay in the lower post by one increment.
In this connection, the learned counsel drew our attention to the definition of "Promotion" contained in Clause (o) of Rule 2(1) of the "Service Rules",which is as under :  "(o) "promotion" means the appointment of a member of any division, category or grade of the service to a higher division, category or grade of the service."
Learned counsel contended that the post of Junior Assistant is definitely a promotion post and it is a promotion insofar as the persons holding the posts of Examiner, Reader and Copyist are concerned and that having regard to the duties and responsibilities attached to the post of Junior Assistant, which are duties and responsiblities of greater importance than those attached to the post of Examiner, Reader and Copyist, they are entitled to the application of FR 22-B and have their pay fixed accordingly in the post of which they are promoted, viz., Junior Assistant (LDC) etc.
They challenged in these writ petitions are clarifications issued by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, Home (Courts-C) Department dated 1631983 and 2031986 respectively.
In the impugned letters.
Government stated that in view of the fact that the posts of LDC as well as Examiner, Reader and Copyist carry an identical time-scale of pay of Rs. 425-10-455-15-650 with effect from 1.4.1978, the petitioners who are all promoted subsequent to 1.4.1978 are not eligible to have their pay fixed at the next higher stage under FR 22-B.
10.
On the other hand, learned Government Pleader contended that in views of the fact that with effect from 1.4.1978 the time-scale of pay of all the posts having been equalized and fixed at Rs. 425-10-15-650 irrespective of the fact that it is promotional post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance, the petitioners will not be entitled to the benefit of FR 22-B.
11.
Before discussing the main point to be decided in these writ petitions, we are of the opinion that the posts of Junior Assistant (LDC), Typist and Steno-Typist which are in the category of 5 of Division IV of the "Service Rules" are promotion posts for the persons holding the posts of Examiner, Reader and Copyist in view of the definition of "Promotion" contained in Rule 2(1)(o) of the "Service Rules".
It is also clear that all these posts including the post of Junior Assistant (LDC) carrying the same time-scale of pay with effect from 1.4.1978 by virtue of GOMs No. 235 Finance (PRC-I) Department dated 1791979.
It is clear that the petitioners who are all members of the AP Judicial Ministerial Service are governed by the Fundamental rules by virtue of Rule 3 of the "Service Rules".
12.
To appreciate the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer and extract the fundamental rules which are relevant for the purpose of resolving the present controversy and they are as under:  "FR 22-B.
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules, where a Government servant holding a post in a substantive, officiating or temporary capacity is promoted or appointed in a substantive, officiating or temporary capacity to another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the post held by him, his initial pay in the time-scale of the higher post shall be fixed at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at, by increasing his pay in respect of the lower post by one increment at the stage at which such pay has accrued : Provided that the provisions of this rule shall be applicable to all the Government servants who are promoted or appointed to the following categories of posts :- (a) xx xx xx xx or (b) All posts carrying the scale of 1800-75-2400-100-2500 or below shown in column (3) of schedule I, to the Andhra Pradesh Revised Scales of Pay Rules, 1979 introduced through GO (P) No. 235, Finance & Plg.
(F.W.
PRC-I) Department, dated the 17th September, 1979. or (c) xx xx xx Provided that if a Government servant either - 1. has previously held substantively, officiated in (i) the same post, or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale, or (iii) a permanent post other than a tenure post, or a temporary post on an identical time-scale, or (iv) is appointed substantively to a tenure post on a time-scale identical with that of another tenure post which he has previously held substantively or in which he has previously officiated, then proviso to Fundamental Rule 22 shall apply in the matter of initial fixation of pay and counting of previous service for increment.
FR 22.
The initial substantive pay of a government servant who is appointed substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows : (a) If he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post or would hold a lien on such a post had his lien not been suspended : (i) When appointment to the new post involved the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance (as interpreted for the purpose of rule (30) than those attaching to such permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post;  (ii) xxxxxxxxxxxx (iii) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx (iv) xxxxxxxxxxxxxx (b) xxxxxxxxxxxxx Provided, both in cases covered by clause (a) and in cases other than cases of re-employment after resignation, removal or dismissal from the public service covered by clause (b), that if he either (1) has previously held substantively or officiated in - (i) the same post, or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale, or (iii) a permanent post, other than a tenure post, on an identical time-scale, or a temporary post on an identical time scale such post on the same time-scale as a permanent post; or (2) is appointed substantively to a tenure post on a time-scale identical with that of another tenure post which he has previously held substantively or in which he has previously officiated, then the initial pay shall not be less than the pay other than special pay, personal pay or emoluments classed as pay by the President of India under Rule 9(21)(a)(iii), which he drew on the last such occasion, and he shall count the period during which he drew that pay on such last and any previous occasion for increment in the stage of the time-scale equivalent to that pay."
On a plain reading of the language of FR 22-B, learned counsel for the petitioners, contended that the petitioners are entitled to the benefit of FR 22-B.
However, learned Government Pleader drew our attention to the last proviso of FR 22-B as extracted above, and contended that where both the posts viz., promoted post as well as lower post from which the person is promoted, carry the same time-scale of pay, then the proviso to FR22 will apply in such a situation.
On a reading of the proviso, it is clear that if a Government servant previously held a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale of pay, then proviso of FR 22 will apply.
Thus, it is necessary to refer to FR 22 along with proviso insofar as they are relevant for the purpose of present discussion.
Proviso to FR 22 refers to identical situations as are referred to by the list proviso to FR 22-B as extracted above.
13.
Sub-clause (2) of the proviso to FR 22 is to the effect that a Government servant who is appointed substantively to a tenure post on a time scale identical with that of another tenure post which he has previously held substantively or he has previously officiated, then his initial pay shall not be less than the pay other than special pay, personal pay or emoluments classed as pay under rule 9(21)(a)(iii), which he drew on the last occasion.
14.
On a reading of the relevant proviso, it is clear that where a person is promoted from one post to another post, both of which carry the same time- scale pay, he will not be governed by FR 22-B, but he will be governed by Clause (2) of Proviso to FR 22 which is made applicable by the last proviso to FR 22-B.
Where the time-scale of pay is not the same for both the posts, FR 22-B applies.
But if the post he held previously and the post to which he is promoted, carry the same time-scale of pay, the person will not be entitled to the benefit of FR 22-B.
Having regard to the fact that the posts of Examiner, Copyist and Reader as well as the promotion post of Junior Assistant (LDC) etc., carry the same time-scale of pay with effect from 1.4.1978, the last pay drawn in the posts of Examiner, Reader and Copyist alone is protected in view of the proviso to FR 22, which is made applicable by the last proviso to FR 22-B.
Having regard to the above, we are of the opinion that the impugned letters of the first respondent stating that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefits of FR 22-B of the Fundamental Rules in view of the fact that the time-scale of pay attached to the posts are identical, are in accordance with the last proviso to FR 22-B read with the proviso to FR 22.
15.
One more hurdle is in the way of petitioners, for invoking the benefit of FR 22-B.
Accusing for the sake of argument that FR 22-B applies in the case where the previous post held by an individual and the post to which he is promoted carry identicial scales of pay, he will have to establish that the promoted post carries duties and responsibilities of greater importance for invoking the benefit of FR 22-B.
Therefore, we have to see as to what is meant by the words "another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the post held by him" occurring in FR 22-B.
A reference may usefully be made to the similar language contained in FR 22(a)(i), which is as follows :  "22(a)(i).
When appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance (as interpreted for the purpose of Rule 30) than those attaching to such permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post."
This clause refers to FR 30 for the interpretation of "post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance".
The provision insofar it is relevant for the present discussion is as under:  "FR 30(2).
For the purpose of this rule the officiating appointment shall not be deemed to involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance if the post to which it is made is on the same scale of pay as the permanent post, other than a tenure post, on which he holds a lien or would hold a lien had his lien not been suspended or on a scale of pay identical therewith."
This sub-rule (2) of FR 30 lays down in unmistakable terms that if the post to which the person is appointed to officiate carries the same time-scale of pay of the post on which he had a lien, then it shall not be deemed to involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance.
In other words, if the time-scale of pay attached to the post of Examiner, Reader and Copyist which the petitioners, previously held, and on which the petitioners are holding lien, is the same in respect of the post to which they are promoted, viz., Junior Assistant (LDC etc., then it is deemed that the promotion post of Junior Assistant etc., will not involve duties or responsibilities of greater importance.
Therefore, having regard to the fact that the time scale of pay attached to these posts are identical, the promotion to the posts of Junior Assistant (LDC) etc., will not involve the assumption of duties of responsibilities of greater importance.
A combined reading of FR 22-B and FR 22(a)(i) and sub-rule (2) of FR 30 makes it clear that the petitioners' officiating promotion as Junior Assistants (LDCs) etc., which posts carry the same time-scale of pay as that of the lower post from which they are promoted, will not involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance.
On this point also, we are of the view that the ingredients of FR 22-B are not established.
16.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners relied upon the judgment of K Ramaswamy, J (as he then was) in Writ Petition No 7811 of 1984 dated 2061988.
We have sent for the original record in the said writ petition.
The affidavit filed in support of the said writ petition disclosed that the petitioners therein were working as Examiners and were promoted to the posts of Junior Assistants (LDC) and they have been working in Judicial Department, West Godavari District.
It was specifically stated therein that they were promoted between 1969 to 1983.
It was mentioned in the affidavit that the post of examiner and Junior Assistant (LDC) carry the same time- scale of pay with effect from 1978 i.e. Rs. 425-10-455-15-650 by virtue of GOMs No. 235 dated 1791988.
In spite of the reference made in the affidavit to the identical scales of pay attached to the posts of Examiner as well as Junior Assistant, the learned Judge referred to different scales of pay which were applicable prior to 1.4.1978 in the judgment and also did not refer to the fact that some of the petitioners, therein were promoted between 141978 to 1983.
Having regard to the decision arrived at by us in the foregoing paragraphs, the view taken by the learned Judge is not correct and it is accordingly overruled.
K Ramaswamy, J (as he then was) allowed another Writ Petition No. 11469 of 1984 on 2461988 by following the earlier judgment rendered by him in Writ Petition No 7811 of 1984 dated 2061988.
We have perused the original record this writ petition also.
We find that the petitioners therein were promoted between the years 1978 and 1984.
A reference was also made to the equalized pay scales in para (4) of the affidavit.
Even so, the learned Judge allowed the writ petition following the earlier judgment.
Having regard to the decision arrived at by us, we are constrained to hold that the judgment of the learned Judge is not correct in law and it is accordingly overruled.
Similarly, Sardar Ali Khan, J allowed Writ Petition No. 9093 of 1989 on 1991989, without giving any reasons whatsoever, simply following the above judgments rendered by K Ramaswamy, J (as he then was).
The learned Judge has also not taken into consideration the equalised scales of pay attached to the respective posts with which we are concerned.
As a consequence of the overruling of the judgment Writ Petition No 7811 of 1984 dated 2061988, this judgment also stand overruled.
Writ Appeal No. 1321 of 1988 decided by a Division Bench of this Court on 12121988 on the basis of FR 30(2) is concerned, there is no detailed discussion of the relevant provisions of Fundamental Rules and other aspects.
We are of the opinion that in all probability, the learned Judges proceeded on the footing that in view of the fact that the time-scales of pay are identical, it will not involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance.
However, reference to rule 30(2) in the order is not correct.
V Sivaraman Nair, J while referring the matters seems to be of the opinion that FR 30(2) may not apply to the situation for the reason that the rule itself is applicable to officiating appointments and that the learned Judge felt that what is essential according to rule was that the post to which the Government servant was promoted shall carry the duties or responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post held by him.
In our opinion, Sivaraman Nair, J did not notice that by virtue of FR 22(a)(i), the meaning given by FR 30(2) for the words "involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance", is made applicable by reference, to an appointment whether substantive, officiating or temporary, FR 30(2) clearly says that if both the posts, i.e., post previously held and the post to which the person was promoted carry the same scale of pay, then it will not "involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance".
The above meaning contained in FR 30(2) was made applicable to FR 22 by reference and the same meaning will have to be given while construing FR 22-B.
It is true that FR 30(2) may refer to officiating appointment.
But the interpretation, put by FR 30(2) on the words "involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance" will apply even in case of a Government servant who is promoted or appointed in a substantive, officiating or temporary capacity.
It is unfortunate that the relevant rules and provisions, which are considered by us, have not been brought to the notice of any one of the learned Judge who decided the earlier matters and the result was conflicting decision as referred to above.
The order of reference of the Division Bench of this Court consisting of Sardar Ali Khan and Y Bhaskar Rao, JJ dated 1481991, except saying that they are not in agreement with the judgment of the Division Bench in Writ Appeal No. 1321 of 1988 dated 12121988, did not give any reasons.
17.
Sri Panduranga Rao, learned counsel relied upon a judgment of Madhya Pradesh High Court in Ramesh Kumar v. State of MP, 1979(3) SLR 233.
We find that the facts of the said case are not similar to the facts of the present case.
In the said case, the petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in Education Department of the State of Madhya Pradesh in the scale of Pay of Rs. 250-10-290-15-350-20-450.
Subsequently, he joined in a new post of Deputy Collector as Probationer in the scale of pay of Rs. 300-25-550-30-850 which was later on revised.
In view of the fact that the two posts carry two different scales of pay, the learned Judge granted the relief.
The said decision is not of any assistance to the petitioners herein.
18.
Sri J Venugopala Rao, learned Counsel for the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 3130 of 1991 relied upon the judgments in KR Srinivasan v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 419 and EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, [AIR 1974 SC 555.
The learned Judges of the Supreme Court held that if the action is arbitrary, it is liable to be struck down under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
We fail to see to how they are relevant for the purpose of this case.
19.
Having regard to the above discussion, we hold that in view of the identical scales of pay of Rs. 425-10-455-15-650 attached to the posts of Junior Assistant (LDC), etc., the Examiner, Reader and Copyist by virtue of the revised pay scales introduced with effect from 1.4.1978, the petitioners who were promoted subsequent to 1.4.1978 are not entitled for the benefits under FR 22-B.
20.
For the reasons mentioned above, all the writ petitions are dismissed and there will be no order as to costs.
21.
However, the petitioners are all salaried persons and in view of the uncertaintly in law created to some extent by the conflicting decisions, they were allowed to draw the salary giving the benefit of FR 22-B.
It will be too harsh and onerous if they are asked to refund the amount paid already to them at this stage.
In similar circumstances, the Supreme Court in State of AP v. G Srinivasa Rao, 1989(2) SCC 290 directed that the additional monetary benefit given to the respondents therein shall not be recovered from them.
We are of the opinion that the similar direction meets the ends of justice in the present cases as well.
We, therefore, in the interests of justice, direct the respondents not to recover from the petitioners the excess amount drawn by them already on the basis of FR 22-B.
Order accordingly.