GC Garg, J - The challenge herein is to the award dated December 31, 1980 annexure P-3 of the Industrial Tribunal whereby it was held that the petitioner-workman had abandoned the job and thus, the rule of retrenchment was not applicable.
Consequently, the reference was answered in favour of the management and against the workman.
The present writ petition is at the instance of the workman claiming that he never abandoned the job, rather his name was struck off the rolls which amounted to retrenchment and consequently, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') were required to be complied with and, therefore, he was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
The petitioner was in the employment of respondent No. 2 at a monthly salary of Rs. 346/- with effect from May 18, 1977.
He proceeded on leave for one month and nine days on April 17, 1979.
Thereafter, he applied for extension of leave upto June 10, 1979 through registered letter dated May 25, 1979 and obtained fitness certificate dated June 11, 1979 and ultimately reported for duty on June 12, 1979.
He was not allowed to join.
His services were ultimately terminated on June 13, 1979.
A demand notice, Annexure P-1, was served by the petitioner on June 18, 1979.
3.
The case of the management, however, is that it did not receive any request from the petitioner for extension of leave nor was it extended.
The workman was asked to report for duty which communication had admittedly been received by the workman.
He having remained absent from duty unauthorisedly, his name was struck off the rolls in terms of the Certified Standing Orders.
4.
The matter was ultimately referred to the Tribunal for adjudication in the following terms :  "Whether the termination of services of Shri Krishna Singh was justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief is he entitled ?"
On consideration of entire evidence led by the parties, the Tribunal after observing that there is no proof of receipt of any application for extension of leave by the management and that the workman did not produce any acknowledgment due receipt, concluded that there was nothing to show that the management wanted to get of the workman.
It was further observed that there was no union of workers in the factory and the workman became member of the Delhi Union after June 12, 1979.
In the circumstances, a firm finding was returned by the Tribunal that it was the workman who abandoned the job on own.
Under Issue No. 3, the Tribunal concluded that since the workman had abandoned his job of his own by remaining absent, the action of the management being fortified by the Certified Standing Orders, the rule of retrenchment was not applicable to the facts of the present case.
As noticed above the Tribunal thus, concluded that the management did not terminate the services the workman and rather it was the workman who had abandoned the job by remaining absent.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the termination of service on account of absence from duty even if amounts to abandonment, is retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act and the workman is entitled to reinstatement with full back wages for non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
Learned counsel in support of his contention placed reliance on L Robert D'Souza v. The Executive Engineer, Southern Railway, AIR 1982 SC 854, The Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh, Judgment Today 1990(2) SC 489 and Desh Raj Sood v. Presiding Officer Industrial Tribunal, 1984 Lab.
I.C.
1651.
In the Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh's case (supra), the workman had remained absent from duty and his services were terminated for having abandoned the job.
The Labour Court found that the termination amounted to retrenchment and was illegal for non-compliance with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act and that the workman was entitled to reinstatement with full back wages.
The writ petition filed by the management challenging the award of the Labour Court was dismissed.
While considering this appeal as well as a number of other appeals it was concluded by the apex Court as under :-  "Applying the above reasonings; principles and precedents, to the definition in Section 2(oo) of the Act, we hold that "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever except those expressly excluded in the section."
In the result, the appeal of the management referred to above, was dismissed.
In L Robert D'Souza's case (supra), the matter regarding striking off name of the workman from the rolls without there being anything more came up for consideration, when it was observed as under :-  "If termination of service of a workman is brought about for any reason whatsoever, it would be retrenchment except if the case falls within any of the excepted categories, i.e. (i) termination by way of punishment inflicted pursuant to discipline action; (ii) voluntary retirement of the workman; (iii) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf, (iv) or termination of the service on the ground of continued ill-health.
Once the case does not fall in any of the excepted categories the termination of service even if it be according to automatic discharge from service under agreement would nonetheless be retrenchment within the meaning of expression in Section 2(oo).
It must as a corollary follow that if the name of the workman is struck off the roll that itself would constitute retrenchment."
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents relied upon Freewheels India Ltd v. State of Haryana, 1984(2) LLJ 77; Siri Ram v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, 1991(2) PLR 84 and L Robert D'Souza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railway, 1979(1) LLJ 211, a Full Bench decision of Kerala High Court, to contend that the name of the workman was removed from the rolls of the factory in terms of the Certified Standing Orders and such removal did not amount to retrenchment and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not required to be complied with.
Learned counsel for the respondents in the alternative relied upon a letter dated June 13, 1979, Annexure R-1 addressed by the management to the petitioner, to contend that even if it be held that the removal of the petitioner did amount to retrenchment, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act stood complied with as by the letter aforesaid the petitioner was advised to collect his dues from the Accounts Department of the factory on any working day after submitting his `No Dues Certificate.
According to the counsel such an intimation to the workman was a sufficient compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F.
The counsel for the respondents further pointed out that the management had not been afforded any opportunity to prove the misconduct of the workman.
7.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
I find no merit in the contentions of the counsel for the respondents.
The first contention that the removal of the name of workman from the rolls of the factory did not amount to retrenchment is bound to fall on the ground, for, none of the judgments cited by the learned counsel is of any assistance to the respondents.
In the Freewheels India Ltd's case (supra), the point, whether abandonment of job by a workman amounted to termination and consequently retrenchment did not come up for consideration.
In Siri Ram's case (supra), the judgment of the Supreme Court in L Robert D'Souza's case (supra) (AIR 1982 SC 854) was not noticed.
The judgment of the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in 1979(l) LLJ 211 was over-ruled by the Supreme Court in Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, 1980 SC 1219.
So far as the latter two submissions of the learned counsel for the respondents are concerned, the same deserves to be outrightly rejected on a short ground that letter Annexure R-1 can in no circumstance be said to be a compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F Section 25-F of the Act requires that the workman shall be given one month's notice in writing indicating he reasons for retrenchment compensation equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service as a condition precedent to retrenchment.
The case of the management here is that the name of the workman was removed from the rolls of the factory on account of his absence in terms of the Certified Standing Orders.
In a situation like this, it cannot be said that the management offered retrenchment compensation and paid in lieu of the notice period as a condition precedent to retrenchment.
As regards the evidence of misconduct, suffice it to say that no such request to lead evidence to prove the misconduct of the petitioner was ever made before the Tribunal.
As already noticed above, the name of the workman was struck off the rolls of the factory only on the ground that he remained absent from service without any intimation.
Such abandonment of job by a workman amounts to termination and consequently retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Once it is so, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act are required to be complied with.
In the present case the learned Tribunal has found as a fact that the workman absented from duty and his name was struck off from the rolls.
It, however, found that in a situation like this, it amounted to abandonment and not retrenchment.
This view of the Tribunal cannot be sustained in view of the law laid down by the apex Court in the judgments referred to above and relied upon by the counsel for the workman.
8.
The above being the situation and the provisions of Section 25-F having not been complied with, the termination of services of the workman cannot be sustained and is, therefore, set aside.
Consequently, he is entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service.
9.
As regards the back wages, it may be noticed that the name of the petitioner was removed from the rolls as far back as June 13, 1979 and a period of more than 14 years has gone by.
Though there is nothing on the record to show that the workman remained gainfully employed during this period, yet it cannot be assumed that he was not earning anything during all this period.
He was drawing a salary of Rs. 346/- per month at the time of termination of his services.
Thus, it would be quite just and fair to award to the workman 50% of the wages last drawn by him, which on calculation comes to Rs. 29064/-.
However, with a view to avoid any future reference to Labour Court or any dispute between the parties, I award a consolidated sum of Rs. 30,000/- by way of back wages to the workman for the period he remained out of job i.e. June 13, 1979 till the date of his reinstatement.
It is made clear that the workman will not be entitled to any other pecuniary benefit for the aforesaid period except the benefit of continuity of service.
Learned counsel for the workman has given an undertaking that the workman will join his job within a period of one and a half months from today and that he will file an affidavit to this effect in this Court with a further undertaking that he will serve the management sincerely and at least for a period of more than five years.
Mr. Mittal, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the respondent management has assured the Court that the workman will be taken back in service as and when he reports for duty.
In view of what has been observed above, the award of the Tribunal, Annexure P-3 is quashed and the writ petition is allowed in the terms indicated above.
No costs.
Petition allowed.