Gulab Chand Gupta, J - The petitioner was employed as a male nurse in Singrauli Colliery Hospital of respondent No. 1 and has been dismissed from employment on account of misconduct for which he has been found guilty.
The present writ petition seeks quashing of the order Annexure D-10 by issuance of appropriate writ.
2.
The respondent No. 1 is a Government company and a subsidiary of Coal India Limited.
It is not in dispute that it is covered by the definition of "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and, therefore, is under an obligation to act according to Articles 14 ad 16 thereof.
The service conditions of the petitioner, according to Para 2 of the petition, are regulated by model standing orders forming part of Schedule 1-A of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946.
A, charge- sheet dated 1781990 (Annexure D-5) was issued to the petitioner alleging misconduct against him and seeking his explanation.
The petitioner submitted his explanation on 1881990 (D-7) and denied the charge.
He also demanded a Departmental Enquiry by his letter dated 1990 (D-8).
A Departmental Enquiry was thereafter, held in which he participated.
The record of the enquiry proceedings indicate that the petitioner was helped by a co-worker PJ Phillip.
During the Departmental Enquiry, witnesses for the respondent- Management were produced and cross-examined by the petitioner.
Each and every page of the enquiry proceedings bears signature of the petitioner.
The petitioner also examined his defence witnesses, including himself as a witness and, thereafter, the enquiry was closed on 19990.
The Enquiry Officer thereafter submitted his report, holding the petitioner guilty of the misconduct alleged.
The respondent No. 2 thereafter considered the report and the evidence and agreed with the conclusions recorded by the Enquiry Officer and passed the order impugned.
The petitioner claims to have preferred an appeal to the higher authority, which, according to him, has not been decided in accordance with the provisions in the standing orders.
Submissions of Shri Y.S.
Dharmadhikari learned counsel for the petitioner are mainly two :  (1) That the petitioner had not been supplied with the copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer which amounts to violation of principles of natural justice, sufficient to vitiate the Departmental Enquiry.
Reliance is placed on Union of India v. E Bashyan, AIR 1988 SC 1000 and Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC); and  (2) The appeal of the petitioner having not been decided within seven days, as provided under the rules, the petitioner is entitled to the relief prayed for.
Mrs. Indira Nair raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the petitioner is only an industrial worker and it would be appropriate for him to seek relief by raising an industrial dispute under the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
That was not only the legal question but also merits of the misconduct can be enquired into.
3.
There is no dispute that the petitioner is an industrial worker and entitled to raise industrial dispute and get the matter decided not only on legal questions but also on merits.
In M/s. Lakmirattan Cotton Mills Co Ltd v. It's Workmen, AIR 1975 SC 1689, it was clarified that if during a departmental enquiry some legal defect, sufficient to vitiate the same, is noticed, the entire matter remains open for consideration of the Tribunal.
The parties in such a situation are entitled to adduce additional evidence to support their respective cases.
It may therefore, even be possible for the petitioner to raise an industrial dispute and get the same decided by a Tribunal.
He has, however, not chosen to do so because that is not an effective and efficacious remedy.
Since he has chosen to remain satisfied by challenging the domestic enquiry on legal grounds, we do not consider it in the interest of justice to throw away his petition on the ground of alternative remedy.
4.
The question seriously submitted for consideration of this Court is whether non-supply of report of the Enquiry Officer is violative of principles of natural justice, sufficient to vitiate the order of termination.
It is not the petitioner's case that he had any time asked for the report of the Enquiry Officer and the same was not supplied to him.
On the contrary, the submission as contained in Para 9 of the petition is that after receiving the order of termination, he applied for a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer and record of the proceedings but was not given.
In Para 10, he has submitted that he submitted his a peal without getting a report of the Enquiry Officer.
On the basis of these facts, a submission has been made that there has been breach of principles of natural justice and reliance placed on the above mentioned two decisions of the Supreme Court.
As far as E Bashyan's case is concerned, it does not decide the question whether non-supply of report of the Enquiry Officer amounts to violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution but only considers that the question is of wider public importance and should be decided by a larger Bench.
The decision of the larger Bench has not been brought to the notice of this Court.
In so far as Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case is concerned, the point requiring consideration of the Supreme Court was whether Article 311 of the Constitution as amended by 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, takes away the right of a Government Servant to receive a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer.
The Supreme Court after considering the matter in the context of principles of natural justice, held that :  "We, therefore, come to the conclusion that supply of a copy of the inquiry report along with recommendations, if any, in the matter of proposed punishment to be inflicted would be within the rules of natural justice and the delinquent would, therefore, be entitled to the supply of a copy thereof.
The Forty-Second Amendment has not brought about any change in this position.
The Supreme Court thereafter made the following observations :  "There have been several decisions in different High Courts which, following the Forty Second Amendment, have taken the view that it is no longer necessary to furnish a copy of the inquiry report to delinquent officers.
Even on some occasions, this Court has taken that view.
Since we have reached a different conclusion .the judgments in the different High Courts taking the contrary view must be taken to be no longer laying down good law.
We have not been shown any decision of a coordinate or a larger Bench of this Court taking this view.
Therefore, the conclusion to the contrary reached by any two-Judge Bench in this Court will also no longer be taken to be laying down good law, but this shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground."
It would therefore appear that the Court was conscious of the fact that it was laying down a new law for the first time and therefore, specifically directed that it will have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground.
These words therefore, clearly lays down that this new view declared by the Supreme Court would be effective from the date of this judgment i.e. 20111990 and termination orders passed earlier shall not be open to challenge on this ground.
In the instant case, the impugned order of termination on has been passed on 4/5-10-1990 and is therefore, not open to challenge oil this ground.
5.
It is also the considered view of this Court that the aforesaid two decisions of the Supreme Court cannot be applied to the case of an industrial employee, not governed by Article 311 of the Constitution.
It is a common ground that the procedure to be followed in the matter of disciplinary action is laid down in Rule 17(ii) of the Model Standing Orders which reads as under :  "Rule 17(ii).
No order of punishment under Standing Order No. 17(1) shall be made unless the workman concerned is informed in writing of the alleged misconduct and is given an opportunity to explain the allegations made against him.
A departmental enquiry shall be instituted before dealing with the charges.
During the period of enquiry, the workman concerned may be suspended.
The workman may take the assistance of a co-worker to help him in the enquiry, if he so desires.
The records of the departmental enquiry shall be kept in writing.
The approval of the owner, agent, or the chief mining engineer of the employer or a person holding similar position shall be obtained before imposing the punishment of dismissal.
A copy of the enquiry proceedings shall be given to the workman concerned on the conclusion of the enquiry, on request by the workman."
This Standing Order does not provide for giving a show-cause notice after the departmental enquiry.
Even if the words "enquiry proceedings" are given their wider meaning as to include "copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer", the provision requires the petitioner to request a copy of the same on the conclusion of the enquiry.
No such request had been made and, therefore, Standing Order as aforesaid did not stand violated.
Case not covered by Article 311(2) of the Constitution and regulated by principles of natural justice have been differently dealt with by the Supreme Court in Suresh Koshy George v. University of Kerala, AIR 1969 SC 198.
The Supreme Court considered this aspect of the matter in the context of the cases decided in and held as under :  "It is true that the Vice-Chancellor did not make available to the appellant a copy of the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer.
Admittedly the appellant did not make for a copy of the report.
There is no rule requiring the Vice-Chancellor to provide the appellant with a copy of the report of the Inquiry Officer before he was called upon to make his representation against the provisional decision taken by him.
If the appellant felt any difficulty in making his representation without looking into the report of the Inquiry Officer, he could have very well asked for a copy of that report.
His present grievance appears to be an after-thought and we see no substance in it."
In the instant case also, there is no provision for a show-cause notice or submitting a representation.
That is perhaps the reason why the petitioner had claimed that he needed the report for submitting the appeal.
Appeal is a stage after the termination and hence, an order of termination would not be vitiated on this account even if the law as laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case is to be applied.
6.
The only other point submitted for consideration is that the petitioner's appeal was not decided within 7 days.
He has filed his appeal on 22.10.90 to the Chairman and Managing Director of the respondent No. 1.
The reply filed by the respondents is that the said appeal has been decided.
Even if it be held that an appeal is required to be decided within a period of 7 days and such time limit has exceeded, it will not, in our opinion, vitiate the order of termination.
7.
In view of the aforesaid, this Court finds no substance in the petition which fails and is dismissed.
It is however, clarified that this order will not take away the right of the petitioner, if any, to raise an industrial dispute challenging his termination and seek its redressal in accordance with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Petition dismissed.