GC Garg, J - Dr Satish Kumar Solanki, petitioner competed for admission to MD (Medicines) Course, Group I and II in Govt. Medical College and Hospital, Rohtak.
On the basis of his merit in the examination and interview, he could not get admission in the said course.
He was, however, granted admission in Diploma in Medical Radio Diagnosis (D.M.R.D) for which he had also competed.
Admission to MD and MS Courses was finalised in April, 1991.
The petitioner having been denied admission in MD Medicines, Group I or Group II, approached this court for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to admit him to the said course on the basis of his merit, the seats being still available.
2.
On June 12, 1991, while issuing notice of motion, for July 17, 1991, this court ordered that the petitioner shall be admitted to Group-II, MD Medicine, provisionally at his own risk and responsibility, if there was a vacant seat.
On July 17, 1991, none appeared on behalf of the respondent despite the case having been called twice.
The writ petition was consequently admitted to regular hearing and an interim direction to admit the petitioner to Group-II MD Medicines provisionally at his own risk and responsibility was again issued to the respondents.
The petitioner was consequently admitted to the aforesaid course and he is continuing his studies.
Written statement was filed in August, 1991 on behalf of the University, respondent No. 1.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
In the written statement, the stand of the University is that no seat is lying vacant in MD (Medicines) Group-I or II, and out of the two available seats in MD (Medicines) Group-II, Dr. Kailash Chander Singhal and Dr. Sandeep Miglani have been granted admission by the orders of the High Court.
It was thus sought to be justified that the petitioner was not entitled to admission in MD (Medicines) Group-II.
3.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioners moved a Civil Misc.
Application No. 613 of 1992 praying that the respondents be directed to release his salary with effect from August 7, 1991.
Notice of this application was issued to the Advocate General, Haryana but despite several opportunities, no reply was filed to the application.
It was ultimately ordered that the salary of the petitioner be released with effect from August 7, 1991 in terms of the Prospectus of the MD University, Rohtak, 1990 Edition and the provisions contained under the Head Note "Salary for the P.G.
Students".
4.
There is no dispute that the petitioner had been granted admission to MD (Medicines) Group-II course in view of the interim orders of this court dated June 12, 1991 and July 17, 1991.
The petitioner thereafter moved another civil misc. application dated August 30, 1992 stating therein that 14 students including him were studying in MD (Medicines) Group-II.
Detail of all the 14 students was given in the application.
This includes the name of Shri VK Arora who is below the petitioner and also the names of two students who are ordered to be admitted to the course by this Court.
The further allegation in the application is that all the students except the petitioner, have been granted exemption of one year out of three years postgraduate course by the respondents on the ground that they had put in one year house job whereas the said concession has been declined to the petitioner only on the ground that his admission has yet not been regularised by the Court.
Documents Annexures A-1 and A-2 have been produced on the record in the support of this contention.
This exemption of one year, as observed above, is granted to the student on the ground that after passing his MBBS examination, he has done house job for one year.
This application was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court by directing that the main writ petition be listed for final hearing.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that the petitioner had been granted admission to MD (Medicines) Group-II a three-year course in view of the interim orders passed by this Court and he has already completed almost two years in the said course.
The students who were similarly admitted to the aforesaid Course and also had done one year house job, have been granted exemption of one year out of three-year post-graduate course whereas the case of the petitioner for such exemption has been declined by order dated July 16, 1992 by saying that this case would be taken up for exemption after his admission is regularised by the High Court.
In the circumstances, learned counsel submitted that even one student who was junior to the petitioner and had been granted admission, has been granted the said relief and the seats being available, the admission of the petitioner deserves to be regularised.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel relied upon Dr. Kanwaldeep Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(3) SLR 245.
The allegations as made by the petitioner and noticed above have not been disputed either during the course of arguments or by filing reply to any of the applications filed by the petitioner.
In fact, respondents 2 and 3 though did put in appearance but it is only the University respondent No. 1 which opposed the writ petition.
6.
The petitioner was granted admission to MD (Medicines) Group-II about two years back though provisionally.
He has continued as such along with others.
All other students who were admitted to MD (Medicines) Group-II have already been granted exemption of one year house job prior to their admission to the said course.
The petitioner has not yet been granted such exemption and his case for such relief is kept pending only on the ground that his admission has not yet been regularised.
If such an exemption is granted, the course would be reduced to two years and would come to an end, as stated at the Bar in a couple of months.
Since the petitioner had been granted admission and is continuing in the said course, it would be just and fair that without going into the merits of the case, his writ petition should be disposed of with the direction to the respondent-authorities to regularise his admission.
Declining of such relief to the petitioner would not only cause prejudice and hardship to him but his entire career would be blasted.
In the circumstances, the respondents are directed to regularise the admission of the petitioner in MD (Medicines) Group-II Course forthwith.
It is made clear that availability or non-availability of seat in the said Course loses all significance at this stage as the petitioner has already completed almost the entire course and the University or the Medical College, the respondents took no steps to get the interim orders of this Court vacated.
The writ petition stands allowed in the terms indicated above.
No costs.
Petition allowed.