Subhashan Reddy, J - This writ petition is filed challenging the inflictment of punishment on the petitioner in disciplinary proceedings initiated against him.
The petitioner is working as the Deputy Controller of Stores in the Office of the 2nd respondent.
The Head of the Department of the said section is Chief Controller of Stores and at the relevant point of time one Mr. AV Cheynulu was holding the said post.
During the year 1975, a Fire Engine (a non-stock item) was indented the Deputy Conservator and the Chief Mechanical Engineer of the office of the 2nd respondent, who after processing the same, transmitted the file relating thereto to the Chief Controller of Stores and the latter had placed the purchase order on 1671976 for fabrication of crash tender (Fire Engine) on Tata chasis by Delhi Garage Limited at Delhi.
The value of the said work was arrived at Rs. 2,02,835/- and one of the conditions stipulated was to pay 85% of the above value to the above concern Delhi Garage Limited against its delivery of the said Fire Engine at Visakhapatnam.
It is needless to mention that in a work of this nature, the expertise on technical aspects is necessary and it is stated that a Senior Assistant of Purchase Section of Controller of Stores Department of the 2nd respondent accompanied by Chief Mechanical Engineer visited the above firm in Delhi and certified its fitness and capability.
It is not in dispute that till this point of time, there was no participation of the petitioner.
The accusation is that even though 85% of value of the Fire Engine was to be paid at Vizag as against its delivery at Vizag, the petitioner had facilitated the payment to the above fire at Delhi and consequence there was a leniency given to the above concern to play with the rights of the 2nd respondent resulting in lot of delay of delivery of the above fire engine, that too, not with good quality.
Along with the petitioner, the other officers including that of Mr. Cheynulu, the then Chief Controller of Stores were also proceeded against for disciplinary action.
A common proceeding was held and it is not in dispute that the Chief Controller of Stores Department is the Head of the Department.
The appointing authority of the said officer is the Central Government, and the same is evident by Section 24(1)(a) of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (in brief 'the Act').
But, nevertheless, the disciplinary power is vested in the Chairman under Section 25(1) (a) of the said Act, subject to, of course, Regulations made under Section 28 of the Act.
Regulations are made under the said rule making power under Section 28 of the Act, under caption Visakhapatnam Port Employees' (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1968".
The said Regulations came into force on notification and it is not in dispute that the notification in that regard was issued and the said Regulations came into force in the year in which they were framed.
2.
Mr. Y Suryanarayana, the learned counsel for the petitioner, lays stress on Regulation 14 of the said Regulations and particularly the note appended to Clause 14(1) of the above Regulations, which reads thus :  "If the authorities competent to impose the penalty of dismissal on such employee are different an order for taking disciplinary action in a common proceeding may be made by the highest of such authorities with the consent of the others".
Sub-clause (2) of the said Regulation 14 empowers to specify the authority which may function as the disciplinary authority for the purpose of common proceedings; but the same is subject to the provisions of Section 25(1) of the Act mentioned supra.
There is absolutely no clash between these Regulations and Section 25 of the Act, and as such I cannot countenance the contention that the disciplinary proceedings having been initiated in common against all the officers and that the Chief Controller of Stores being the Head of the Department, the Central Government was the competent authority to initiate action.
There is no valid basis for such a contention.
The Chairman is the competent authority under Section 25(1)(a) of the Act, in so far as the Chief Controller of Stores is concerned, and for the Officer lower than him, any other authority authorised by the Chairman can take disciplinary action.
In the instant case, the Chairman being the highest of all the authorities, the proceedings are not vitiated and they fully satisfy the requirements of the Note to Regulation 14(1) of the said Regulations.
Further, as contemplated under Regulation 8 and schedule thereto, respondents 2 and 3 have taken the approval of the Government of India also for initiating disciplinary action against the Chief Controller of Stores and that is evident from the proceedings No. VIG/VPV/7/78.Vol.II, dated 381992 of the Ministry of Shipping and Transport, Government of India, New Delhi.
3.
The next contention of Mr. Y Suryanarayana, the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the order of the appellate authority i.e., the first respondent herein is bereft of reasons and the same has been dismissed in a slip-shod fashion.
He also contends that discrimination has been shown against the petitioner even though similarly situated delinquent has been exonerated of the charges levelled under common proceedings and that he was restored to his original rank.
It is true that there is 'divergence of opinion' as regards the requirement of recording reasons.
But the latest Judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in SS Chawla v. Indian Airlines, 1990(1) ALT 48 (NRC), it was held that no reasons need be given by the appellate authority if the appellate authority is affirming the order of the disciplinary authority and not differing with the same.
As such, this contention of Mr. Y Suryanarayanana also fails.
With regard to discrimination, the same can be taken as a circumstance while considering the merits of the case projected by the petitioner.
4.
Coming to the merits of the case, as to whether the case on hand warrants the recording of guilt as also the inflictment of punishment against the petitioner depends upon the nature of accusation, the material supporting thereof and the approach of the disciplinary authority.
It is true, as contended by Mr. K Srinivasa Murthy, the learned counsel for respondents 2 and 3, that as held by the Supreme Court in several cases including that of a Judgment rendered in Maharashtra SBS & HSE v. KS Gandhi, 1991(2) SLR 682 : 1991(2) SCT 611 (SC) that in exercise of powers either under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by the High Court or under Article 136 of the Constitution of India by the Supreme Court the matter is not dealt by the said authorities as a Court of appeal and the evidence cannot be reappreciated as an appellate court to come to its own conclusions.
It was further held as follows :-  "If the conclusions reached by the Board can be fairly supported by the evidence on record, then the High Court or this Court has to uphold the decision, though as appellate court of facts, may be inclined to take a different view".
As such, the only power which is vested in this Court in exercise of its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, is to see whether the conclusions of the disciplinary authority are supported by the evidence on record.
If the evidence is lacking or if it cannot be said that the evidence on record can not form sufficient basis for passing the impugned order in the disciplinary proceedings, the power of this Court, cannot be curtailed.
This view of mine is a settled proposition.
In the light of the above, I shall now proceed to consider the contention advanced by Mr. Y Suryanarayana, on merits.
5.
Mr. Y Surayanarayana, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has taken me to the accusation which is not only against the petitioner, but is against some others like V Krishnamurthy, Assistant Controller of Stores, K Apparao, Senior Assistant of Stores, Sri Madar, Assistant Engineer (Auto), Mohd.
Ibrahim, Senior Fire Safety Inspector and also the Head of the Department of Stores i.e., the Chief Controller of Stores Mr. AV Cheynulu.
In so far as the petitioner is concerned the misconduct alleged against him is that he has facilitated payment of 85% of the amount to Delhi Garage Limited at Delhi without delivery of fire engine instead of paying the same at Visakhapatnam against the delivery of the above fire engine and that knowingly he had accepted the said fire engine built by sub-standard quality material.
The charges read thus :  "That Sri K Sanjeeva Rao while functioning as Deputy Controller of Stores, Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam during the years 1976 and 1977 in connivance with Sri.
K. Aprarao, Senior Assistant, Office of the Controller of Stores, Sri Madar, Assistant Engineer, MV Section and Md Ibrahim, Sr. Fire Safety Inspector all of Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam, committed gross misconduct inasmuch as he approved on 1791976 the note dated 1691976 initiated by Sri K Apparao to the effect that the cheque for Rs1,35,28475 could be paid to MDGL(P) Ltd, New Delhi by Shri MS Ramaiah, Fire and Assistant Safety Officer, Central Fire Station, Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam after inspection and acceptance of FoamCO2/Water Tender and other materials as per purchase order No. 1/5/0602 dated 1671976 at New Delhi instead of at Visakhapatnam after obtaining delivery of materials; and also, approved and accepted substandard crash tender as per the minutes dated 25101977 its detailed in the statement of imputations of misconduct.
Sri K Sanjeeva Rao, by his above acts exhibited lack of absolute integrity and devotion to duty and thereby violated Regulation 3(1) of Visakhapatnam Port Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1964.
The statement of imputations of misconduct is extracted as below :  "That Sri K Sanjeeva Rao has been functioning as Controller of Stores, Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam since 21.1.1971, Sri V Krishna Murthy has been functioning as Asstt.
Controller of Stores since 13111975.
Sri K Apparao has been working as Sr. Assistant in the office of the Controller of Stores since September, 1973.
Sri S Madar has been working its Assistant Engineer, MV Section of C.M.E.
Department, Visakhapatnam Port Trust since 1571976.
Prior to that he was working as Foreman in the same section from 13.8.1975 to 1571976.
Sri Mohd.
Ibrahim hits been working as Sr. Fire Safety Inspector since June, 1976 and prior to that he was working its Fire and Safety Inspector in the Visakhapatnam Port Trust.
The Visakhapatnam Port Trust accepted the quotations of M/s.
D.G.L.
(P) Ltd, New Delhi, for fabrication of Foam/C02Water Tender on the Tata Chassis supplied by the Visakhapatnam Port Trust for a total sum of Rs. 2,02,83550 ps.
and the Chairman of the Visakhapatnam Port Trust accorded sanction and the Secretary of the Visakhapatnam Port Trust, communicated the order under his letter No. P/1861/75, dated 23.6.1976 to the Chief Mechanical Engineer.
On the basis of the sanction order Sri AV Cheynulu, Controller of Stores issued a purchase order bearing No. V5/0602, dated 1671976 to M/s. D.G.L.
Private Ltd., New Delhi, for the Fabrication of the Foam/CO2/Water Tender.
According to the terms of the purchase order, Visakhapatnam Port Trust agreed to pay 85% of the value being Rs. 1,35,284.75 ps.
against delivery of the Foam/CO2/Water Tender at Visakhapatnam.
Thereafter M/s.
D.G.L.
(P) Ltd, New Delhi, under its letter bearing No. FP.VSJ 731 dated 3081976, informed the Visakhapatnam Port Trust that fabrication work on the Crash Tender was very satisfactory and the Firm was expecting that the unit would be fit for inspection and delivery within 20 days and further enclosed to the said letter proforma invoice dated 3081976 for Rs. 1,35,284.75 ps.
towards 85% value of the Crash Tender and requested the Visakhapatnam Port Trust to send the Bank Draft through the officer deputed for inspection at New Delhi.
On receipt of the above said letter Sri AV Cheynulu, Controller of Stores, got pay order bearing No. 110/90, dated 991976, prepared.
It was decided to depute Sri MS Ramaiah, Fire and Asstt.
Safety Officer, Central Fire Station, Visakhapatnam Port Trust to New Delhi for inspection of the Foam/CO2/Water Tender.
In this connection Sri V Venugopala Rao, Junior Clerk of the Office of the Controller of Stores, prepared it draft letter on 1691976 addressed to Deputy Conservator with regard to the handing over of the cheque for Rs. 1,35,284.75 ps.
to Sri MS Ramaiah.
On the said draft letter Sri K Apparao, Senior Asstt., Office of the Controller of Stores, without any justification initiated a note for approval which reads as follows :  "That the terms of the payment as per order is 85% against delivery by cheque.
The cheque is received from Bill Section, since MS Ramaiah has been nominated for inspection, the above draft is put up for approval to pay after inspection and acceptance at New Delhi instead of against delivery.
The said note put up by Sri K Apparao is contrary to the terms of the purchase order issued by the Controller of Stores, Sri K Sanjeeva Rao, without any justification whatsoever and contrary to the terms of the purchase order issued by his Senior Officer, approved the draft letter and also the said note.
Thereafter, Sri V Krishna Murthy, Assistant Controller of Stores, without any justification whatsoever issued a letter to the Deputy Conservator on 22.9.1976 by signing the fair copy of the letter.
Thereafter Sri MS Ramaiah, Fire and Asstt.
Safety Officer, Central Fire Station, handed over the draft for Rs. 1,35,284.75 ps.
to M/s. D.G.L.
(P) Ltd, at New Delhi and did not take delivery of the Foam/CO2Water Tender.
In spite of sustained efforts made by Visakhapatnam Port Trust, M/s D.G.L.
(P) Ltd, on some pretext or other did not transport the Foam/CO2/9Water Tender till October, 77.
On or about 15.10.1977 the Law Officer instructed the Dy.
Controller of Stores Sri K Sanjeeva Rao to take delivery of the crash tender after noting down the actual position of the same.
But, Sri K Sanjeeva Rao, Dy.
Controller of Stores assisted by Sri Madar, Asstt.
Engineer and Sri Md Ibrahim, Sr. Fire Safety Inspector accepted the Foam/CO2/Water Tender in the presence of Sri Varun Sharma, and Sri VS Jan of M/s.
D.G.L.
(P) Ltd, accepted and approved the crash tender after mentioning in the minutes dated 25101977 deficiencies in the Foam CO2/Water Tender and its accessories to the detriment of the Visakhapatnam Port Trust.
The Vehicle was brought by the staff of the Visakhapatnam Port Trust from New Delhi.
As it was found to be substandard it was got inspected at Central Fire Station, Visakhapatnam Port Trust on 12121977 by a team of Officers of the AP Fire Service headed by Sri K Sankar Lal, Dy.
Director of Fire Services.
After inspection, it was noticed that almost all the parts used for fabricating Foam/CO2/Water Tender, did not tally with the specifications and the fabrication work was below average.
Thus, Sri K Sanjeeva Rao, connived with Shri V Krishna Murthy, Asstt.
Controller of Stores, K Apparao, Sr. Assistant, S. Madar Asstt.
Engineer and Md Ibrahim, Sr. Fire Safety Inspector and lacked absolute integrity and devotion to duty and thereby contravened Regulation 3(1) of the Visakhapatnam Port Employees (Conduct) Regulation, 1964.
The enquiry was conducted by the Enquiry Officer and the report was submitted by him recording the finding that articles of charge against K Sanjeeva Rao (Petitioner), V Krishna Murthy, K Apparao and AV Chaynulu have been established and that they have been partly established against Syed Madar and Md Ibrahim.
Accepting the said report, the disciplinary authority, the Chairman, has inflicted the punishment of reduction of pay of the petitioner to a lower stage from Rs. 1900/- to Rs. 1750/- with cumulative effect for a period of two years.
6.
Now let me examine as to what is the material adduced against the petitioner to prove his guilt and the manner of approach of both the Enquiry Officer as also the disciplinary authority.
The gravamen of the charge against the petitioner is that he had approved the draft note dated 1791976 addressed to the Deputy Conservator.
The said note was put up by K Apparao, another delinquent who was the Senior Assistant in the Office of the Controller of Stores.
In so far as the handing over of cheque to MS Ramaiah is concerned he was the person who was authorised to carry the cheque and in the said authorisation no role is played by the petitioner.
It is admitted that note is not put up by the petitioner and that note was put up by his subordinates.
The main role was being played by K Apparao, another co-delinquent.
The said note which entirely changes the crux of the matter is disowned by the petitioner.
It is not alleged that the petitioner is the author of the said note, but it is alleged that he approved the same.
It is not even alleged that he has asked his subordinates including K Apparao to put up the said note.
The petitioner has flatly denied of having knowledge of the said note and he alleges that the said note was later added after he had signed the draft and a strong circumstance in his favour is that the said note does not contain his signature.
Even striking off the material word in the note accepted by him, his initials are not found and he disowned the same.
It is all accepted and settled principle of law that whenever a note or correction is not signed or at least initialled by the officer concerned unless the officer accepts the same, it cannot be attributed to him.
Further, there is no clear proof to connect the petitioner to either the said scored out portion of the admitted draft or disputed note.
It is a different situation if the officer's signature or initials are admitted, as the burden of disproving the contents of the admitted signature and initials lies on the said Officer.
But, in the instant case, the petitioner has disputed his role is scoring out the material words as also the note and there is no legally acceptable evidence to connect the petitioner to the same.
It is to be borne in mind that in a disciplinary proceeding any ambiguity or doubt should go to delinquent and not otherwise in fact, it has not been properly dealt with by either the Enquiry Officer or by the disciplinary authority and the approach of the Enquiry Officer is perfunctory.
When the petitioner was crying hoarse that the note was added after his signature and without his knowledge, it is too much for the Enquiry Officer to say that the petitioner had failed to put up the objections to COS (Controller of Stores) as the deviation was not even his competence.
As the authorship of the disputed note, which is the crux of the misconduct, is disputed and the same was not proved by legal acceptable evidence, it has to be concluded that there is no evidence on record to support the charge of misconduct.
The misconduct cannot be assumed and cannot be a matter of surmises.
Coming to the aspect of acceptance of substandard tender, it is a matter of record that even though MS Ramaiah, the Technical Expert went to Delhi and handed over the cheque, Fire engine could not be taken delivery of not only at that time, but even for a year thereafter.
It was only when the petitioner swung into action that he could secure the delivery of' the same.
For a period of full one year, no officer of the respondents could succeed in getting the delivery of fire engine intended for.
For the purpose of securing the delivery, the petitioner had stayed at Delhi, a far off place, exposed to risk.
Syed Madar and Md Ibrahim, the technical personnel who accompanied the petitioner to Delhi had tested the crash tender and Trailor fire pump and on their advice as also on the advice of the Law Officer of the respondents, who was present at Delhi and who had advised the petitioner to take delivery of the fire engine, the fire engine was taken delivery of and the petitioner took care to express his protest that the same was being taken delivery of without prejudice to the enforcement of terms and conditions of the purchase order (sic) Visakhapatnam Port Trust.
In fact, the Enquiry Officer himself commended the action of the petitioner in getting delivery of fire engine from Delhi.
I extract that portion :  "No doubt the firm was dubious and lot of monies of the VPT was at stake, including the cost of the chassis supplied by VPT.
Considering the odds against which Shri K Sanjeeva Rao had to get the job somehow completed to whatever extent possible and to get the tender itself out of the firm's premises, was itself a no mean achievement..."  Having said so, the Enquiry Officer finds fault with the petitioner that even though quite a few deficiencies were recorded in the joint note, the petitioner had failed to note deficiencies as were further pointed out by the officers of AP Fire Service.
This finding is without any basis as whatever deficiencies were pointed out at the time of inspection and particularly as pointed out by the technical personnel Sh. Madar and Md Ibrahim they were noted and the petitioner being a non-technical person, was to be guided by only the above technical personnel and no motives can be attributed to the petitioner to this account.
The deficiencies later pointed out by the AP Fire Service officials after the fire engine was brought to Visakhapatnam and again inspected could not be subject-matter of the contents of the note at the time of taking delivery of the said fire engine at Delhi which was anterior in time.
In fact, the Enquiry Officer records further "this omission could as well due to the psychological pressure and anxiety under which they were working and not due to any motives".
The above finding of the Enquiry Officer resulted in exoneration of the petitioner from the second charge and the entire disciplinary proceedings rested only on the disputed note dated 1791976, which I have already held that there was no evidence to connect the petitioner to the said note and that the same was not legally proved.
6.
In view of what is stated supra, I am constrained to hold that there was no evidence to sustain the allegation of misconduct pointed at the petitioner and that consequently the order dated 2531983 of the disciplinary authority, the third respondent, and confirmed by the order dt. 18.2.1987 of the appellate authority, the first respondent are set aside and the Rule issued is made absolute.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.