NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge whereby the appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted thereby decreeing his suit.
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff, a Clerk in the Punjab Roadways at Pathankot depot, was charge-sheeted by defendant No. 2 Director State Transport Punjab, Chandigarh, on 631981.
The charges were that while posted as Purchase Clerk at Pathankot he made irregular purchases of GI sheets after inviting quotations from the local market and was also responsible for stealing the relevant record of purchase order and quotations from the steel table drawer of the Resident Senior Auditor of Punjab Roadways, Pathankot.
The plaintiff was further charged that while posted as Nazir he issued bogus uniforms to the staff which had been transferred to sub depot Nangal of Punjab Roadways, Hoshiarpur, whereas such uniforms were to be issued by the Hoshiarpur depot only.
He even issued chits for uniforms to the staff posted at Hoshiarpur depot.
As soon as he became aware of the same that he is liable to be prosecuted, he even stole away the connected record from the room of the Nazir.
An inquiry was instituted with regard to the above mentioned charges and vide order - dated 3051983 three increments of the plaintiff with cumulative effect were stopped.
The plaintiff challenged the order dated 3051983 in the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class at Pathankot who dismissed his suit vide judgment and decree dated 981985.
The appellate Court reversed the judgment of the trial Court vide judgment dated 2821986.
The appeal of the department was dismissed by the High Court in limine and the Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court also met the same fate.
Since it was held by the Courts that no proper opportunity had been given to the plaintiff by the enquiry officer, the department ordered for de novo enquiry and appointed inquiry officer from the office of the Divisional Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar, to conduct the same vide order dated 351988.
3.
Once again the plaintiff with a view to get rid of order dated 351988 vide which de novo enquiry had been ordered challenged the same on the ground that the same is illegal, unlawful, unconstitutional and in violation of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules is thus liable to be set aside and further sought relief restraining the defendants from starting enquiry proceedings on the basis of the impugned order.
4.
The defendants contested the suit on the basis that there is no bar for holding a fresh enquiry as in the present case the Court held that proper enquiry was not conducted earlier and the plaintiff was also not afforded proper opportunity to defend himself.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 3588 passed by defendant No. 2 is illegal, void and liable to be set aside ?
OPP  2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction prayed for ?
OPP  3.
Relief  5.
The trial Court decided issue No. 1 again the plaintiff holding that since the earliest departmental proceedings were set aside by the Civil Court on account of non-compliance the mandatory requirement of the Rules like refusal to summon defence witnesses or affording opportunity to the person to seek the assistance of a co-worker or about the inspection of the records and so the enquiry was set aside on the ground of non-compliance of rules of natural justice, but all the same it cannot be construed that the plaintiff was exonerated of the charges levelled against him by the earlier decision of the civil Court Ex. P2.
It thus held that there is no bar for holding of a fresh enquiry in respect of the same charges as contained in the order dated 631981.
6.
In view of the decision on issue No. 1, issues No. 2 and 3 were also decided against the plaintiff.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed,  7.
The appellate Court reversed the decision of the trial Court on the ground that Rule 9(1) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter called 'the Rules') under which de novo enquiry has been ordered vide order dated 351988 has no applicability to the facts of the present case.
According to the lower appellate Court, Rule 9(1) has to be read in conjunction with the preceding Rules and in particular Rule 8 of the Rules.
As per scheme of the Rules, the enquiring authority appointed under Rule 8 of the Rules holds an enquiry in accordance with the said Rules who thereafter forwards the report and record of the enquiry officer which is considered by the punishing authority and it is at this stage that Rule 9(1) of the Rules comes into play.
Since in the instant case the order of the punishing authority has been set aside by the Civil Court, a de novo enquiry cannot be ordered.
Accordingly, the lower appellate Court reversed the decision of the trial Court.
8.
The first submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the lower appellate Court has erred in law in misconstruing the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules and the judicial pronouncements of this Court as well as of the Supreme Court of India.
In fact, the lower appellate Court has simply glossed over the reasons which prevailed with the trial Court while setting aside the earlier order of the punishing authority and the order dated 351988 for initiation of a de novo enquiry in respect of the same charges as were levelled vide charge-sheet dated 631981.
A bare perusal of the various objections raised by the plaintiff as detailed in the judgment of the Additional District Judge dated 2821986, Exhibit P-2, would clearly prove that the earlier order was struck down on the ground that fair opportunity had not been granted to the plaintiff by the enquiry officer.
In this view of the matter, the earlier order was set aside on a purely technical base and viewed thus there was no bar in initiating further de novo enquiry by the concerned authorities in respect of the same charges.
The counsel in support of his above contention relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in case reported as Devendra Pratap Narain Rai Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1962 Supreme Court, 1334.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondent has urged that a de novo enquiry is not envisaged under Rule 9(1) of the Rules.
In fact, Rule 9(1) of the Rules has no applicability to the facts of the present case.
The present attempt to get the matter once again investigated is nothing but to harass the plaintiff who had been successful in getting the earlier order vide which he had been punished i.e. stopping of three annual increments with cumulative effect, set aside by the Civil Court.
Reliance in this regard was made to the judgment in case reported as KR Deb v. Vice Collector of Central Excise, Shillong, AIR 1971 Supreme Court, 1447, Karnail Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) Recent Services Judgments, 231 and Syed Syfulla v. Supdt.
of Police, Shimoga, 1982(3) SLR 145.
Before examining the legal submissions, it would be appropriate to refer to the background i.e. the earlier charges levelled, the defence set up and the observations of the Court.
As briefly noticed in the earlier part of the judgment, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that punishment of stoppage of three increments imposed upon him by the Director State Transport, Punjab, with cumulative effect is null and void, ineffective, unconstitutional and otherwise also against the principles of natural justice.
In the plaint it was averred that the charge sheet-issued to him is vague and was merely based on suspicion.
The documents on the basis of which charge-sheet was framed were never shown to him.
Copies of these documents were never supplied to him.
His reply to the charge-sheet was not considered properly.
The enquiry officer was biased against the plaintiff.
He had friendly relations with the Resident Senior Auditor who played the pivotal role in trapping him in the false case.
The plaintiff requested for transfer of the enquiry by putting an application whereby he expressed fear that he would not get justice from Sh. BR Chadha, the inquiry officer, but his request was declined without reason.
The inquiry officer became inimical to him.
After that he had moved an application for transfer of enquiry.
The enquiry officer did not provide him assistance of co-worker or a legal practitioner.
He even refused to summon the witnesses.
The enquiry officer did record his statement during the enquiry proceedings.
No personal hearing was given to him before the impugned order was passed.
These are some of the points which were urged for seeking declaration sought.
The Additional District Judge found merit in the contention of the plaintiff and so was pleased to observe that, "it was the duty of the inquiry officer to summon defence witnesses in the inquiry at the State expense.
Inquiry officer could not compel the delinquent to produce defence witnesses on his own responsibility."
Similarly the Court observed that, "refusal to summon defence witnesses on this count amounts to violation of rules of natural justice."
As regards the charge of the plaintiff that Sh. BR Chadha who dealt the preliminary enquiry ought not to have been appointed as inquiry officer, the learned Additional District Judge found merit in this plea of the plaintiff as well.
Similarly, the Court found merit in the plea of the plaintiff that his application for inspection of record was turned down by the Enquiry Officer and so observed that the inquiry officer had neither her allowed him to inspect the record nor did he allow him to summon the witnesses in defence which clearly smacked of his bias.
For the aforesaid reason, the impugned order of the Director, State Transport was set aside declaring the same to be wholly illegal, null and void.
10.
On bare perusal of judgment Exhibit P-2 dated 2821986 (from which salient observations have been briefly noticed above) leaves no manner of doubt that the enquiry officer appointed by the department was biased.
This was also the case of the plaintiff.
Examined thus, the department had no option but to appoint an another enquiry officer to examine the charges levelled against the plaintiff as per charge-sheet dated 631981.
For this, the plaintiff could hardly have any grouse.
In fact, a new person has been appointed keeping in view his earlier charge that Sh. Chadha who was appointed an enquiry officer was biased against the plaintiff.
The learned counsel for the respondent has laid much emphasis as to the initiation of a de novo enquiry.
According to him, a de novo enquiry cannot be ordered in any circumstance and since the present impugned order has been passed under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, for initiation of a de novo enquiry such an order is legally unsustainable.
It is quite immaterial whether to term such an enquiry as de novo enquiry or fresh enquiry.
All that has been ordered vide Exhibit P-1 the impugned order dated 351988 is to hold an enquiry into the charges levelled vide charge-sheet dated 631981.
No new charge has been added.
This has been necessitated solely on the various objections raised by the plaintiff with regard to the enquiry conducted against him.
Somewhat similar proposition came up for consideration before the apex Court in Devendra Pratap Narain Rai Sharma's case (supra) and it was held even an order passed by an enquiry officer against a public servant imposing a penalty when quashed by a civil court, a further proceeding can be commenced against him if in the proceeding in which the order quashing the enquiry was passed, the merits of the charge against the public servant concerned were never investigated.
Where the High Court decreed the suit of the public servant on the ground that the procedure for imposing the penalty was irregular, such a decision cannot prevent the State from commencing another enquiry in respect of the same subject-matter consistently with the provisions of Articles 310 and 311 of the Constitution.
11.
All that has been ordered vide the impugned order Exhibit P-1 is to hold an enquiry into the charges levelled against the plaintiff.
The judgments cited by the counsel for the respondent are clearly distinguishable.
In KR Deb's case (supra) the Court was examining Rule 15 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules (1957) and it was held that if there is some defect in the enquiry conducted by the enquiry officer, the disciplinary authority can direct the enquiry officer to conduct further enquiries in respect of that matter but it cannot direct a fresh enquiry to be conducted by some other officer.
In the present case, one of the points which was highlighted by the plaintiff was that the enquiry officer was biased and precisely for this reason the department rightly chose to appoint another person to examine the charges levelled against him.
Fresh enquiry officer has, in fact, been appointed in view of the objections raised by the plaintiff.
The judgment in Syed Syfulla's case (supra) has also no applicability on the facts of the present case.
In Karnail Singh's case (supra) the petitioner, who was a Patwari in the revenue department, was promoted as Kanungo by the order of the Collector on 20.10.1980 and further promoted as Sadar Kanungo on 15101986.
He was placed under suspension on 3101988 as a departmental enquiry was contemplated against him.
Four different charges were levelled against him.
His reply was not found to be satisfactory and so an enquiry officer was appointed.
The petitioner was exonerated.
The Additional Deputy Commissioner did not agree with the reports and so proposed that these enquiries be entrusted to the District Officer for Removal of Grievances or the General Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner for conducting the same afresh.
On receipt of the information that the General Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner has been appointed as enquiry officer, the petitioner challenged the same contending that de novo enquiry cannot be ordered against him.
My brother RS Mongia, J after referring to Rule 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 held that only power that the punishing authority had was to remit the case to the same enquiry officer and that too after recording the reasons and so de novo enquiry could not be ordered.
All the same he observed that it may not be understood that in no case further enquiry can be held by another inquiring authority but that would be under very special circumstances where the previous inquiring authority is unable for any reason to hold further enquiry.
12.
As has come on record fresh inquiry officer has been appointed by the department in view of the specific objections raised by the plaintiff that the earlier enquiry officer was totally biased against him.
The appointment of another enquiry officer vide Exhibit P-1 in the background of the present case was just and proper.
I accordingly accept the appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court, consequently, affirm the judgment and decree of the, trial Court whereby suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
Since the matter has become fairly old, the department shall direct the enquiry officer to hold the enquiry and conclude the same without any unjust delay.
No costs.
Order accordingly.