GR Majithia, J - The petitioners have sought a mandate to the respondents to release them the selection grade in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioners are working as Library Restorers in the State of Punjab in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600.
They claim that they have reached the maximum of the time scale and are entitled to selection grade in the light of the instruction issued by the Punjab Government from time to time.
In support of their claim, they have placed reliance upon circular letter No. 8/30/78-FR(5)/1845, dated March 3, 1980 and letter No. 7/25/84-5FR/11160, dated October 29, 1984 issued by the Government of Punjab, Department of Finance (Finance Regulations) whereby criteria for grant of Selection Grade in the cadres of various services in the State was laid down.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab and Director of Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, the issuance of the instructions alluded to in the writ petition is not disputed, but it is averred that these are not applicable to the petitioners as no selection Grade has been provided to the category of posts in the Service to which they belong in the Punjab Government Gazette (Extra.)
No. 38/4/79-FR(Pay Revision), dated October 18, 1979 Schedule B, Sr. No. 5.
4.
The writ petition came up for hearing before JL Gupta, J, before whom the petitioners' counsel in support of his submissions relied upon the decisions of this Court in CWP No. 94 of 1987 decided on November 26, 1987 and CWP No. 16078 of 1989 decided on March 21, 1991.
The learned Judge expressed reservation regarding the view taken in these two judgments and suggested that the matter be reconsidered by a larger Bench.
It is now this matter has been placed before us.
5.
The relief on identical grounds was sought in CWP No. 94 of 1987 Mohan Lal Sharma v. State of Punjab.
The learned Judge, after referring to the pleadings and the instruction issued by the Punjab Government, observed thus :-  "After going through the pleadings of the parties and hearing their learned counsel, I am of the considered view that the stand taken by the respondents is wholly untendable in law.
Once the petitioner has fulfilled the necessary conditions with regard to eligibility and entitlement of the grant of selection grade according to the policy decision of the State Government.
Simply because the State Government has now taken a decision to leave the incomplete cases for the consideration of the Third Punjab Pay Commission and not to finalise the same, the petitioner cannot be denied his lawful right, especially when persons similarly situated like Hari Dutt and Bhajan Singh, have already been granted the same.
Such an action is a violation of Article 16 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as it has denied to the petitioner the equality of opportunity in the matter of employment."
This judgment was followed in CWP No. 16078 of 1989 Santokh Singh v. State, of Punjab, decided on 21-3-1991 by Ashok Bhan, observing thus :-  "Petitioner has filed the present writ petition seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the selection grade to the petitioner with effect from 111978, the date on which he became entitled to the selection grade.
Petitioner has staked his claim on the basis of instructions issued vide Annexures P/1 and P/2 to the writ petition.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a Single Bench Judgment of this Court in Mohan Lal Sharma v. State of Punjab, CWP No. 94 of 1987 decided on 26111987, wherein a similar case of Restorer, M.R.
Agnihotri, J issued a direction to the respondents to release the selection grade of Rs. 510-800 with effect from the date it became due to him.
I have gone through that judgment and in my view petitioner's case is squarely covered by that judgment.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed in the same terms and the respondents are directed to release the selection grade of Rs. 510-800 to the petitioner with effect from the date it became due to him with arrears of pay and allowances accruing therein within three months."
6.
The State Government laid down guidelines in the matter of "provision of selection grade in the cadre of various services."
In paragraph 2, it has been stated that "these guidelines should be kept in view while sending proposal to the Department of Finance for providing selection grade posts in a particular cadre and while making appointment of employees in the selection grade as well.
The proposal sent to the Department of Finance should be complete giving full details on the above mentioned points."
This position was reiterated in circular letter No. 7/25/84-5FR/11160, dated October 29, 1984 issued by the Government of Punjab in the Department of Finance (Finance Regulations).
It is specifically stated therein that "it has been found that in a number of cases, the proposals for the introduction of selection grade and/or for determination of number of selection grade posts referred to the Department of Finance by various departments are not in accordance with the guidelines on the subject."
The guidelines issued from time to time were summarised in this letter and these are as follows :-  "(i) No. 8/30/78-FR(5)/1845, dated the 3rd March, 1980.
(i) Selection grades will be provided in cases where the number of higher posts (all levels taken together) to which employees in a particular case can seek promotion is less than half the strength of that cadre or where there is no promotion post at all, available to a cadre or service;  (ii) The number of selection grade posts at each level should not exceed 20% of the strength of the basic scale for which the selection grade posts are to be sanctioned.
For the purpose of calculating the number of selection grade posts, all posts including temporary posts, which have been in existence for three years, should be taken into account; and  (iii) Selection grade will not be admissible to an Officer unless he has completed 15 years' service.
The service should either be in the basic scale where appointment to the basic scale is from the point of fresh entry into service or as the sum total of the employees' service in the basic scale and in the one scale next below.
2.
No. 8/30/78-FR(5)/3369, dated the 5th April, 1980.
The observation of the Second Punjab Pay Commission as contained in paragraphs 911 to 913 of its report (Extracts at Appendix-I), particulars the observation relating to 'levels of promotions' available in the respective cadres, should be kept in views.
3.
No. 8/30/78-FR(5) dated the 19th November, 1980.
Specific sanction determining the number of selection grade post in each case should be issued by the Administrative Department concerned in consultation with the Department for Finance.
4.
No. 7/84/81-5FR/10191, dated the 18th December, 1981.
Selection grade @ 20 per cent would be admissible subject to the minimum of one or two posts, selection grade would be admissible to one post."
2.
It has also been observed that in some cases, the proposals do not specify the selection grade proposed to be sanctioned.
This should invariably be done.
To facilitate the formulation of the proposal a statement showing the time scales and the selection grades provided in the various cadres at present is appended (Appendix-II).
"3.
With the proposal for the introduction of selection Grade, a check list duly filled in the form at Appendix-III may also kindly be sent."
These letters merely contain the guidelines to the Heads of Departments for provision of selection grade in the cadre of the various services.
These letters do not confer any right on the employees for granting them selection grade.
The State Government has executive powers in relation to all matters with respect to which the legislature of the State has power to make law.
It follows from this that the State Government will have executive powers in respect of entry 41 in List II of Schedule VII to the Constitution of India, which relates to State Public Services.
The State Government has to decide the number of posts to be created in a particular cadre of State public service.
The terms and conditions of the public service can also be prescribed.
Provision to Article 309 of the Constitution enables the President or the Governor, as the case may be, to make Rules to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service.
This power is no co-extensive with the power of the Legislature with respect to item 7 of List I or item 41 of List II of Schedule VIII to the Constitution.
The object of Article 309 of the Constitution is that matter relating to Government service should be regulated by a legislation and till such legislation was available, they should be governed by rules made by the executive.
In exercise of the powers conferred by Article 309 read with clause (3) of Article 187 of the Constitution of India, Governor of Punjab, after consultation with the Speaker of the Punjab Vidhan Sabha, in so far as such consultation is necessary under the aforesaid provision, made Rules called "The Punjab Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1979 (for short, the Rules).
Rule 2 says that these Rules shall apply to Government employee holding any pre-mentioned in Schedule 'B' or Schedule 'C', if the pay scale of the post has been revised under these Rules.
The scale of pay of the Restorers was revised from Rs. 100-160 to Rs. 400-600 under these Rules.
Item No. 5 under Category II of Schedule 'B' appended to these Rules reads thus :-  Sr. No./ Existing Revised Spl.
Remar Designation of posts scale of pay scale of pay Pay ks 5.
Restorer, Duplicating Machine Operator & Gestetner 100-160 400-600 The increase has been allowed only in time scale and no selection grade has been provided.
Wherever selection grade was provided, mention was made in the Rules.
7.
The petitioners are Restorers working in various State Libraries.
The posts held by them fell under item No. 5 of Category II in Schedule 'B' to the Rules.
No provision for selection grade had been made for Restorers.
The petitioners can only claim selection grade if the Rules provide for it.
The Rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India cannot be superseded by executive instructions.
The Government letter, referred to above, on the basis of which the petitioners are making a claim for selection grade is not an order issued in exercise of the executive powers under Article 162 of the Constitution.
These letters contained only guidelines to be followed by the Heads of the Departments while sending proposals to the Department of Finance for grant of selection grade in the cadre of service in the State.
No Department can, without the previous consultation with the Department of Finance, sanction the emoluments of posts or change other conditions of service of posts which may have financial implications.
Rule 18.1, Chapter XVIII, Punjab Financial Rules, Volume I, is in the following terms :-  "18.1 The powers of administrative departments for according financial sanctions are regulated by the following provisions :-  (i) No Department shall, without the previous consultation with the Department of Finance authorize any orders (other than orders pursuant to a general delegation made by the Department of Finance) which either immediately or by their repercussions, will affect the finance of the State or which, in particular, either :-  a) relate to the number of gradings or cadres or the emoluments of posts or to any other conditions of service of posts which may have financial implications; or  b) involve any grant of land or assignment of revenue or concession; grant, leave or licence of mineral or forest right or a right of water power or any easement or privilege in respect of such concessions; or  (c) in any way involve any relinquishment of revenue.
ii) All financial sanctions and orders issued by a Department within its own financial powers will be communicated direct to the Accountant General.
All other orders involving financial sanctions which may be issued by Department of the Punjab Government, i.e. sanctions beyond their financial powers will be communicated to the Accountant General through the Department of Finance."
The Administrative Department cannot sanction increase in the emoluments of posts without the previous sanction of the Department of Finance.
The letters containing guidelines do not confer any right on the employees to the grant of selection grade.
These Rules were not brought to the notice of the learned Judge disposing of CWP No. 94 of 1987, decided on November 26, 1987.
8.
Apart from this, this Court can issue directions to the State Government to consider the suitability of a member of public service for grant of selection grade in the light of the guidelines reproduced supra.
The Court should be loathe in issuing directions to the State Government to grant selection grade to a particular officer/official.
In State of Mysore and another v. Syed Mahmood and another, 1968 S.L.R.
333, and State of Mysore and another v. PM Nanjundiah and another, 1969 S.L.R.
346, relying upon its earlier judgment in State of Mysore v. HM Bellary, (1964) 7.
SCR.
471, the apex Court directed the State Government to perform its statutory duties and to consider whether having regard to the seniority and fitness a particular officer could be promoted from a particular date.
The principle laid down in these authorities applies on all fours to facts of the instant case and a direction could have been issued for considering the suitability of a particular officer/official for grant of selection grade.
The learned Judge was in error in issuing a direction in Mohan Lal Sharma's case (supra) to the State Government to grant selection grade to the petitioner in that case.
We accordingly overrule the decision rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 94 of 1987 (Mohan Lal Sharma's case decided on November 26, 1987.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 16078 of 1989 (Santokh Singh v. State of Punjab decided on March 21, 1991, the learned single Judge, relying upon the decision in Mohan Lal Sharma's case (supra), granted the relief to the petitioners therein and on the same parity of reasoning, we overrule that decision also.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners had also relied upon a judgment of this Court rendered in L.P.A. No. 117 of 1990 (The State of Punjab and another v. Chaman Lal, Laboratory Attendant, Govt. College, Gurdaspur, 1991(3) SCT.
62), decided on April 3, 1991.
In that case, the only question which arose for determination was whether the Laboratory Attendants were entitled to the same pay scale as was given to the Senior Laboratory Attendants.
Laboratory Attendants in the State were either Matriculates or non-Matriculates.
Matriculate Laboratory Attendants were redesignated as Senior Laboratory Attendants and non-Matriculates as Laboratory Attendants.
The pay scales of the Senior Laboratory Attendants and of the Laboratory Attendants were revised to subsequent the promulgation of the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1979.
Former were placed in the scale of Rs. 400-600, whereas the latter were given the pay scale of Rs. 325-495.
The respondent in that case contended that the disparity in the pay scales should be removed since they were performing same type of duties.
The writ petition was allowed by learned single Judge and he also allowed them selection grade.
On appeal, the view of the learned single Judge was reversed and it was held that the Senior Laboratory Attendants were entitled to higher pay scale.
However, after so holding, the Bench upheld the grant of selection grade to the petitioners in that case observing thus :-  " Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram has also contended that in view of the fact that the Laboratory Attendants who were non-matriculates have absolutely no channel of promotion, some benefits towards selection grade should be given to this category of employees.
He has referred to Annexure P-6 in this connection.
The learned single Judge had also given the respondents the requisite relief regarding the grant of selection grade.
We are, therefore, of the view that the grant of selection grade in terms of the judgment of the learned single Judge is fully justified and to that extent the State appeal must fail."
These observations indicate that the question which is posed before us in the instant case was never urged before the Division Bench deciding I.P.A.
No. 117 of 1990.
We do not think it advisable to refer the matter to the larger Bench.
That case was decided on the position of law which was assumed by the Court and not on arguments.
The decision is not an authority for what was assumed.
It will not be a binding precedent.
A decision given sub silentio, i.e. on assumed position of law and not on arguments will not be a binding precedent.
A precedent is not binding if it was rendered in ignorance of a statute or a rule having the force of statute.
The rule apparently applies even though the earlier court knew of the statute in question, if it does not refer to, and had not present to its mind, the precise terms of the statute.
Similarly, a court may know of the existence of a statute and yet not appreciate its relevance to the matter in hand; such a mistake is again such incuriam as to vitiate the decision.
(See in this connection, Yeshbhai v. Ganpat Irappa Jangam, A.I.R. 1975 Bombay 20).
10.
Similar view was taken by the Bombay High Court in Sitaram Hari Salunkhe v. Laxman Rambodh Dubey and another, AIR 1980 Bombay 55, where it was held thus :-  "Normally, as I am differing with the decision of a co-ordinate Bench of this Court, the matter should have been referred to a larger Bench.
However, as the matter was decided by Joshi, J without noticing the specific provisions of the Act and the Rules, it can safely be said that the decision was delivered per incuriam and, therefore, is not binding upon me.
As to when it could be said that a precedent is not binding, is by now well settled.
A precedent is not binding if it was not rendered in ignorance of the statute or a Rule having the force of a statute.
In such circumstances it can be said that the matter was decided per incuriam.
In this context reference could usefully be made to a decision of this Court in Yeshbhai v. Ganpat Irappa Jangam, AIR 1975 Bom 20, and particularly towards the following observations in paras 27 and 28 :-  "Now a precedent is not binding if it was rendered in ignorance of a statute or a rule having the force of statute.
The rule apparently applies even though the earlier Court knew of the statute in question, if it did not refer to and had not present to its mind the precise terms of the statute.
Similarly, a Court may know of the existence of a statute and yet not appreciate its relevance to the matter in hand; such a mistake is again such incuriam as to vitiate the decision.
These are the commonest illustrations of the decision being given per incuriam, it is not enough that it was inadequately argued.
It must have been decided in ignorance of a rule of law binding on the Court such as a statute.
(See the observations in "Salmond on Jurisprudence" Twelfth Edition, pages 150 and 169)."
Identical view was expressed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Thuraka Onnuramma v Tehsildar, Kadiri and others, AIR 1980 A.P.
267.
11.
The ratio of these judgments was followed by this Court in Sardari Lal Gupta v. Siri Krishan Aggarwal, A.I.R. 1984 Punjab & Haryana 439.
In that case, the Bench was considering a binding force of earlier decision of a coordinate Bench on the subject.
The Bench observed thus :-  "It is thus clear that the judgment in Ganpat Rai's case (AIR 1981 Lah 373) (supra) was rendered in ignorance of the position of law as existed then.
The learned judges proceeded on the basis of English Law according to which if one of the co-owners of a party-well placed obstruction on it, the aggrieved party had himself the right to remove the construction.
However, the law in India was different.
Therefore, the said judgment is per incuriam.
After noticing Salmond on Jurisprudence it has been held in Yeshbai v. Ganpat Irappa Jangam, AIR 1975 Bom 20, than a precedent is not binding if it was rendered in ignorance of a statute or a rule having the force of statute.
The rule apparently applies even though the earlier court knew of the statute in question, if it did not refer to and had not present to its mind, the precise terms of the statute.
Similarly, a court may know of the existence of a statute and yet not appreciate its relevance to the matter in hand; such a mistake is again such incuria as to vitiate the decision.
Similar view was taken in Sitaram Hari Salunkhe v. Laxman Rambodh dubey, AIR 1980 Bom 55, and Thuraka Onnuramma v Tehsildar, Kadiri, AIR 1980 Andh Pra 267.
We are in respectful agreement with the above-said view.
Therefore, we are not bound to follow the ratio in Ganpat Rai's case (AIR 1931 Lah 373).
We are further of the view that in this situation it is not necessary to refer the case to a larger Bench.
With great respect to the learned Judges, in our opinion, Durga Prashad's (AIR 1954 Pun 125) and Pritam Singh's (1969 Cur L.J 627) (Pun) cases were not correctly decided and consequently these stand overruled."
12.
This matter came up for consideration before the apex Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, (1989) 1 SCC.
101, where the question was whether a decision can be treated per incuriam if it is given in ignorance of the rule having the force of law.
The apex Court observed thus :-  "A decision should be treated as given per incuriam when it is given in ignorance of the terms of a statute or of a rule having the force of a statute.
So far as the order shows, no argument was addressed to the Court on the question whether or not any direction could properly be made compelling a stall at the pitching site of a pavement squatter.
Professor P.J Fitzgerald, editor of the Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th Edn.
explains the concept of sub silentio at p.158 in these words :  "A decision passes sub silentio, in the technical sense that has come to be attached to that phrase, when the particular point of law involved in the decision is not perceived by the court or present to its mind.
The court may consciously decide in favour of one party because of point A, which it considers and pronounces upon.
It may be shown, however, that logically the court should not have decided in favour of the particular party unless it also decided point B in his favour; but point B was not argued or considered by the Court.
In such circumstances, although point B was logically involved in the facts and although the case had a specific outcome, the decision is not an authority on point B.
Point B is said to pass sub silentio."
The apex Court again examined this question in State of UP v. M/s Synthetics and Chemicals, JT 1991(3) SC 268, where it was observed thus :-  " Incuria literally means 'carelessness'.
In practice per incuriam appears to mean per ignoratium.'
English Courts have developed this principle in relaxation of the rule of stare decisis.
The 'quotable in law' is avoided and ignored if it is rendered, 'in ignoratium of a statute or other finding authority'.
(1944 IKB 718 Young v. Bistol Aeroplane Ltd) Same has been accepted, approved and adopted by this Court while interpreting Article 141 of the Constitution which embodies the doctrine of precedents as a matter of law.
In Jaisri Sahu v. Najdewan Dubey (1962) (2) SCR 558) this Court while pointing out the procedure to be followed when conflicting decisions are placed before a Bench extracted a passage from Halsbury Laws of England incorporating one of the exceptions when the decision of an Appellate Court is not binding.
13.
Does this principle extend and apply to a conclusion of law, which was neither raised nor preceded by any consideration.
In other words, can such conclusions be considered as declaration of law ?
Here again the English Courts and jurists have carved out an exception to the rule of precedents.
It has been explained as rule of sub-silentio.
A decision passed sub-silentio, in the technical sense has come to be attached to that phrase, when the particular point of law involved in the decision is not perceived by the Court or present to its mind (Salmond, 12 Edition).
In Lancaster Motor Company (London) Ltd v. Bromith Ltd (1941 IKB 675), the Court did not feel bound by the earlier decision as it was rendered 'without any arguments without reference to the crucial words of the rule and without any citation of the authority'.
It was approved by this Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur (1989(1) SCC 101).
The Bench held that, 'precedents sub-silentio and without arguments are of no moment'.
The Courts thus have taken recourse to this principle for relieving from injustice perpetrated by unjust precedents.
A decision which is not express and is not founded on response nor it proceeds on consideration of issue cannot be deemed to be a law declared to have binding effect as is contemplated by Article 141.
Uniformity and consistency are core of judicial discipline.
But that which escapes in the judgment without any occasion is not ratio decidendi.
In Shamo Rao v. State of Pondicherry (AIR 1967 SC 1680) it was observed, 'it is trite to say that a decision is binding not because of its conclusion but in regard to its ratio and the principles laid down therein.'
Any declaration or conclusion arrived without application of mind or preceded without any reason cannot be deemed to be declaration of law or authority of a general nature binding as a precedent.
Restraint is dissenting or overruling is for sake of stability and uniformity but rigidity beyond reasonable limits is inimical to the growth of law."
14.
With great respect to the learned Judges, in our opinion, Chaman Lal's case (L.P.A. No. 117 of 1990) (supra) was not correctly decided and consequently, it stands overruled.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.