GR Majithia, J - Sh. Satvir Singh Ahlawat, Additional Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha has challenged the appointment of Sh. Sumit Kumar as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
A reference to the relevant facts for the purpose of adjudication of the disputed question is necessary.
Sh. Sumit Kumar, who was working as Assistant Advocate-General, Haryana, was appointed by transfer to the post of Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, vide order dated April 3, 1989.
The appointment was subject to the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
On March 5, 1990, another order was issued saying that the appointment of Sh. Sumit Kumar w.e.f.
April 4, 1989 (forenoon) be made with the approval of the Public Service Commission by relaxing the requirement of experience as laid down in Entry No. (ii) under Column 4 against Serial No. 1 of Appendix `B' to Rule 8 of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Rules, 1981.
On successful completion of probation period of one year, Sh. Sumit Kumar was confirmed as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, vide order dated June 16, 1990.
The confirmation was subject to the final decision of C.W.P.
No. 2528 of 1985 pending in this Court.
Challenge to the appointment of Sh. Sumit Kumar as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, has been made on the ground that the petitioner was eligible for appointment as Secretary and his claim was ignored.
The amendment to the Rules was contrary to the provisions of Article 187 of the Constitution.
Shri Sumit Kumar was not eligible for appointment as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, on the date the vacancy arose.
3.
Written statements have been filed by the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat and also by Shri Sumit Kumar.
A preliminary objection has been taken in the written statement filed on behalf of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat that the petitioner, who was working as Joint Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, was holding the additional charge of the post of Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
He was relieved of the additional charge on 4th April, 1989 on the appointment of Shri Sumit Kumar as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, vide order dated April 3, 1989.
The writ petition challenging the appointment of Sh. Sumit Kumar was filed on April 1, 1991 when he had already been confirmed on the post of Secretary w.e.f.
April 4, 1990.
The petitioner is seeking a writ a quo warranto and the same is liable to be dismissed on the sole ground of delay and laches.
On merits, it is pleaded that the Governor of Haryana, in exercise of powers conferred by Clause (3) of Article 187 of the Constitution of India, after consultation with the Speaker, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, made rules regarding the appointment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service (for short, the Service).
These rules were amended by the Governor of Haryana in consultation with the Speaker of Haryana Vidhan Sabha under Article 187 of the Constitution of India Rule 9 relates to the method of recruitment to any service.
Rule 9 was amended, vide notification No. G.S.R.
5/Const./Art.
187/85, dated January 11, 1985 and the amended rule reads, thus,  "9.
Method of recruitment :-  (1) Recruitment to service shall be made -  (i) by direct recruitment; or  (ii) by promotion; or  (iii) by transfer or deputation of an officer/official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
(2) The appointing authority shall determine the method of recruitment as and when a vacancy arises.
4.
In the said rules, in Appendix B, against Serial Number 1 :-  (a) under column 3, in entry (2), after the words `Legislative Assembly', the words `or ten years practice at the Bar' shall be inserted;  (b) under column 4, for the existing entry, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :-  (i) In case of appointment by promotion, Law Graduate with five years experience as Deputy Secretary in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat;  (ii) In case of appointment by transfer of an officer already serving the State in a substantive permanent capacity as Deputy Advocate-General/Senior Deputy Advocate-General, who is duly qualified to be appointed as Public Prosecutor;  (iii) In the case of appointment by deputation of an officer already serving the State as member of Haryana Superior Judicial Service in substantive permanent capacity."
This rule envisages three methods of recruitment and it is for the State Government to choose any of the methods for filling the vacant posts.
The State Government decided to fill the post of Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha by way of transfer of an officer already in the Service of the State Government.
Reference to the Rules has been made in the written statement to establish that the appointment of Sh. Sumit Kumar as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha was in conformity with the rules.
4.
To the same effect is the plea of Sh. Sumit Kumar in the written statement filed by him.
5.
Reference to other facts in the pleadings has not been found necessary because these are irrelevant for resolving the dispute raised in this petition.
6.
Sh. Joginder Singh Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, at the time of the hearing of the writ petition made only one submission, namely, on the date when the vacancy arose.
Sh. Sumit Kumar was ineligible for appointment as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha and in support of it, he relied upon the apex Court's decision in Y V Rangaiah and ors. v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, 1983(1) S.L.R.
789.
The Governor of Haryana, in exercise of powers conferred by Clause (3) of Article 187 of the Constitution, after consultation with the Speaker, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, made the rules called "The Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service Rules, 1981 (for brevity, the Rules) regarding the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service.
Part-II of the Rules relates to recruitment to Service.
Rule 3 says that the Service shall comprise the posts in each group in- corporated in Appendix `A' to the Rules and the members of the Service shall draw pay in the scales of pay shown thereagainst.
The post of Secretary finds mention in Appendix `A' to the Rules.
Rule 7 says that appointment to the posts in the Service shall be made (a) in the case of Secretary, by the Governor in consultation with the Speaker and (b) in the case of other posts, by the Speaker.
Rule 8 prescribes qualifications for appointment to any post in the Service.
It says that no person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column (3) of Appendix B to these Rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column (4) of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of recruitment other than by direct recruitment.
Rule 9 relates to the method of recruitment and it says that the method of recruitment to any post in the service other than to the post of Secretary, shall be determined by the Speaker.
Rule 15 makes provision for relaxing any provision of the Rules with respect to any class or category of persons.
Proviso to this Rule says that the Governor shall consult the Speaker before making any order of relaxation.
The second proviso to this rule says that the Speaker shall obtain the prior approval of the Government before making any order of relaxation.
7.
Vide notification No. G.S.R.
30/Cons./Art.
187/89 dated March 20, 1989, following entries against Sr. No. 1 of Appendix B to the Rules were amended :-  Sr. No./Designation of posts Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for direct recruitment.
Academic qualification/experience for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
Remarks 1.
2 3 4 1.
Secretary 1) Law Graduate 2) 8 years experience in supervisory capacity involving practical knowledge of Secretariat Administration, Parliamentary Procedure and Rules of Legislative Assembly or 10 years practice at the Bar in the lower Courts or five years practice at the Bar in the High Court., 1) Law Graduate with two years experience as Joint Secretary or five years experience as Deputy Secretary in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat; (2) In case of appointment by transfer of an officer already serving the State in a substantive permanent capacity as Assistant Advocate-General or Deputy Advocate-General or Senior Deputy Advocate-General is qualified to be appointed as Public Prosecutor (3).... (3)....
The amended entry in Appendix `B' against Serial No. 1, Col. No. 4(2) says that an Assistant Advocate-General or Deputy Advocate General or Senior Deputy Advocate-General who is qualified to be appointed as Public Prosecutor and is serving the State in a substantive permanent capacity can be appointed by transfer as Secretary of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
Shri Sumit Kumar was confirmed as Assistant Advocate-General, vide order contained in Memo No. 2/23-68-JJ/8 dated March 31, 1989.
A person is eligible for appointment as a Public Prosecutor if he has been in practice as an Advocate for not less than 7 years as provided under Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
This condition of 7 years' practice as an Advocate was relaxed by the State Government, vide order dated March 5, 1990 whereby Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, was appointed as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha by transfer, with the approval of the Public Service Commission, Haryana.
The relaxation of the requirement of experience as laid down in entry No. (2) under column 4 against Serial No. 1 of Appendix `b' to Rule of the Rules was ordered to relate back to the date of initial appointment of Shri Sumit Kumar.
The order dated March 5, 1990, reads thus :  "In exercise of the powers under Rule 15 of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Rules, 1981, the Governor of Haryana, with the approval of the Public Service Commission, Haryana is pleased to appoint by transfer Shri Sumit Kumar, Assistant Advocate-General as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, w.e.f.
the 4th April, 1989 (F.N.)
by relaxing the requirement of experience as laid down in entry No. (ii) under Col. 4 against Serial No. 1 of the Appendix-3 to Rule 8 of the said Rules.
This issues in continuation of the order dated the 3rd April, 1989, circulated, vide endst.
No 6/8/89 - Pol, dated the 4th April, 1989."
8.
Rule 15 of the Rules enables the appointing authority to relax any provision of the Rules with respect to any class or category of persons.
In exercise of these powers, the State Government relaxed the requirement of experience as laid down in entry 2 under Column 4 against Serial No. 1 of Appendix `B' to Rule 8 of the Rules.
Rule 15 says that an Assistant Advocate General holding the post in substantive permanent capacity should also be qualified to be appointed as Public Prosecutor.
The qualification that an Assistant Advocate-General holding the post in a substantive permanent capacity should be qualified to be appointed as Public Prosecutor was relaxed by the Government in the case of Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, meaning thereby that an Assistant Advocate General serving the State in a substantive permanent capacity was eligible for appointment as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha even though he is not qualified for appointment as a Public Prosecutor.
The appointment of Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, who was holding the post of Assistant Advocate General in substantive permanent capacity was made in relaxation of the requirement of experience as laid down in entry (ii) in Column No. 4 against Serial No. 1 of Appendix `B' to Rule 8 of the Rules.
The State Government is the appointing authority of the Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
The State Government, in exercise of the powers under Rule 15 of the Rules, appointed Shri Sumit Kumar as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha by transfer.
If the power is vested in the competent authority, it will be assumed that it was validly exercised.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner rightly did not challenge that the relaxation regarding requirement of experience in the case of Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, was irregular.
10.
The only question which requires our consideration is whether Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, fulfilled the qualifications for appointment as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha on the date when the vacancy arose.
The vacancy allegedly arose on October 3, 1988 when the petitioner who was working as Joint Secretary was given the additional charge of the post of Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
Mr. Joginder Singh Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, maintains that on the date when the vacancy arose, Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, was ineligible for appointment as Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha and for this he placed reliance on the apex Court's decision in YV Rangaiah's case (supra).
That was a case relating to appointments by transfer to the posts of Sub-Registrars Grade II in the Department of Registration and Stamps, Andhra Pradesh.
On an examination of the Andhra Pradesh Registration and Subordinate Service Rules and the Government instructions issued from time to time, it was, inter alia, observed by their Lordships of the apex Court that "the vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules."
In the case of promotion from a lower post to a higher post, a person working on a lower post comes to acquire a right for consideration for promotion to the higher post, unless the Rules have been amended retrospectively.
The right to be considered for promotion cannot be defeated and their Lordships of the apex Court observed that the old vacancies would be governed by the old Rules.
In the case of posts in the promotional cadre, the eligibility of the incumbent has to be reckoned on the date when the post in the promotional cadre falls vacant.
The desirability for examining the eligibility on the date when the vacancy in the promotional cadre falls vacant was discussed in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, AIR 1990 P & H 117.
MM Punchhi, J (as his Lordship then was) speaking for the Full Bench in his lucid judgment observed thus :-  "The office order dated October 22, 1968, quoted in the published report in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) clearly reveals that different conditions of eligibility have been prescribed for diploma holders and non-diploma holders Linesmen, the fulfilment of which alone qualifies them to be promoted as Line Superintendent on the basis of seniority, and deducibly, as we have called out, to be reckoned on the date when the post in the promotional cadre falls vacant.
Our deduction is based on pure logic, practical experience, common knowledge, besides precedent.
Suppose a Linesman, be he a diploma holder or a non-diploma holder, acquires eligibility for promotion when no promotional post is available, he inevitably has to -wait for one becoming available.
He should normally on the strength of BS Yadav v. State of Haryana, (1980) 3 Serv LR 591 : (1981 Lab IC 104) (SC), get it the day it falls vacant.
But despite that he is not promoted, for one reason or the other.
And in the meantime another Linesman, be he a diploma holder or a non-diploma holder, becomes eligible.
The question then inevitably will crop up, who should get the promotional post.
Should it in these circumstances go to the one who acquired eligibility first.
In this situation, seniority per se cannot be intended to be taken as the basis for promotion, as, otherwise, it would lead to undesirable results.
If it is to be dealt otherwise, it would lead to breeding of manipulation, machinations, calculations and caprice.
Designed the case of promotion of the first eligible can deliberately be kept delayed with oblique motives so as to let suitable rivals come in and in this manner his acquired eligibility can be frustrated by someone senior acquiring eligibility far far late.
Since different conditions for eligibility for promotion from Linesmen to Line Superintendent have been prescribed by the Board on the differences based on the educational qualification-cum-service experience, respectively for non-diploma holders and diploma holders, having regard to the requirements of promotional posts and in the interests of efficiency of service, the eligibility criteria is the first dominant factor and thereafter comes the principle of seniority governing the fate when two equal eligible stake claim to the promotional post.
In that situation, the senior person would get the promotional post on both acquiring eligibility on the same date, even though the promotional post falls vacant later.
Therefore, we wish to emphasise here that seniority alone is not the basis for promotion from the post of Linesman to the post of Line Superintendent, as is the common belief of the writ petitioners in the instant litigation, and more so by Ashok Kumar Sehgal, who in his writ petition except for pleading his seniority number and the numbers of those who were junior and promoted has done nothing else.
Significantly nothing has been pleaded by him disclosing as to when did anybody acquire eligibility for promotion and when did the post fall vacant and which person got that post and by what right or negation thereof."
In the instant case, we are concerned with the appointment to the post of Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha by direct recruitment.
The eligibility has to be seen on the date of the selection.
The selection process starts with the issuance of the advertisement.
The selection will be regulated in accordance with the Rules and orders which were in force on the date of advertisement.
(See in this connection, T Devin Katti etc. v. Karnataka Public Service Commission, 1992(2) S.L.R.
378 (SC).
In the present case, the State Government filled the vacant post of Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha on April 3, 1989 by appointing Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4.
The appointment was to be made in conformity with the Rules, viz., the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Rules, 1981.
Rule 9 relates to method of recruitment.
Amendment to Rule 9 and Appendix `B' to the Rules was made by the Government, vide Notification No. G.S.R.
8/Cons./Art.
187/85, dated January 11, 1985, and again vide Notification No. C.S.R.
30/Cons./Art.
187/89, dated March 20, 1989.
The amendment introduced in rule vide notification dated January 11, 1985 specifically provided that the amended rules would be deemed to have come into force with effect from October 6, 1981, the date from which the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service Rules, 1981 came into force.
The amendment in the Rules was made retrospectively meaning thereby that the amendment of Rule 9 would be deemed to have been made with effect from October 6, 1981.
There is no bar for the competent authority to make the rules applicable with retrospective effect.
The Court cannot enquire into the propriety of the exercise of the legislative powers.It is to be assumed that the legislative discretion is properly exercised.
The motive of the legislature in passing a statute is beyond the scrutiny of the Courts.
In this connection, reliance can usefully be placed on the apex Court's judgment in P Ven v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1985 SC 724, where it was observed thus :-  "Any law made by the legislature, which it is not competent to pass, which is violative of the provisions in Part-III of the Constitution or any other constitutional provision is ineffective.
It is a settled rule of constitutional law that the question whether a statute is a constitutional or not is always a question of power of the legislature concerned.
Dependent upon the subject-matter of the statute, the manner in which it is accomplished and the mode of enacting it.
While the courts can declare a statute unconstitutional when it transgresses constitutional limits, they are precluded from inquiring into the propriety of the exercise of the legislative power.
It has to be assumed that the legislative discretion is properly exercised.
The motives of the legislature in passing a statute is beyond scrutiny of courts.
Nor can the courts examine whether the legislature had applied its mind to the provisions of a statute before passing it.
The propriety, expediency and necessity of a legislative act are for the detrmination of the legislative authority and are not for determination by the courts.
An ordinance passed either under Article 123 or under Article 13 of the Constitution stands on the same footing.
When the Constitution says that the ordinance making power is legislative power and an ordinance shall have the same force as an Act, the ordinance should be clothed with all the attributes of an Act of legislature carrying with it all its incidents, immunities and limitations, under the Constitution.
It cannot be treated as an executive action or an administrative decision."
12.
April from this, the petitioner has sought Writ of quo warranto from this Court.
It will be a futile exercise of power if the alleged irregularity in the appointment of the holder of an office can be cured by re-appointment.
Even of it is assumed that the relaxation in the requirement of experience as laid down under entry (P) of column 4 against Serial No. 1 of Appendix `B' to Rule 8 of the Rules was granted by the Government on March 5, 1990, after the initial appointment of Shri Sumit Kumar, respondent No. 4, he can be re-appointed even now and if he can be re-appointed, it will be a futile exercise to issue a writ of quo warranto.
In PL v. Ajit Nath Ray, Chief Justice of India, New Delhi and others, AIR 1975 Delhi 86, a Full Bench of the Delhi High Court while dealing with a writ petition wherein prayer for issuance of a writ of quo warranto challenging the appointment of Justice AN Ray as the Chief Justice of India was made, observed thus :-  " .........
I, therefore, conclude that on his appointment as Chief Justice of India, a Judge of the Supreme Court does not cease to be a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Therefore, even if Justice AN Ray is ousted from his office as Chief Justice of India by a writ of quo warranto, he as the senior-most puisne Judge of Supreme Court will be entitled to be appointed as the Chief Justice of India if the contention that the convention of seniority is a rule of law and is inherent in Article 124(2) of the Constitution to be correct.
I make it clear that what I have said is not to be taken to be the expression of an opinion either that there is such a contention or that it has such effect.
Therefore, not only being eligible for re-appointment as Chief Justice of India but being entitled to be so re-appointed, a writ of quo warranto ousting Justice AR Ray, from the office of the Chief Justice of India will be futile and such a writ cannot be issued."
Looking at the matter from any angle, we find no substance in this petition.
Before we part with this judgment, we would like to record that the Motion Bench had directed this writ petition to be set down for hearing with Civil Writ Petition No. 2520 of 1985.
That writ petition was dismissed on January 18, 1993, observing thus,  Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that this writ petition has become infructuous and be dismissed as such.
We order accordingly.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.