RS Mongia, J - The undisputed facts giving rise to the present writ petition are in a narrow compass, which are as follows :-  The petitioner is a domicile of Haryana and he graduated in Arts, i.e., BA from Panjab University, Chandigarh in the year 1991, while studying in Arya College, Ludhiana.
He sought admission in the M.BA course in the Department of Management, Kurukshetra University for the session 1992-93.
There were total 30 seats in the M.BA course, apart from three seats for foreign students.
According to the prospectus issued by the University, reservation of seats had been provided as under :-  "(a) for Haryana Candidates :-  50% seats in M.BA will be reserved for candidates who produce a certificate of Residence of Haryana according to the procedure prescribed in the appendix at page-27.
(b) Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Socially Backward Classes :-  (i) Scheduled Castes, 15%  (ii) Scheduled Tribes, 7-1/2%  (iii) Socially Backward Classes as defined by the State of Haryana (not for Economically Backward Classes), 10%.
Note :- 1.
The reservation will apply only to those candidates who are among the first 150 candidates called for interview on the basis of Written Test.
2.
The seats reserved for SC or ST candidates will be filled up inter se with SC or ST candidates only and in no case such seats will be thrown upon."
The admission to the M.BA course was to be based on a combined Entrance test and those candidates who qualified in written test and appeared for Group Discussion/Personal interview, were entitled to claim University weightages in their marks, which had also been provided in the prospectus.
We are concerned here with Clause (A) regarding the University weightages for purposes of merit, which is in the following terms :-  "(a) Candidates who have passed the qualifying examination from the Kurukshetra University or MD University, Rohtak...5 Marks."
2.
It may be observed here that the petitioner was the candidate for admission to the M.BA course against the seats reserved for the residents of Haryana, but he could not be admitted on the basis of his merit in the said reserved category, which led him to file the present writ petition.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner in the writ petition is that the above-quoted clause regarding University weightages for purposes of merit is ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as the same is wholly arbitrary and the class of students who might have passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University or MD University cannot be classified as a separate class for the purposes of granting them some weightage, as this classification has no nexus with any object that may be in the mind of the University.
During the arguments, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that for the purpose of this case, he may not go full length to challenge the abovesaid clause regarding weightages and would rather confine his challenge only to the extent the clause provides for giving 5 marks to the candidates who had obtained their basic qualification from MD University, Rohtak.
According to the learned counsel, if the students who were admitted on the basis of the weightage of 5 marks for having passed the qualifying examination from MD University, are excluded from admission by denying these marks, then the petitioner would get admission in the M.BA Course.
In support of his contention that such a clause is bad in law, the learned counsel relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Pushpa Sharma and another v. The Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar and others, 1990(7) S.L.R.
84 and a Single Bench judgment of this Court in Dr. Arapana Gill and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(1) SCT 598 (P&H) : 1990(6) S.L.R.
123.
The petitioners in Pushpa Sharma's case (supra) had sought admission to Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar in MSc.
courses in Home Science.
According to the instructions of the Haryana Agricultural University, weightage of 5 per cent marks for admission to the MSc.
course in Home Science was to be given to those students, who had passed the qualifying examination from its Institutions, i.e., Institutions of the Haryana Agricultural University.
The Division Bench in the said case after noticing the two judgments of the Supreme Court reported as State of Rajasthan v. Ashok Kumar Gupta, A.I.R. 1989 SC 177 and Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Thukral Anjala Deo Kumar, A.I.R. 1989, SC 1194, struck down the Rule/Instructions of the University, which provided weightage of 5% marks to the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from the Haryana Agricultural University.
4.
Later on, one of the Judges, who constituted the Division Bench in Pushpa Sharma's case (supra) (i.e. Amarjeet Chaudhary, J) held in Dr. Arapana Gill's case (supra) that weightage of 50 marks to the candidates of Punjabi University, Patiala and Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, for admission to Post-Graduate courses in Medical Colleges at Patiala/Amritsar, was ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that the Region-wise preference or reservation of certain seats for admission to a particular course is permissible.
Consequently, there was nothing illegal or arbitrary to give weightage of 5 marks to those candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from the Kurukshetra University or MD University, which are the only two Universities in the State of Haryana.
Further, according to the counsel, the State of Haryana forms one region, and, therefore, there was nothing wrong in providing weightage to the candidates who had passed the basic examination from MD University as well as Kurukshetra University.
It was further submitted that the syllabi for the basic qualifying examination of both Kurukshetra University as well as of the MD University is identical and keeping in view the representation from various quarters and also taking into consideration the fact that parents of one student may be transferred from one place to another within the State of Haryana, which may fall within the jurisdiction of the Kurukshetra University or the MD University, as the case may be, a high powered Committee decided to give weightage of 5 marks to those candidates, who had passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University or MD University.
In the written statement, the stand taken by the University for granting weightage of 5 marks to the candidates who qualify the basic examination from Kurukshetra University or MD University, may also be noticed :-  Now, taking the first prayer made by the petitioner, the answering-respondent submits that there is nothing arbitrary, illegal, discriminatory, against the principles of natural justice in giving such weightage.
Such weightage is given to students belonging to particular region.
This is a reciprocative step taken by the University, keeping in view such weightages being given by other Universities for example, Punjab University, Chandigarh, Panjabi University, Patiala, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Delhi University, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla, etc. All the above-mentioned Universities and many others are giving preferences/weightages to their students to protect the interest of their own students.
In the reciprocative fashion, the answering-respondent is also giving slight weightage of just five marks, which under no circumstances, can be held to be excessive.
If the prayer of the petitioner is granted, then only the students of this region will be put to hardship whereas other students of other universities will continue to enjoy such weightages/preferences/reservations.
This weightage is also based on intelligible differentia.
The prima concern is convenience of the students, convenience of their parents and convenience of his friends and relatives etc.
It would be convenient for a person who has been pursuing his studies under this particular institution/in this region for a considerable long period to go further and climb the ladder of high learning in the same region.
It is also based on economic region.
It is much more economical for a person to study in his area rather to study after going out of the region to which he/she belongs.
Persons living in hostels etc. certainly have a longer education bill for their parents when compared to day scholars.
There is another aspect of the matter.
In the social set-up like ours, it is very difficult to send girls to another place for learning and people prefer that the girls do the course at that particular place where they reside.
There are some of the reasons which weighed in the mind of the University to give some weightage, i.e., of only five marks to their own students who had done their qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University/MDUniversity."
6.
As far as the judgments of the Court in Pushpa Sharma's case and Dr. Arpana Gill's case (supra) are concerned, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that in none of these two authorities, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Jagdish Saran and others v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1980 SC 820, has been considered.
Before the Supreme Court in Dr. Jagdish Saran's case, the validity of reservation of 70 per cent seats in Post-graduate classes in favour of Delhi University graduates was assailed.
Such a reservation of seats which was termed by the Apex Court as Institutional Preference, was upheld.
The learned counsel for the respondents in particular referred to para 59 of the report.
According to the learned counsel, the judgment of this court, to which reference has been given above, run counter to the ratio of the Supreme Court judgment in Dr. Jagdish Saran's case (supra).
The learned counsel also cited Charanjit Kaur v. State of Haryana and others, 1990(1) P.L.R.
123, in support of his contention.
He referred to the following observations :-  "By relaxation of the regulation and giving weightage up to 5% marks, candidates are made eligible.
As per example given in Regulation VI, as reproduced above, 3% marks are given to raise it to 45% if the marks obtained are 42% and in the case of Scheduled Caste students relaxation can be upto 7- 10% if the seats reserve for them are not filled up with 5% relaxation.
The weightage of 5 marks is given if the candidate had passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University or MD University and 5 marks weightage is given to permanent employees of the University, their spouses, sons or daughters.
Allowing of weightage to students of Colleges affiliated to Kurukshetra University and MD University, as provided in Regulation V(A), is weightage to the present employees, their spouses, sons and daughters of Kurukshetra University only is discriminatory in nature and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
The learned counsel for the respondents further submitted that even if 5 marks of those candidates who have obtained the basic qualification from the MD University are ignored, even then the petitioner cannot get admission, inasmuch as there is one candidate above the petitioner in merit.
7.
In reply, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the State of Haryana as a whole cannot be considered as a Region and further he submitted that in fact there are three Universities in the State of Haryana and not two, i.e., Kurukshetra University, MD University and Haryana Agricultural University.
According, to the learned counsel, a candidate who had passed B.Sc.
from the Haryana Agricultural University, was also eligible for admission to the M.BA course in the Kurukshetra University.
He still further submitted that while giving Institutional Preference, a University may be justified to give certain weightage to the candidates who might have passed the qualifying examination from that University, but it cannot go beyond that and provide weightage to the candidates who might have passed a similar or identical examination from another University.
According to the counsel even if the State of Haryana as such was to be considered as a Region then certain seats for the domicile of Haryana could be reserved or they could be given some preference for admission.
The University had already reserved 50% of the seats in the M.BA course only for the domicile of Haryana.
According to him, once a reservation is made for the domicile of Haryana, no further weightage could have been provided for those candidates who might have passed the qualifying examination from a particular University in that region.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the view that this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The Division Bench of this Court in Pushpa Sharma's case (supra), with which I am bound, after noticing two Supreme Court judgments, held that the weightage of marks for admission to the students who might have passed the qualifying examination from its own University, was bad.
The challenge herein is only, as observed earlier, to the grant of 5 marks to those students who might have passed the qualifying examination from the MD University.
The argument of the learned counsel proceeded that if after noticing two judgments of the Supreme Court, the Division Bench came to the conclusion that there cannot be any weightage provided for the candidates who might have passed the qualifying examination from the same University in which the admission is to take place, it would follow fortiori as a necessary corollary that no weightage is permissible for the candidates who might have passed the qualifying examination from another University.
I am of the considered view that in Dr. Jagdish Saran's case (supra) the Apex Court permitted Institutional Preference whereby it upheld the reservation of certain percentage of seats for the candidates who had passed the basic qualifying examination from the Delhi University and were studying earlier in the Delhi University.
Even if it is to be conceded that some Region-wise reservation is permissible, then in the present case I find that 50% of the seats had been reserved for the domicile of Haryana only.
Dr. Jagdish Saran's case (supra) does not go to the extent of holding that the weightage is permissible even for those candidates who might have passed the qualifying examination from some other University than the one in which the candidates are seeking admission.
In Dr. Arspana Gill's case (supra), the learned Single Judge, who was specifically dealing with the point, struck down a similar weightage which was granted to those students who had passed the qualifying examination from the Punjabi University, Patiala or Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, for the purposes of admission to MD Courses at Patiala or Amritsar.
The moot point before the learned Single Judge in Charanjit Kaur's case (supra) was whether the rule proving weightage to spouses/children of the employees of the University only was discriminatory in nature and violative of the provisions of the Constitution of India.
This will be apparent from Para 4 of the Judgment, which starts as follows :-  "The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the rule providing for weightage to be given to spouses/children of the employees of the University is discriminatory and violative of the provisions of the Constitution."
No doubt, in the paragraph on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondents (which has already been reproduced above), it has been observed that allowing of weightage to students of Colleges affiliated to Kurukshetra University and MD University, as provided in Rule V(A) is valid on the ground of Institutional Preference.
However, as observed above, this was not the issue before the learned Single Judge, nor any arguments were addressed on such a point.
According to me, this judgment is of no help to the respondents.
Moreover, I find that the object and purpose for which this weightage is sought to be given, which has been spelled out in the written statement (reproduced above) have no nexus with the classification of those candidates who pass the qualifying examination from the MD University.
This is because of the fact that to achieve the objects mentioned in the written statement, 50% seats have already been reserved for the domicile of Haryana.
That being so, there does not seem to be any justification, simply on the ground that the courses and the syllabi of both the Universities is the same to give weightage of 5 marks to the candidates who have passed the qualifying examination from the MD University.
9.
The whole case can be looked from another angle also.
The admission to the M.BA course is not based on the basic qualifying examination, but is based on a common Entrance test/viva voce etc. Once, all the candidates from different Universities are subjected to a common test, then to my mind, giving weightage of 5 marks would not be justified as one of the main purposes of granting weightage is to rationalise the marks of the candidates of the various Universities, as marking system etc. may be different in different Universities/Institutions.
10.
As a matter of abundant caution and for the sake of clarification it may be observed here that nothing said above may be taken to mean that a particulate University cannot give weightage for purposes of admission to those students, who might have passed the qualifying examination from the same University.
In this case, I am not opining one way or the other.
11.
For the forging reasons, I allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to calculate the merit of the petitioner vis-a-vis other candidates who might have been admitted in the M.BA course against the reserved seats for the Haryana domicile by excluding the marks of weightage, which might have passed the qualifying examination from the MD University.
If any of such candidate(s) by excluding weightage of 5 marks given on account of having passed the qualifying examination from the MD University, happens to be lower in merit than the petitioner, then such seat or seats would be offered to the candidates including the petitioner strictly on the basis of merit, even if additional seat/(s) is/are to be created.
The admission of such candidates who may happen to be lower in merit than the petitioner, would not be disturbed, as they have undergone sufficient course and were admitted at the time when the clause of weightage had not been interpreted by this Court.
Let these directions be carried out within a fortnight from the receipt of the copy of the judgment.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.