GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition No. 130 of 1980 and Civil Writ Petition No. 3511 of 1986.
Challenge has been made to the office order dated September 18, 1975 issued by the Chief Engineer, Haryana, P.W.D Public Health Branch, Chandigarh, vide which respondents No. 3 to 5, namely, Gurcharan Dass, Smt. Rai Kumari and Jai Paul, were made senior to Sudesh Kumar Verma and Roshan Lal Bhandari (petitioners in CWP No. 130 of 1980) and office order No. 9608-PH/EIII, dated June 26, 1981, issued by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch, Chandigarh confirming the petitioner and the private respondents (in C.W.P.
No. 3511 of 1985) as assistants.
2.
Reference to relevant facts has been made from the pleadings in C.W.P.
No. 130 of 1980 except where otherwise necessitated.
Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 joined the service as clerks on June 17, 1969 and July 2, 1969, respectively.
They were provisionally promoted as officiating assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400 for a period of six months vide office order No. 1986PH/EI, dated January 19, 1972.
Respondents No. 3 to 5, namely, Gurcharan Dass, Smt. Raj Kumari and Jai Paul, joined service as clerks on June 18, 1969, November 23, 1969 and November 26, 1969, respectively.
They were promoted as assistants on February 28, 1973, February 28, 1973 and August 1, 1973, respectively.
In the seniority list, they were placed below the petitioners.
The seniority was revised, vide order dated September 18, 1975 issued by the Chief Engineer, Haryana, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch, Chandigarh and the same was conveyed to them, vide Endst.
No. 13218-30-PH/EIII, dated September 22, 1975.
Respondents No. 3 to 5 were shown senior to the petitioners in the seniority list.
The inter se seniority of the petitioners and respondents No. 3 to 5 is stated to have been disturbed without hearing the petitioners.
3.
Written statement has been field on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 Shri S.L.
Gulati, Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch.
Chandigarh.
It is averred therein that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 joined as clerks in the head office on June 18, 1969, November 29, 1969 and April 9, 1970 respectively, whereas the petitioners joined as such in the field offices on June 17, 1969 and July 2, 1969, respectively.
The petitioners were transferred to the head office cadre at their own requests, vide Order No 5762/E dated 6/9th April, 1970.
Petitioner No. 1 in his application dated April 8, 1970 submitted that he be transferred from the field office to the head officer and that he would not claim any seniority over and above the clerks working in the head office.
The clerical cadre in the head office and that of the field offices are separate and these are governed by separate rules.
The petitioners were borne on the clerical cadre of field offices and were not eligible for transfer to the head office cadre and their transfer was ordered with a specific condition reading thus :-  "Sarvshri Roshan Lal Bhandari and Sudesh Kumar Verma clerks transferred to head office cadre.
Their seniority in head office will be reckoned from the date they join the head office.
They should only join heal office if it is acceptable to them."
Accepting the condition in the office order transferring them from field offices to the head office, the petitioners joined the head office cadre as clerks on April 11, 1970 and April 1, 1970 respectively.
They were shown at serial No. 12 and 13 respectively on the tentative gradation list of clerical establishment of head office as it stood on January, 1 1975, circulated, vide office U.0.
No. 11061-66-PH/EIII, dated August 13, 1975.
Representations were filed by the affected parties (including respondents 3 to 5) against the tentative gradation list of clerical establishment of head office.
The representations filed by respondents No. 3 to 5 were accepted in view of the fact that the clerical cadre at the head office and that of the filed offices are separate.
The services rendered by the petitioners in the field offices could not be counted towards seniority amongst the clerks working in the head office.
Respondents No. 3 to 5 being senior to the petitioners as clerks in the head office cadre were made senior as assistants also.
It is further stated that in the year 1972 there was acute shortage of assistants in the head office and it became essential to promote some clerks as assistants to cope with the office work.
It was decided to promote provisionally as assistants those clerks who had four years or more experience to their credit for a period of six months.
Respondents No. 3 to 5 were not promoted as assistants at that time because they did not have four years' experience on the post of clerk.
The petitioners though junior to respondents No. 3 to 5 in the head office cadre as clerks, had more than four years' experience on the post of clerk, were promoted to the posts of assistant, vide order dated January 19, 1972.
Respondents No. 3 to 5 on completion of four years' service as clerk, were promoted as assistants in the year 1973.
As the promotion of the petitioners as assistants was on provisional basis, they could not claim themselves as senior to respondents No. 3 to 5.
Respondents No. 3 to 5, on successful completion of their probation period, were confirmed as assistants with effect from November 5, 1980.
4.
Learned counsel for the contesting respondents submitted that the impugned office order was passed on September 18, 1975 and the same was challenged in this court through the writ petition filed on January 15, 1980, after a lapse of five years.
The petitioners did not approach this court expeditiously and it would be sound and wise exercise of discretion by this court if it refused to exercise it extraordinary jurisdiction under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
In support of his submission, he relied upon a judgment of the apex court rendered in PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 2271, where it was held thus :-  "A person aggrieved by an order of promoting a junior over his head should approach the court at least within six months or at the most a year of such promotion.
It is not that there is any period of limitation for the courts to exercise their powers under Article 226 nor is it that there can never be a case where the courts cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length of time.
But it would be a sound and wise exercise of discretion for the courts to refuse to exercise their extraordinary powers under Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief and who stand by and allow things to happen and then approach the Court to put forward stale claims and try to unsettle settled matters.
The petitioner's petition should, therefore, have been dismissed in limine.
Entertaining such petitions is a waste of time of the court.
It clogs the work of the court and impedes the work of the court in considering legitimate grievances as also its normal work.
We consider that the High Court was right in dismissing the appellant's petition as well as the appeal."
The submission has merit.
The petition observes to be dismissed on the ground of laches and delay.
However, I have opined on merits also.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the inter se seniority of the petitioners and the private respondents has been altered without giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
In support of this submission, he relied upon in SK Ghosh and another v. Union of India and others, 1968 SLR 741; Shri Kewal Kumar Luthra v. General Engineer (Techolnolgy), New Delhi and others, 1971(1) SLR 727; Virdendra Chawla v. The Chandigarh Administration and another, 1984(1) SLR 452 and Dwarka Nath Sharma v. Union of India and others, 1989(4) SLR 234.
6.
In SK Ghosh case (supra), the inter se seniority of the writ petitioners and the private respondents was fixed on January 30, 1951 in accordance with the rules governing their conditions of service.
The seniority was changed by government's order dated June 5, 1965.
The service rules pursuant to which the inter se seniority was fixed on January 30, 1957 were not altered or modified but the seniority was disturbed under Government's order dated June 5, 1965.
As a result of the revision of seniority in the junior time scale of Indian Postal Service Class I, the private respondents were shown as senior to the writ petitioners.
It was in this court that the apex court observed thus :-  "It is clear that in these circumstances, even if there was justification for revising the seniority inter se of the petitioners and respondents 3 to 7 in time scale of Class I Service, that revision of seniority could not in any way affect their order of seniority in the grade of Directors to which they were promoted on the basis of selection in accordance with the rules.
It is, therefore, clear that even if it be held that the order of the government dated 5th June, 1965 revising the seniority of these officers in the junior time scale was valid, the order dated 17th January, 1966 revising the seniority in the grade of Directors of Postal Services was not dependent on the inter se seniority in the junior time scale and any alteration in the seniority in the latter could not form the basis for revising the seniority in the former grade.
No other justification for the revision of the seniority in the grade of Directors of Postal Services was put forward on behalf of any of the respondents.
It is, thus, clear that the revision of seniority in the grade of Directors of Postal Services by the order dated 17th January, 1966 was not based on any rule or appropriate principle applicable to determination of seniority in that grade and must, therefore, be held to be totally arbitrary.
Such an arbitrary order, which affects the civil right of the petitioners in respect of future promotion must, therefore, be struck down as violating Article 16 of the Constitution."
In Kewal Kumar Luthra's case (supra), the question of interpretation of Rule 17 of the Engineering Supervisors (Recruitment and Training) Rules, 1966 arose for consideration before the Delhi High Court.
Eligibility for appearing in the competitive examination prescribed in Appendix `G' to these rules was to be considered in terms of rule 17 and this was the only question for adjudication before the learned Judge.
7.
In Virendra Chawla's case (supra), reversion of the writ petitioner from the post of Workshop Superintendent to that of Assistant Lecturer in the Government College of Arts and Crafts, Chandigarh was challenged.
The reversion was declared by a Division Bench of this Court invalid since it was made without affording an opportunity of hearing to the writ petitioners.
It was in this content that the Bench observed that the reversion without resorting to the principles of natural justice was invalid.
8.
In Dwarka Nath Sharma's case (supra), the apex court observed that the cause of action to challenge the seniority list arises from the date of rejection of the representation against the seniority list.
9.
The aforesaid authorities have no bearing to the facts of the instant case.
The State Government's positive stand is that separate seniority is maintained of the clerks working in the head office and in the field offices and they are governed by separate rules.
The petitioners were transferred to the head office from the field offices on their request on compassionate ground on a specific condition that they would not claim seniority over the clerks working in the head office.
If the inter se seniority of the petitioners and the private respondents has been fixed in the light of these proved facts, no fault can be found with it.
10.
The second submission of the learned counsel is that the petitioners were promoted as assistants earlier to the private respondents, they were entitled to be placed higher in the seniority list of assistants.
This contention also arises for determination in Civil Writ Petition No. 3511 of 1986.
In this petition, it was submitted that the petitioners were promoted as assistants prior to the private respondents and as such their ad hoc service as assistants ought to be counted towards inter se seniority as assistants.
This submission is also devoid of merit.
Admittedly, the service conditions of the petitioners and private respondents are governed by the Punjab Secretariat Service Buildings & Roads Branch (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1943 (for short, the rules) clause (e) of rule 2 says the "Service" means the Punjab Secretariat Service, Public Works Department, Buildings and Roads Branch.
Designation of the members of the service in various grade is mentioned in Appendix `B' and these are superintendent, stenographers, assistant, cashier, senior clerk, junior clerk and restorer.
Persons holding these posts are members of the service.
Rule 6 relates to method of appointment to the service.
Rule 9 relates to the seniority of member of the Service and the same has to be determined in the manner provided therein.
Rule 9 reads thus :  "9.
SENIORITY - The seniority of the members of the service shall be determined as follows :-  (i) Members of the service holding posts in the higher scale of pay shall be senior to those holding posts in the lower scale of pay.
(ii) In the case of members of the service holding posts in the same scale of pay, seniority shall be determined by the date of confirmation in the scale concerned :  Provided that if two or more members are confirmed in the same grade on the same date.
(a) members appointed by selection or promotion in the services shall be senior to all members appointed otherwise;  (b) members appointed by transfer from other department of government shall be senior to members appointed by direct appointment;  (c) in the case of members who are appointed by selection in the service or who are appointed by transfer from other departments of government, seniority shall be determined according to pay preference be given to a member drawing a higher rate of pay and if the pay drawing is the same, seniority shall be determined according to length of service preference begin given to a member having the longer service, and if both the pay drawn and the length of service are the same, the elder member shall be senior to a younger member;  (d) in the case of members who are recruited by direct appointment, the elder member shall be senior to a younger member :  Provided further that if any member is reverted to his former post and is subsequently reappointed to the post from which he reverted, his seniority shall be determined by the appointing authority."
Sub-rule (ii) of rule 9 applies to the facts of the instant case.
The seniority of the members of the service holding posts in the same scale of pay had to be determined by the date of confirmation in the scale concerned, provided that they are confirmed in the same grade on the same date.
The petitioners and the private respondents were confirmed as assistants on the same date vide office order No. 9608-PH/EIII, dated June 26, 1981, issued by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch, Chandigarh.
Their inter se seniority as assistants was fixed in the light of sub-rule (ii) of rule 9 of the rules.
The Government instructions, if any, running counter to the rules for determining the inter se seniority cannot be pressed into service in order to challenge the inter se seniority.
No fault can be found with the fixation of inter se seniority of assistants.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in these petitions and the same are dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 500/- in each petition.
Petition dismissed.