NC Jain, J - This appeal has been filed against the judgment and decree dated 2-11-1987 passed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala decreeing the suit of the plaintiff-respondent.
The facts giving rise to the filing of the suit are that the plaintiff was recruited as Head Constable in April, 1948, in the erstwhile State of Patiala and on the formation of Pepsu State, he was absorbed therein.
He was brought on the list `D' on 26-5-1954 and he was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector with effect from 161954.
On merger of the Pepsu with Punjab State, he was reverted to the rank of Head Constable on 22-8-1957 by the Superintendent of Police, Bhatinda.
The plaintiff challenged his reversion by way of filing a civil suit and the decision of the civil suit went in his favour right upto the High Court, as consequence of which his reversion was cancelled in the year 1964.
The necessary implementation was done in the year 1966.
It is further the case of the plaintiff that on his representation, the following orders were passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ferozepur Range, Ferozepur Cantonment, on 17-9-1974 :-  "In view of the Court's Judgment the reversion of ASI Parshotam Dass No. 74/PLT w.e.f.
22-8-1957 FN is set aside and he shall be deemed to be holding the rank of offg.
ASI continuously since 1-6-1954."
According to the plaintiff his name for promotion was not considered at all from the year 1954 to 1963.
Many persons who were junior to the plaintiff were sent for training in promotion courses and promoted to that rank of Inspector and D.S.Ps.
several instances were given in the plaint.
The promotion of juniors without considering the claim of the plaintiff was challenged as illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void.
Under the aforementioned circumstances, while seeking declaration for promotion, the plaintiff claimed that a decree to the effect that he be considered as promoted above his juniors with all rights, benefits and privileges attached to the posts which have already accrued to him and which are likely to accrue in future, be passed.
2.
The defendants while disputing the claim of the plaintiff asserted that the plaintiff passed the intermediate school course in the year 1964-65 and upper school course in 1975 and his name was brought on promotion list `E' with effect from 1.10.1975.
The passing of all the courses according to the defendants was necessary before the plaintiff could be promoted as Sub Inspector.
According to the case of the defendants, all the persons junior to the plaintiff had passed the promotion courses earlier to him.
The promotion courses were governed by the provisions in the Punjab Police Rules and Instructions issued by the Inspector General of Police, Punjab.
On the pleas of the parties, the trial Court struck the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD  3.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD  5.
Whether this Courts has got no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD  6.
Relief.
under issue No. 4 and 5 were recorded in his favour.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
3.
The plaintiff went in appeal before the First Appellant Court, which has been allowed.
It has been held by the 1st Appellant Court that Upper School Course was introduced w.e.f.
March, 1972, whereas the right of the plaintiff for promotion as Sub Inspector accrued before the aforesaid date and therefore the plaintiff was not to be ignored for promotion.
In other words, it was held that since there was no Upper School Course, when the plaintiff became eligible for promotion under the old rules, he was not to undergo Upper School Course.
The plaintiff was held by the Appellant Court entitled to promotion as Sub Inspector and other higher ranks from time to time in accordance with seniority-cum-merit.
It was further observed by the 1st Appellant Court that the claim of the plaintiff for promotion was ignored on wrong premises.
While setting aside the findings of the trial Court on merits, the 1st Appellant Court did not touch the finding of the trial Court on the point of limitation.
4.
At the very outset, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the Appellant Court has committed a legal error in not recording any finding on the point of limitation.
It is true that the 1st Appellant Court has not reversed the findings of the trial Court on the point of limitation.
In view thereof I have heard counsel for the parties on the point of limitation.
Before recording the finding on Issue No. 3 which relates to limitation, it is necessary to keep in mind some of the facts which have remained in dispute before this Court.
5.
It has not been dispute before me that the plaintiff joined as Head Constable in the Patiala State forming part of Pepsu in April, 1948 and he was brought on `D' list on 2651954.
He, infact, was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
161954.
On merger of Pepsu with Punjab State he was reverted to the rank of Head Constable on 22.8.1957 giving rise to the filing of a suit, which was decided in his favour right upto the High Court.
While implementing the decree passed in the previous suit, the plaintiff's reversion was cancelled in the year 1964.
The Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Ferozepur Range on 17.9.1974 set aside the reversion of the plaintiff and declared that he was deemed to be holding the rank of Officiating Assistant Sub Inspector continuously since 161954.
In view of the aforementioned factual position regarding the date of joining of the plaintiff and the fact that the plaintiff was entitled to be promoted and was infact promoted as his reversion order having been found to be not legal, the ratio of law laid down in Kishori Lal, ASI v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab, 1981(1) SLR 650 applies to the facts of the instant case.
It was held in Kishori Lal's case (supra) that under the old rules for promotion, it was not necessary for a police official to pass Upper School Course and he is entitled to be promoted without passing the examination.
The plaintiff was promoted under the old rules as ASI before he was ordered to be reverted.
In view thereof no fault can be found with the findings of the Appellant Court in the present appeal.
6.
This brings me to the question whether the suit of the plaintiff was barred by time or not ?
There is no doubt that the Appellate Court should have decided the question of limitation, but this having not been done.
I am inclined to decide the question of limitation.
7.
After hearing counsel for the parties I am of the view that the suit of the plaintiff is within time.
In pursuance of the judgment and decree passed in the previous suit, no order considering the claim of the plaintiff to the higher ranks above the rank of ASI was passed by the concerned authorities, but what was done by the concerned authorities was only this much that the order of reversion of the plaintiff was set-aside in the year 1974.
At that the time plaintiff's case for promotion to the high er ranks, as was ordered, by the Civil Court in the previous suit should have been passed.
Had an order been passed, the plaintiff was obliged to challenge the same within a period of three years.
Since no order had been passed, the plaintiff was under no legal obligation to bring the suit and he could bring the suit when he was promoted to the rank of only an Inspector in the year 1982.
This fact has not been disputed before me that the plaintiff was promoted as Inspector in the year 1982.
The question of limitation can be examined from another angle as well.
It has been averred by the plaintiff in Paragraph 8 of the plaint that plaintiff's name for promotion course as well as for further promotion was not considered at all from 1954 to 1963 and that many persons junior to him were sent for training in promotion courses without any seniority and promoted to the rank of Inspectors and D.S.Ps.
The plaintiff gave the names of as many as 14 persons.
This paragraph was, of course, denied in the written statement, but the factual aspect of the averments made in Paragraph 8 of the plaint to the extent of date of recruitment and promotion of 14 persons and their date of joining etc. has not been denied.
Once the persons junior to the plaintiff were promoted and no order was passed considering the claim of the plaintiff in the year 1974 or even thereafter, the plaintiff was not obliged to file a suit.
In view of what has been observed above, I hereby hold that the suit is within limitation.
The plaintiff has retired from services and he be considered for promotion on the basis of the seniority-cum-merit from the date his juniors were promoted.
If the plaintiff is found to be fit for promotion, he be given the financial benefits, which he would have been entitled to, but for the fact that his promotion to any particular post was not made.
For the reasons recorded above, I dismiss the appeal.
No costs.