NK kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, whereby the appeal filed against the judgment and decree of the Sub Judge 2nd Class, Chandigarh, dated 851984 was dismissed.
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to be promoted to the post of S.D.O.
against one of the posts reserved for members of the scheduled castes and backward classes in accordance with the instructions issued by the government vide their letters No. 1346-SWI-74/11491 dated 2061974 and 3039-SWI-1 dated 6121974 against the vacant post of S.D.Os.
filled on and after 8.7.80. in the roster and against the vacant posts of S.D.Os.
proposal to fill up which by promotion is under consideration and further sought relief of permanent injunction restraining the defendants from showing disregard to the government instructions and also directing them to prepare the roster for promotion and in accordance with the policy decision of the government.
3.
The defendants put in appearance and filed written statement.
The defendants contested the claim of the plaintiff primarily on the ground that he has since been promoted as an officiating S.D.O.
on 8111982 and so the suit has become infraction.
Besides, it was contended by the defendants that the plaintiff was not recruited against the reserve vacancy at the time of his initial entry into government service and so is not entitled to promotion against the reserve point.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the suit has become infructuous ?
2.
Whether this court lacks jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPD.
Under issue No. 1, the trial Court after observation that the plaintiff has been promoted as officiating S.D.O.
vider order dated 8111982 came to the conclusion that since promotion sought is form 871980 and not from 8111982 thus this way the suit is maintainable.
However, on merits, the trial Court under issue No.1 reached to the conclusion that the plaintiff has got no right to be promoted from 871980 as alleged.
Issue No. 2 was not pressed by the defendants and so the same was decided against the defendants.
In view of the decision of the Court under issue No. 1, issue No. 3 was decided against the plaintiff.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 8-5-1984.
5.
The appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as law but did not find merit in any of the contentions raised by the counsel for the appellant and so dismissed the appeal.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the judgment and decree of the Courts below terming these to be wholly illegal.
According to the counsel, both the Courts have erred in law in not properly perusing the government instructions contained in letter dated April 2, 1981 and even otherwise has discriminated the plaintiff vis-a-vis other employees who too joined service when their castes had not been notified as backward classes by the government.
In support of his contention, the counsel relied upon the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 3931 of 1985 decided on August 4, 1986.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the defendant has urged that both the Courts on the basis of evidence have held against the plaintiff and in view of the matter no question of law much less a substantial question of law arise in the present case; which can be interfered by this Court in second appeal.
No doubt, this has to be kept in view while examining the decisions of the Courts below.
All the same, as held by the Apex Court in Jagdish Singh v. Nath Singh, AIR 1992 SC 1604, High Court is not debarred from reapreciating evidence in second appeal if it is of the view that findings of fact recorded by Courts below are vitiated by non-consideration of relevant evidence or by an essentially erroneous approach to the matter.
7.
The plaintiff was appointed as a Junior Engineer on 13101959.
He belongs to Chhimba caste.
At the time when plaintiff joined government service Chimba caste was not included amongst the notified backward class/community in Punjab.
It is only after a gap of about two months ie on 23121959 that the punjab Government vide its notification No. 9159-4WC/11/59/38353 declared Chimba caste as backward class in Punjab.
This fact was entered in the service book of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff passed the department revenue examination in May, 1979 and the department professional examination in November, 1979 the prerequisite for promotion to the post of S.D.O.
8.
Admittedly, the government vide letter Exhibit P-3 dated 451974 made reservation of 16% of the posts to be filled in by promotion to or within class I and class II State service for members of the scheduled castes and backward classes (14% for scheduled castes and 2% for members of the backward classes).
Sub-sequently, vide circular dated 2061974, Exhibit P-4, and circular dated 641976, Exhibit P-7, the government decided that in case the scheduled castes candidates are not available to fill up the vacancy reserved for them, in that event the vacancy so accruing be offered to a candidate belonging to the backward class.
It is this grievance of the plaintiff that despite clear instructions of the government the same are not being followed in the case of the plaintiff.
Both the Courts below instead of closely examining the circular relied mainly on the letter issued by the government of Punjab on 241981, the relevant portion of which is hereunder reproduced :-  "I am directed to address you on the subject noted above and to say that it was decided by Government vide circular letter No. 4651-SWI-74/17691, dated the 4th September, 1974, that there should be no income limit for employees belonging to the Backward Classes in the cases of the availing by them the concession of reservation in promotion.
After careful consideration, the Government have decided that in future this benefit of reservation for Backward Classes will be made available only to those persons who at the time of their initial entry into service were eligible for reserve point i.e. they were fulfilling the income limit.
In other words, the reservation in promotion will be made available only to those Backward Classes employees, who were either recruited against a reserve vacancy or whose family income was within the prescribed limit at the time of their initial entry into service so as to make them eligible for the reserve point."
9.
According to the observation of the Additional District Judge, this benefit of the reserved post can be claimed by only those candidates who were recruited against the reserve vacancy or whose family income was within the prescribed limit at the time of their initial entry in service so as to make them eligible for the reserve vacancy.
Accordingly, the Additional District Judge came to the conclusion that the plaintiff could be promoted to the post of S.D.O.
out of turn only on proof that income of his family was within the prescribed limit at the time of initial entry and since the evidence with regard to the same was not worthy of credence, he had no right to be promoted on the basis of letter dated April 2, 1981.
A bare perusal of this letter clearly reveals that the learned Additional District Judge has erred in construing the real import of this letter.
This letter is perse prospective as it clearly stipulate that "in future this benefit of reservation for Backward Classes will be made available only to those persons...." In the present case, the plaintiff had become entitled to the promotion on the basis of earlier letter dated 451974 whereby 14% posts were reserved for members of the schedule castes and 2% for the members of the backward classes.
There is no denying the fact that from 451974 till April 2, 1981, instructions Exhibit P-3 were in operation and the persons were promoted on the reserve points accordingly.
In somewhat similar circumstances, one Resham Singh challenged the promotion of Sarv Sh. Gurnam Singh and Pishora Singh by means of writ petition No. 3931 of 1985 on the ground that in view of instructions issued by the government of Punjab on 241981 (matter in dispute in the present case also) the benefit of reservation for backward classes was to be made available in future only to those persons who at the time of their initial entry into service were eligible for reserve point i.e. they were fulfilling the income limit.
In the writ petition too, respondent Nos. 4 and 5, namely, Gurnam Singh and Pishora singh, too joined the service and their castes were subsequently notified as backward class.
Since respondents were promoted against the reserve points, the same was challenged by Resham Singh.
The reply filed by the Deputy Secretary, Irrigation and Power, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 with regard to the point in controversy is as follows :-  "Para 3.
Admitted.
It is, however, submitted that respondents No. 4 and 5 belong to Lohar Community which had been declared as Backward Class vide Punjab Govt. letter dated 23121959.
Since both these respondents joined service before 23121959, the instructions dated 241981 (Annexure P/1) are not applicable in their case nor the employees already in service of Govt. and declared as backward class subsequently can be discriminated against in respect of any future concessions because of their earlier recruitment in service as the same will be ultra vires of the constitutional provision as contained in Article 14 & 16 of the Constitution.
The case of the respondents No. 4 and 5 is concerned under Government instructions as contained in the Government letter dated 521980 (Annexure P/10) according to which benefit of reservation is admissible to them from the date they submit their claim."
A bare perusal of this paragraph clearly reveals that the stand of the government that the instructions dated 241981 are not applicable in case of the employees who were already in service of the government whereas their castes had been declared as backward class subsequently.
The order of the Division Bench in CWP No. 3931 of 1985 (Resham Singh v. State of Punjab) dated August 4, 1986, reads as under :-  "The petitioner has called in question the legality of the order dated 18th July, 1985 copy Annexure P-8 to the petition, which has resulted in his reversion and also the legality of the order promoting respondents 4 and 5 to the posts of Sub Divisional Officers.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
In view of the averments made in the preliminary objects and the reply to para 3 of the petition on merits, we find no substance in this petition, and, consequently, dismiss the same in limine.
Sd/- Prem Chand Jain, Chief Justice.
Sd/- Sukhdev Singh kang, Judge  August 4, 1986."
Keeping in view the government instructions dated 451974, Exhibit P-3, the specific stand of the government in CWP No. 3931 of 1985 and the decision of the Division Bench of this Court dated August 4, 1986, the decision of the Courts below in respect of issue No. 1 is legally unsustainable and the same is accordingly reversed.
In view of the finding on issue No. 1, issues No. 3 consequently too is decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Accordingly, the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are hereby set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is decreed as prayed for.
Keeping in view the peculiar facts of the case, parties will, however, bear their own costs.