RS Mongia, J - Respondent, Shri Harbhagwan Arora, was working as a Salesman with the Carona Sahu Co Ltd, Bombay (in short CSC).
In the year 1980 he was posted as such in a retail shop of the CSC situated in Sheikhan Bazar, Jalandhar City.
He was temporarily transferred on 30th November, 1980 to a newly opened retail shop at Sadar Bazar, Jalandhar Cantt.
He worked in the said retail shop from 30th November, 1980 to 15th June, 1981 when he was sent back to his original place of posting.
Shri Harbhagwan Arora filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) before the Labour Court Jalandhar, inter alia, claiming that he was entitled to the salary of Manager for the abovesaid period as he had worked as acting Shop Manager/Incharge at the Sadar Bazar retail shop at the instance of the Management of the CSC whereas the Management had paid him the wages of a Salesman.
The difference of the wages of a Salesman and that of a Manager for the above said period comes to Rs. 715/-.
The Labour Court accepted the application of Shri Arora and vide award dated 14th September, 1987, held that he was entitled to receive the amount of Rs. 715/- from the Management.
Dissatisfied with the award of the Labour Court the management of the CSC filed the present writ petition.
2.
The points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner to assail the award are as follows :-  i) That respondent Harbhagwan Arora who was working as a Salesman with the CSC is not a workman as defined in Section 2(S) of the Act.
ii) There was no existing right with the respondent-Salesman, which could be enforced under section 33-C(2) of the Act, and  iii) On facts respondent was not entitled to claim the wages of a Manager of the Shop.
3.
Section 2(s) of the Act, at the relevant time, was in the following terms :-  "`Workman' means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, or retrenched in connection with or as a consequence of that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any such person.
(1) who, subject to the Army Act, 1950 (XLVI of 1950), or the Air Force Act, 1950 (XLV of 1950), or the Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (XXXIV of 1934); or  (ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prison; or  (iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  (iv) who is being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding five hundred rupees per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature;" It will be evident from the definition of "workman" that it means any person employed in an industry to do any skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, the duties of Salesman of the CSC primarily are to pay particular attention to sell the stock in hand, to push slow selling articles by sincere extra efforts, to prepare Cash Memos for shoes, sundries etc. sold, to receive cash from customers and then hand over to Manager, to deposit the sale proceeds in the Bank if so instructed by the Shop Manger/Incharge, to pack the articles sold and deliver them to customers along with cash Memos, to maintain separate records of the sales effected by him everyday filling up the daily mirror and to achieve the daily estimate of sales allotted to him, to look after the decoration and display in the shop and show-window and show-cases, to assist the Manager in daily routine, to hold charge of the shop in the absence of Manager on leave if so required, to be watchful and prevent pilferage etc. From the above, it would be seen that the duties performed by the Salesman involve manual work as also clerical work.
To my mind, the duties of a Salesman would strictly come within the definition of `workman' as given in Section 2(s) of the Act.
The Bombay High Court in Krishna Charan Pramod Nath Chakraborty v. Indian Textiles Co Ltd and another, 1986(2) F.L.R.
289 held that a Salesman is a workman under the Act.
This was so held on the basis of the duties where the respondent in that case as a Salesman used to attend to the customers, prepare cash-memos and demonstrate as to how to use the articles.
The scope of the expression "workman" is very wide and it is necessary to interpret the definition as not to wipe out the object of the Act.
Consequently, I repel the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner on point No. (i) and uphold the finding of the Labour Court that respondent Harbhagwan Arora was a workman under the Act.
4.
As far as point No. (ii) is concerned, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there was no existing right with the respondent, which could be enforced under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
He submitted that respondent was never promoted as a Manager or Shop Incharge.
He was merely asked to perform some duties, which were in fact to be performed by the shop Incharge/Manager and simply because the respondent had performed some duties of the Shop Incharge/Manager, he could not be held entitled to the wages of the Shop Incharge/Manager.
He further contended that according to the Standing Orders applicable to the respondent, if a salesman holds charge of the shop for a period of 11 days, he was only eligible for commission on the total turn over of the shop as the percentage applicable to the type of the shop.
In other words, he would be only entitled to higher commission than what he would draw as a Salesman.
In this regard, primary reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in PK Singh and others v. Presiding Officer and others, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 1618.
Before the Supreme Court.
the workman had been appointed as a `C' Grade Fitter, but actually he was doing the duties of a `B' Grade Fitter.
The workmen claimed under Section 33-C(2) of the Act that they should be classified as `B' Grade Fitters and be paid the wages of `B' Grade Fitters as they were performing the duties which were similar to `B' Grade Fitters.
The Supreme Court held that relief could not be claimed under Section 33C(2).
It observed that-merely by doing the same kind of work which is done by `B' Grade Fitters, the workman appointed as `C' Grade Fitters will not be entitled to claim the wages of a `B' Grade Fitter unless he is duly promoted after getting through the trade test.
Such a workman cannot complain that he is being paid the salary and allowances given to `B' grade Fitter since he does not possess an existing right to claim it.
5.
To buttress the argument, the learned counsel referred to the transfer-order of the respondent and contended that he was never promoted as a Shop Incharge/Manager and by the transfer order he was merely assigned some duties which were normally performed by the Manager/Shop Incharge.
The transfer order is in the following terms :-  "This is to confirm the instructions of District Manager Ambala that your services have been temporarily transferred from our Sheikhan Bazar, Jullundur retail shop to our Sadar Bazar Jullunder Cantt retail shop with effect from 31111980, and you have taken over charge of the said shop.
We assume that at the time of taking over charge of the shop you have checked stocks, cash, furniture fixtures etc. thoroughly as no complaints of any nature will be entertained at a later date.
From the date of taking over charge of the shop you will be responsible for stocks, cash, furniture, fixtures and other properties of the company lying the said shop.
You will continue to draw your present fixed salary and will be eligible for commission @ 60% on the total turnover of the shop for the actual period of your holding charge.
Please return the duplicate of this memo duly singed by you in token of having noted the above, for our record."
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondent is that by the transfer order, the respondent stood promoted temporarily to the of Shop Incharge/Manager and having performed the duties of a Shop Manager, he was entitled to pay of a Shop Manager under the doctrine of equal pay for equal work.
6.
After perusing the transfer order, I am of the view hat the same is not an order of promotion.
Temporarily in the absence of a Shop Manger, the respondent who was working as a Salesman was transferred from Sheikhan Bazar retail shop to Sadar Bazar retail shop at Jalandhar.
No element of promotion is involved.
There is no doubt that he was asked to perform some duties which normally would have been performed by a Shop Manager, but merely performing some duties of a Shop Manager, no right under Section 33-C(2) of the Act would come into existence as has been held by the Supreme Court in the above referred to judgment.
It is only that if officiating promotion is ordered and incumbent is asked to perform all the duties of the promoted rank that he may be entitled to claim wages of the higher post.
However, that is not the case here.
Consequently, in view of the dictum laid down by the Supreme Court in PK Singh's case (supra) and from the reading of the transfer or I am of the view that there was no existing right with the respondent to enforce under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The finding of the Labour Court on this aspect is reversed.
Point No. (iii)  7.
As regards point No. (iii), I may observe that doctrine equal pay for equal work would apply if a person is promoted even though on officiating basis to a particular rank and is asked perform the duties of the higher rank, If the person is asked merely to work or perform the duties as a stop-gap arrangement for a short while, he would not be entitled to claim the wages of the higher post.
The Labour Court relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Smt. P Grover v. State of Haryana and another, 1983(47) F.L.R.
320 to hold that the respondent was entitled to the pay of the Manager on the basis of equal pay for equal work.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the workman had been promoted to the post of District Education Officer, though on acting basis.
Under these circumstances, it was held that the petitioner in that case was entitled to the pay of the promoted rank.
The learned counsel for the respondent cited a single Bench Judgment of the Delhi High Court in The General Manager, Ajudhia Textile Mills and others v. The Presiding Officer Labour Court and another, 1990(2) S.L.R.
392 to support the contention that on a mere transfer if a person is asked to perform the duties of a higher rank, he is entitled to the pay of the higher-rank.
It is not clear from the judgment as to whether the transfer of the workman in that case was a temporary phase or he had been transferred permanently and was required to perform the duties of a higher rank.
With respect to the learned Judge, I cannot subscribe to the view that merely by performing the duties of a higher rant for a short while the incumbent would be entitled to claim emoluments of the higher rank.
For the forging reasons, while upholding the award of the Labour Court to the extent that respondent Harbhagwan Arora is a workman under the Act, the rest of the award is set aside.
The writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.
There will be no order as to costs.