RS Mongla, J - According to the allegations made in the petition, the petitioner had passed her JBT Course from Jammu & Kashmir Education Department in the year 1965.
However, according to the respondents, she had only passed a B.E.C.
training course from Jammu and Kashmir in the year 1965 which was a one year course.
She was appointed as a Primary Teacher on temporary basis by the Block Education Officer, Kaithal, on 1211967.
The appointment was purely ad hoc and temporary for a period of six months.
She was again given temporary appointment.
Such appointments were being given to those teachers who had not taken part in teachers' strike and their services had not been terminated on that account or had not put in resignation during the days of strike.
The Government had given directions on 2961973 that all temporary teachers who were appointed during the days of strike and had joined their duties by 9.3.1973 be reappointed and allowed to join duty after summer vacation.
In a way, it was an incentive to those teachers who had not gone on strike.
2.
The petitioner continued in temporary/ ad hoc service as a stipendary teacher with notional breaks and her case for regularisation of service w.e.f.
111979 was considered according to the Haryana Government instructions, but She was not regularised on the ground that she did not have the requisite qualifications for being regularised as a stipendary teacher.
According to the respondents, the qualification which the petitioner had were not recognised as she had only done one year course from Jammu and Kashmir Education Department.
Accordingly, her services were sought to be terminated vide order dated 10.4.1980 (Annexure P-5) which led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
This order reads as under :-  "In Joint Punjab JBT course was for two years from 1957.
This course is also of two years now a days.
So the Jammu and Kashmir Govt. course for JBT is not equal to Punjab's two years course and it cannot be recognised in the Punjab/Haryana Govt. Service book and original certificates are attached."
The motion Bench while admitting the writ petition had ordered the status quo regarding petitioner's service and by virtue of that order, the petitioner is continuing in service till date.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that while the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis the respondents knew what her qualifications were and that she did not conceal any fact from the respondents regarding her qualifications.
If on the basis of those qualifications the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis and was allowed to work for sufficiently long time, the respondents could not now turn round and say that she could not be regularised as she lacked the minimum qualifications for the post.
In support of his contention, he cited Bhagwati Prashad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371 as also a single Bench judgment of this Court in Mrs. Satwant Khera, Teachress Government Girls High School, Sohna & ors. v. The State of Haryana & ors, 1991(2) RSJ 66.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that in accordance with the Government instructions, only those persons could be regularised who had the requisite qualifications for the post and even long service on temporary basis would not entitle the petitioner to claim regularisation.
In support of his contention, he cited a judgment of Division Bench of this Court reported as Smt. Sudesh Vohra v. The State of Punjab and others, 1984(1) SLR 71.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In Bhagwati Parsad's case (supra), the Apex Court observed that a long experience on a post can even be equated with the basic qualifications of a person even though when he was appointed as he lacked those qualifications.
In para 6 of the judgment, it was observed as under :-  The main controversy centers round the question whether some petitioners are possessed of the requisite qualifications to hold the posts so as to entitle them to be confirmed in the respective posts held by them.
The indisputable facts are that the petitioners were appointed between the period 1983 and 1986 and ever since, they have been working and have gained sufficient experience in the actual discharge of duties attached to the posts held by them.
Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualifications prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
In our view, three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the respondent, in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
5.
A learned single Judge of this Court relying on the above case of the Supreme Court held in Mrs. Satwant Khera's case (supra) that if there was no misrepresentation or concealment of any fact regarding qualifications on the part of the petitioner at the time the temporary appointment was given and such a person is allowed to continue in service for a long time, it would be deemed as if the requisite qualifications stood relaxed.
I am in respectful agreement with the observations of the learned single Judge in Mrs. Satwant Khera's case (supra).
6.
The case can be visualised from an another angle also.
Here in this case, equity will also come to the rescue of the petitioner.
She having joined the Department at a time when teachers were going on strike and having been appointed with the qualifications which were made known to the respondents, it would be too much at this stage now to terminate the services or not to regularise her services on the ground that she lacked qualifications.
Even by virtue of the stay order of this Court, she has worked for more than 12 years from the date of the filing of the writ petition.
Now to say that the petitioner cannot be regularised as she lacked qualifications at the time of initial entry in the service would be wholly iniquitous.
7.
So far as the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is concerned, no doubt, a person normally would not have any right to hold the post if he does not possess the requisite qualifications but if with those qualifications, the appointing authority does give the appointment and allows the incumbent to continue for a sufficiently long time, then that person having acquired experience would not be held to be not qualified and not entitled to confirmation/regularisation.
This was so observed in Bhagwati Parsad's case (supra) by the Apex Court.
8.
I am of the view that in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court referred to above the observations made by the Division Bench of this Court in Smt. Sudesh Vohra's case (supra) would pale into insignificance as the law laid down by the Supreme Court has to be followed.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated 10.4.1980 (Annexure P-5) is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation taking her to be academically qualified for the post.
There will be no order as to costs.