SS Sodhi, J - The matter here arises from a reference under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, regarding the legality of the termination of the services of two workmen.
The main issue that emerges in controversy n concerns the identity of their employer.
While the workmen claimed that they were employees of the appellant M/s Printers House Ltd, the appellants on their part asserted that it was, in fact, the Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company who were their employers - an assertion which the Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company disputes.
How this matter is to be resolved, is the point that now arises for consideration in this appeal.
2.
To give the factual background the services of workman Reva Dhar were terminated by an order passed on May 21, 1985 while those of other workman Kanwar Pal on March 22, 1985.
Both these workmen were admittedly appointed by and had been serving under the appellants M/s Printers House Ltd  3.
The material on record suggests that the Board of Directors of the appellant-company split into two groups, which eventually led to the filing of a petition by the Directors of one group, in the High Court of Delhi.
This being Company Petition 90 of 1983.
During the pendency of this petition, a compromise appears to have been arrived at whereby a division of assets and liabilities of the company was made and a new company known as Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company Private Limited came into being.
An agreement to this effect was duly signed by the two groups and it now forms part of the judgment of the High Court of Delhi in this company petition.
In terms of this compromise, an option was given to the employees whether to continue in service with the appellant or to move over to the newly formed Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company with all benefits of past service.
It is the case of the appellants that the workmen exercised this option and chose to become the employees of the Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company and therefore, the present reference against the appellants was invalid and, at any rate, the workmen could not claim any relief from them as they had ceased to be their employees.
4.
The workmen on their part, as mentioned earlier, continue to assert that they are the employees of the appellant-company and not Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company.
This is also the stand of this newly formed company.
In this situation, it thus clearly becomes incumbent to know who actually were the employers of the workmen.
5.
Coming back to the reference, a reading of the award of the Labour Court (Annexure P.7) shows that notice was issued to the appellant-company and Shri MP Arora, the Factory Manager of Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company executed a Power of Attorney in favour of Shri BK Kohli on September 3, 1985, who thereafter filed a written statement in October, 1985.
Later, on September 3, 1986, the said Shri MP Arora executed another Power of Attorney on behalf of the Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company in favour of Shri Pardeep Sharma.
It was during the course of arguments that this Shri Pardeep Sharma stated that he did not represent the appellant-company and that he was there merely to watch the interests of M/s Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company.
The Labour Court thereafter proceeded to accept the reference, quashed the order of dismissal and directed the reinstatement of the workmen with continuity of service and full back wages.
6.
It was after the award had been made against it, that the appellant-company moved an application under Section 18(3) read with Section 11 of the Industrial Disputes Act seeking the setting aside of the award and the Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company being impleaded as a party to the reference.
By its order of May 25, 1989 (Annexure Rule 10), the Labour Court expressed the view, "there are some matters which require proper probe and just determination."
A conditional order vacating the award and impleading M/s Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company as party was passed.
The condition being the payment, by the appellants to the workmen, of half of their back wages for six months and 75% for remaining period; a condition which the appellant-company accepted and has complied with.
It was this order that came to be challenged in writ proceedings, where it was quashed by the judgment of the learned single Judge, now under appeal.
7.
Before proceeding further it deserves pointed mention that there is no material on record to show that in the reference service had been effected upon the appellants M/s Printers House Ltd or that it was at any stage ordered that it be proceeded against ex parte.
At any rate, once it had been stated by Shri Pardeep Sharma that he did not represent the appellant company, it was clearly incumbent upon the Court to have issued notice to the appellant-company.
These infirmities by themselves would render the award of the Labour Court unsustainable.
8.
Having regard, however, to the situation as it now exists, there can be no manner of doubt that there is indeed a triable issue between the parties, namely determination of the identity of the employer, of the workmen.
In order to do complete justice, therefore, it is incumbent that there be an adjudication on this matter.
In the reference unfortunately no mention was made with regard to this aspect of the controversy between the workmen and their employer.
9.
Faced with this situation and keeping in view the larger interests of justice, we hereby quash the impugned award of the Labour Court and direct that State Government to also refer to the Labour Court the question whether the workmen were the employees of M/s Printers House Ltd or M/s Indo Graphic Art Machinery Company Private Ltd. and the relief, if any, that the workmen would be entitled to from both or either of these companies.
The payments made to the workmen in pursuance of the impugned order of the Labour Court of May 25, 1989 (Annexure P10) shall be subject to the order that the Labour Court may make with regard to it upon adjudication of the reference to be made to it.
Considering the inordinate delay, that has already taken place in the claim of the workmen being adjudicated upon and finally decided, we direct the State Government to make the reference to the Labour Court within three months from the receipt of this order by the Secretary to Government in the Labour Department, Government of Haryana and we also direct the Labour Court, thereafter to make every endeavour to ensure that the final adjudication of it does not extend beyond six months from the date of the receipt of the reference by it.
10.
The judgment of the learned single Judge thus stands modified accordingly and this appeal is consequently accepted in this manner.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
11.
Let a copy of this judgment be sent to the Chief Secretary, Haryana, as also to the Secretary to Government, Labour Department, Government of Haryana.
Appeal allowed.