Ashok Bhan, J - In this writ petition, the petitioners have challenged the criteria laid down by the State of Haryana allocating 30% marks by way of viva voce for selection for the post of Assistant Rice Breeder (Plant Breeding)/Assistant Scientist (Plant Breeding) for the purpose of determining the merit and therefore, the action being arbitrary, unreasonable, discriminatory and offending the provisions Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In order to appreciate the controversy between the parties, the facts may shortly be stated as under :-  3.
On 3061990 (Vide Annexure P/17), applications were invited for one post of Assistant Rice Breeder (Plant Breeding).
The petitioners applied for the said post.
Interviews were fixed for 30101990 but the interviews were not held and instead on 9.11.1990, a corrigendum was issued vide which two posts of Assistant Scientists (Plant Breeding) were added.
Interviews were held on 31121990 in which the petitioners appeared.
The Selection Committee was allocated 15 marks out of 50 marks for viva-voce which came to 30% of the total marks.
This fact is indicative from the proforma given for awarding marks for viva-voce in respect of each candidate by the Selection Committee which reads as under :-  "Marks for interview in respect of each candidate may please be given separately by each Member of the Selection Committee in the following proforma......... (i) Name of the post------------  (ii) Date of Interview-------------  (iii) Criteria------------  Classification of post Maximum interview marks In Extempore lecture interview Total Professor & equivalent 15 20 35 Assoc.
Professor & equivalent 10 15 25 Asstt.
Professor & equivalent 6 9 15 (iv) Award : Sr.No.
Name of Candidate Interview marks awarded Signature of Member of Selection Committee."
Another proforma of marks sheet for Assistant Professor/equivalent, was also supplied which reads as under :-  Proforma Of Marks Sheet For Assistant Professor/Equivalent  Date of meeting Assessment of merit of candidate for Total Marks : 50 Criteria for awarding marks for Qualifications Experience 8 marks for Ist Division each in BSc.
MSc & PhD 5 Marks for 2nd Division each in BSc.
MSc & PhD One mark for every year's experience in teaching, Research or extension upto a maximum of 4 marks.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Sr.No.
Name of the candidate Academic Qualifications Any other Special Qualification/Distinction Experience Publication Performance in extempore Performance in interview Total Grading of Candidates Conduct/record performances/image during stay/service in HAU - 24 Marks 3 Marks 4 Marks 4 Marks 6 Marks 9 Marks - - 4.
Total marks for viva-voce test were 15, 6 marks were for extempore lecture and 9 marks for interview.
In other words, 12% for extempore lecture and 18% for viva-voce thus making the total to be 30%.
The petitioners were not selected although they were PhD in their respective subjects but instead one Satbir Singh Kundu respondent No. 3 who was possessing the qualification of MSc (Agriculture) only was selected to one of the posts.
He was appointed on 311991 who joined the post on the same day.
Being aggrieved against the said selection and fixation of criteria of 30% marks for viva-voce test which is based on the criteria of allocating 30% marks for viva-voce for selection to the post for determining the merit, the same has been challenged.
5.
Facts narrated above have not been challenged by the respondents in written statement.
In fact in para 14 of the written statement, the respondents have given the split-up of marks to be given by the selection committee to the petitioners & respodt.
No. 3 which are as under :-  Satbir Singh Res.
3 Dr. Jagdish Chander Pet.
1 Dr. Shyam Lal Petit.
2 BSc.
8 8 5 MSc 8 8 8 PhD - 8 8 Experience 2 25 25 Publication 2.5 1 3 Distinction 0 0 0 Performance in Extempore lecture 5 0 1 Performance in interview 8 15 15 335 290 290 6.
The splitting-up of the marks as reproduced above indicate that petitioners No. 1 and 2 got 275 and 265 marks respectively out of the total marks 35 reserved for assessing the merit on the basis of academic qualifications, for education, experience and publication whereas respondent No. 3 had obtained 205 marks out of 35 marks for academic qualifications.
In the viva-voce petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 got only 15 and 25 marks respectively out of 15 marks reserved for viva-voce test whereas respondent No. 3 was awarded 13 marks.
Adding the marks of interview to the total marks obtained for academic qualifications the total marks of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 comes to 29 each out of 50 and that the respondent No. 3 to 335.
Both petitioners No. 1 and 2 were Ph.Ds whereas respondent No. 3 had the qualifications of Master of the subject only.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners contended that had the total marks for interview been fixed at 15% then by any permutation and combination, respondent No. 3 could not have been selected over and above the petitioners; that respondent No. 3 has been selected only because there were as much as 30 marks reserved for viva-voce test which gave an element of arbitrariness to the selectors in the whole process of selection offending Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India; the contention is that fixation of 30% marks for viva-voce was excessive and introduced an element of arbitrariness as has been determined by the apex Court in a number of cases, which are as under :-  "Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777, Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 454 and Ajay Hasia's case, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 487."
7.
In Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra), selection through Public Service Commission for 61 posts of Haryana Civil Services (Executive) and other Allied Services was held.
Out of the total of 900 marks, 200 marks were allocated for via-voce.
Their Lordships after referring to Lila Dhar's case (supra) and Ajay Hasia's case (supra), conceded that the test of personal attributes is essential.
The apex Court observed that spread of marks for via-voce being enormous as compared to the spread of marks for the written examination, the viva-voce tended to become a determining factor in the selection process.
The Court held that in cases of recruitment for services, the percentage of marks allocated for viva voce by the Union Public Services Commission in the case of selection to the IAS and other Allied Services being 122% is fair and just in striking a proper balance between the written examination and the viva-voce.
It was further held that allocation of 333 per cent marks for viva-voce opens the doors wide for arbitrariness and in order to diminish, if not eliminate, the risk of arbitrariness, this percentage needed to be reduced.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents contended that there was no written test in the case in hand as was in the case of Ashok Kumar Yadav (supra).
I do not find any substance in this submission.
The point was examined by a Division Bench of this Court in Ramesh Chander & others v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 16167 of 1991 decided on 17.2.1992, in which this aspect of the matter that where no written test is held and only interview is held then a criteria of allocation of marks for educational qualifications experience etc. and then reserving of 30% marks for viva-voce including aptitude test and interview is adopted, was examined from its legal perspective.
After taking into consideration the cases of Miss Nishi Maghu v. State of J&K, 1980(4) SCC 95; A Peeriakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1971(2) SCC 430; R Chitralekha v. State of Mysore, 1964(6) SCR 368; Joginder Singh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1986 P&H 339; Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 647 (SC) : JT 1990(4) SC 704; Sri Ashok alias Somana Gowda v. State of Karnataka, Lila Dhar's case (supra), Ajay Hasia's case, (supra), Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra), Sardara Singh v. State of Punjab, JT 1991(4) SC 154 : 1991(3) SCT 486; Munindra Kumar v. Rajiv Govil, 1991(8) R.S.J.
560 : 1991(2) SCT 304 and Sunit Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1987(4) SLR 347, it was held as under :-  The case in hand is now to be examined in the right of the law laid down by the apex court.
Selection was made to the posts of school teachers and lecturers.
The posts were taken out of the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection board by a proper notification.
An attempt to select was made but did not materialise.
Subsequent selection then had to be made.
Expediency in the matter of selecting and appointing teachers cannot be denied.
Importance of consuming some time for this process is quite evident.
It appears that for this precise reason, written test was dropped.
Instead, 70 marks under different heads were allotted for academic qualifications, for bachelor's degree in education, for experience as teacher and for other extra-curricular activities.
Then, only 30 marks were reserved for interview.
Even here, a further bifurcation was made.
15 marks were reserved for special aptitude - presumably in the matter of teaching, and the remaining 15 marks were for personality test which include different factors as indicated in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra).
Thus, the selection was to be made on the basis of the marks obtained in the qualifying examination and in the interview.
It is, therefore, not a case where the only criteria for selection was a viva voce test.
The decision in Sardara Singh's case (supra), therefore, shall not be applicable to this case.
Instead, Mohinder Singh Garg's case (supra), as subsequently applied in the other two decisions in Munindra Kumar's case (supra) and in Sri Ashok alias Somana Gowda v. State of Karnataka, 1992(2) SCT 35 (SC) reported in Daily Supreme Views & Law Reporter 36, (C.A.
No. 4088 of 1991 decided on 11101991) may govern the present case.
We have noticed that in no uncertain terms the Supreme Court after reviewing the earlier decisions ruled that it would not be reasonable to reserve more than 15 per cent marks for viva voce test for the selection of candidates fresh from colleges and schools by direct recruitment when the rules provide for a composite process of selection, i.e. written examination and interview.
Even where the marks were allocated for groups discussion as a part of viva voce test, the Court stuck to allocating only 15 per cent marks for interview.
In the third case Sri Ashok alias Somanna Gowda's case (supra), which is quite close to the present case, allocation of 33% marks for viva voce test was held unjustified.
In that case selection was to be made on the basis of marks obtained in the qualifying examination and the marks secured in the interview in accordance with the existing rules.
100 marks were kept for qualifying examination and 50 marks for interview.
Applying the ratio of the decisions in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case and Mohinder Singh Garg's case the Court did not approve the allocation of one-third marks for interview.
We are aware of a decision of this Court in Des Raj v. State of Punjab, 1986(2) SLR 39, where, in the absence of a provision for the written test selection of candidates on the basis of their service record and allotment of 40 marks for viva voce test was upheld.
The Bench made reference to AK Yadav's case.
Somewhat similar view under like circumstances has also been expressed in Dhan Kaur v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) SLR 501 which in turn has relied upon another decision in C.W.P.
No. 4453 of 1988, decided on November 1, 1988.
The view taken is, in the absence of any criteria and the rules the selection committee is empowered to devised any mode of selection.
In that case selection was based exclusively on the basis of interview and no written test was held.
The Court observed that the question of apportioning marks for written test and viva voce test did not arise.
It is true, as observed in certain decisions that it may not be laid down as a hard and fast rule as to the apportionment of marks between written and viva voce test for selection for appointment to a public office yet the latest decision of the Supreme Court in Mohinder Sain Garg's and other cases, lay down that allocation of more than 15% marks for viva voce test is not a just and proper criteria.
In the light of these later decisions, explaining and applying the decision in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case and with which decisions we are bound, it may not be possible for us to hold that despite there being no written test in its true sense, but instead adopting allocation of marks for the educational qualifications, experience, etc. and then reserving 30% marks for interview including aptitude test is legally justified.
In the light of Mohinder Singh Garg's case, (supra), decisions of this Court taking a contrary view cannot be said to be laying down a good law.
Our conclusions on this issue are that allocation of 30% marks for viva-voce test which also includes test for aptitude vitiates the entire selection."
The Division Bench further held that the allocation of 30% marks for interview where there was no written test but instead marks were allocated for educational qualifications, experience etc. to be bad in law.
Being bound by the law laid down by the Supreme Court of India in the aforementioned cases, as interpreted by this Court in Ramesh Chander's case (supra), it is held that allocation of 30% marks by way of interview for the purpose of determining the merit is arbitrary and offending the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Had there been 15% marks only for the interview as perceived to be reasonable in the cases, referred to above, then respondent No. 3 who was MSc (Agriculture) and much less qualified than the petitioners, because the petitioners had done their PhD in their respective subjects, could not have been selected by securing marks through alleged manipulation in interview vis-a-vis the marks secured for academic qualifications, distinction/experience and publication etc. by the candidate.
Thus the impugned selection deserves to be struck down.
8.
Half hearted allegations of mala fide against respondent No. 3 who was stated to be son of Shri TC Kundu who was earlier the Dean of the College of Sports of the University and is presently posted as Chief Security Officer of the University; it is stated that Shri TC Kundu had been able to approach the members of the selection committee and, therefore, in disregard of the merit of the petitioners, respondent No. 3 had been appointed.
This question cannot be gone into because neither members of the selection committee nor Shri TC Kundu have been made party to this writ petition.
Otherwise also, there is no material on the record to show that Shri TC Kundu father of respondent No. 3 had approached any of the members of the selection committee for promoting the interest of respondent No 3.
9.
Counsel appearing for the petitioners then contended that the petitioners should be given appointment in place of respondent No. 3 whose selection has been struck down on the plea that they were better in merit so far as their academic qualifications are concerned in comparison to the selected candidate.
I find no substance in this submission as well.
The selection of candidates is the prerogative of selection committee and this Court cannot assume powers and function of the selection committee.
Moreover, the selection is being struck down because the criteria adopted by the respondents for allocating 30% marks for viva-voce test has been held to be bad in law and the merit of the petitioners was also assessed according to the same criteria.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot be given appointment in place of respondent No. 3.
10.
Counsel for the respondents contended that marks for interview were only 18% whereas 12% marks were for extempore lecture which is quite distinct and different from the interview.
I do not find any substance in this submission.
Dividing of viva-voce marks into two categories i.e. for extempore lecture and interview is not a all justified.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed, the impugned selection of respondent No. 3 is struck down with a further direction that the selection committee so appointed or if necessarily to be reconstituted shall proceed to conduct the interviews in the circumstances of this case by allocating not more than 15% marks for viva-voce while the remaining 85% marks to be distributed/allocated under the different heads for academic career and other heads.
There is no representation on behalf of the respondent No. 3.
No costs.
Petition allowed.