HS Bedi, J - As per averments in the writ petition, respondent No. 2 (hereinafter called the respondent) was engaged by the petitioner company as Labour Law Advisor on retainership basis at Rs. 125/- per month in the year 1967 to look after its interests before the Labour Court and Conciliation Authorities set up under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, (hereinafter called the Act).
On January 4, 1979 the respondent wrote a letter to the petitioner company requesting for an increase in his emoluments of Rs. 500/- per month and by way of justification it was stated as under :-  "You know that I appear before High Court Judges as well as Tribunals and therefore the charges paid to me are very less and a disgrace to both sides and then you know my intelligence that even I have assisted Sh. Palkhiwala in some matters of legal importance and even he reads me with interest and then the present pay is highly incommensurate with my laurels and legal wisdom.
Please, therefore, be obliged to consider my case cheerfully".
The petitioner-company, however, did not accede to the demand of the respondent and vide communication dated May 3, 1979 (Annexure P2 to the petition) he was informed that with effect from May 1, 1979, remuneration to him would be given on per case nd not on monthly basis.
The respondent, thereupon, moved an application (Copy Annexure P3 to the writ petition) before the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Act claiming certain amounts allegedly due to him.
Vide ex parte order (Annexure P4 to the writ petition), the Labour Court allowed the application and ordered the payment of a sum of Rs. 6,220/-.
The petition thereafter moved an application before the Labour Court for setting aside the ex parte award but while the matter was yet pending, approached this court by way of the present writ petition impugning the order Annexure P4.
At the time of motion hearing, stay of operation of the impugned order was granted which is an operation till today.
2.
The stand of the petitioner in the writ petition was that there was no relationship of master and servant between the petitioner and the respondent as he was a self-employed person rendering professional services to a number of organisations and, as such, did not fall in the category of a workman as defined in section 2(S) of the Act.
It was also averred that the payments being made to the respondent were in the nature of a retainership and not in the nature of salary.
In the written statement filed by the respondent, the averments made by the petitioner were denied and it was pleaded that the respondent was employed on a part-time basis for a remuneration of Rs. 125/- per month which necessitated his visit to the factory at Shahabad every Saturday afternoon for supervising the maintenance of Provident Fund Account Registers and other work relating to the Labour employed by the petition.
Reliance has been placed by the respondent on the finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court vide order Annexure P4.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties I find that the petition deserves to succeed.
It has been argued by Mr. RS Mittal, learned senior advocate, appearing for the petitioners that the respondent was employed on retainership basis as will be clear from the communication Annexure P1.
It has been urged that a reading of said letter, particularly the words quoted above, is indicative of the fact that the respondent was as Tribunals and had been assisting Mr. Palkhiwala in matters of legal importance.
Reliance has also been placed on letter Annexure P2 written by the petitioner to her respondent in which it is clearly stated that the payment with effect from May 1, 1979 would be made on per case and not on monthly basis.
On the strength of these arguments, it is urged that the element of control of the petitioner over the working of the respondent was lacking and the relationship between the parties depicted it to be a contract for service rather than a contract of service.
For the above proposition, reliance was placed on Birdhichand Sharma v. First Civil Judge, Nagpur 1961(2) LLJ 86, Lakshmipathi (Dr. TN) v. Standard Vacuum Oil Company Ltd, Madras, 1961(2) LLJ 767, Achutha Achar v. Sharda Jewellery Mart, 1968(1) LLJ 500 and Silver Jubilee Tailoring House v. Chief Inspector of Shops and Establishments, 1973 II LLJ 495.
In Birdhichand Sharma's case (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court of India that the prima facie test whether the relationship of master and servant or employer and employee existed between the parties was the existence of the right in the employer not merely to direct what work was to be done but also to control the manner in which it is to be done although the control visualised was incapable of being precisely defined on account of different situations prevailing in different organisations or industries.
In Standard Vacuum Oil Company's case (supra) the court found that a doctor employed on part-time basis on retainership was not an employee so as to create relationship of master and servant.
The matter was reiterated in Achutha Achar's case (supra).
The case law was re-examined by the Supreme Court in Silver Jubilee Tailoring House (supra) and the court found that the control over the working of the employee was not only an important factor but in many cases a decisive factor, in order to determine whether the relationship of master and servant existed.
Applying the ratio of the aforesaid judgments to the facts of the present case I am of the view that on the facts as admitted by the respondent as per Annexure P1 itself, it is clear that there was no element of relationship of employer and employee or master and servant between the contesting parties.
It bears repetition that the respondent himself conceded that he was appearing before High Court Judges and Tribunals and as such it was an implied admission that he was a practising Advocate.
An affidavit dated August 7, 1980, filed by the respondent to the effect that he was neither a registered Advocate nor a pleader is obviously inaccurate keeping in views other facts stated above as also the fact that in the caption to Annexure P1, the respondent has identified himself as a Government Pleader to the Chandigarh Administration.
It also appears to me that the respondent had been working on a fixed retainership of Rs. 125/- per mensem since 1967 until he mad the application Annexure P1 in January, 1979 and it is difficult for me to believe that had the employment of the respondent been on part-time basis he could have continued on the same emoluments for almost 12 years.
In this background it is significant that vide Annexure P2, the petitioner undertook to pay the respondent on par case basis and not on monthly basis henceforth.
4.
Mr. Keep, learned counsel for the respondent, has placed reliance on Rajesh Garg, Advocate v. The Management of the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation Ltd., 1984(3) SLR 397 and VP Gopala Rao v. Public Prosecutor, Andhra Pradesh, 1970 II LLJ 59.
I have gone through these authorities and find that they are not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In Sh. Rajesh Garg's case (supra), it was the admitted case that the petitioner was employed as Legal Assistant and it was on that basis that he was held to be a workman and entitled to the benefits under the Act.
In VP Gopala Rao's case (supra) it is held although on very different facts that it is a question of fact as to whether relationship of master and servant exists in a given case.
Mr. Keer has also urged on the basis of VP Gopala Rao case (supra) that the dispute raised in the writ petition as to the relationship inter se the parties is one of the disputed facts and this court should not upset the order of the Labour Court on this aspect of the mater.
It has to be noted however, that the order of the Labour Court was an ex parte one an the facts of the case are so glaringly eloquent that the only inference that can be drawn is that there was no relationship of master and servant between the parties.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and order Annexure P4 is quashed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.