A Lakshmana Rao, J - These two writ appeals are directed against the common judgments of the learned single Judge dated January 28, 1992 in WP Nos. 13270 of 1989 and 4812 of 1990, dismissing both the writ petitions filed by the appellants herein.
2.
The Government of India established two institutes in the year 1958, namely (1) the Central Institute of Study and Research in Community Development; and (2) the Trainers Training Institute.
These two institutes were merged in the year 1964 to form the National Institute of Community Development.
It was accorded autonomous status in the year 1965.
Following the adoption of integrated rural development approach, the institute was re-named in the year 1977 as the National Institute of Rural Development (hereinafter referred to as 'the Institute).
After registration of the Institute under the Societies Registration Act, it framed rules.
The Institute consists of a General Council composed of all the 45 members of the Institute, presided over by the Minister-in-charge of the concerned Ministry, Government of India, as Executive Council consisting of the ten members, a Committee on Administration, an Academic Committee and a Director General.
The powers and functions of the General Council, inter alia, are to elect members of the Executive Council, the amend or modify the rules of the Institute and to frame bye-laws for the regulation of the business of the Institute in particular with reference to appointments emoluments, terms and conditions governing scholarship, fellowship and reputation and other conditions of service of the staff of the Institute.
One of the functions of the Executive Council is "to create such posts, appointment and control such staff other than those for whose appointment specific provision has been made else-where, as may be required for the efficient management of the affairs of the Institute and to regulate the requirement and conditions of their service" and "to appoint committee, with or without power to co-opt, for disposal of any business of the Institute or for advice in any matter pertaining to the Institute......."  3.
The Committee on Administration is one of the two Standing Committees.
It consists of the following six members, including the Director General of the Institute, who is the Chairman of the committee :  (i) The Director General of Institute - Chairman.
(ii) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Rural Development dealing with the Institute or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary - Member.
(iii) Joint Secretary (Finance) and Financial Adviser in the Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary - Member.
(iv) Three persons from among the members of the Executive Committee to be nominated by the Executive Council for such terms as may be fixed by the Executive council but not exceeding three years - Members.
Members :  The Chairman shall have the power to co-opt as member, such person or persons as may be necessary.
(v) Every meeting of the Committee.
Rule XIII, which provides for the composition of the Committee on Administration, specifies that :  (vi) Every meeting of the Committee on Administration shall be presided over by the Chairman (Director General); and  (vii) Four members of the Committee on Administration which shall include the representative of the Ministry of Rural Development (Vide (ii) & (iii) above) shall constitute the quorum.
The Committee on Administration is entrusted with the powers and functions to deal with matters relating to appointment, administration and finance.
In the matter of appointments, its functions are :  (i) Selection and making recommendations for appointments or selection and appointments to posts in different categories in Group A as the case may be except the Director General, for which the Executive Council is the competent authority.
(ii) Prescription of rulers for recruitment to posts referred to above.
For the purpose of this case, it is not necessary to refer to the other Standing Committee, viz., the Academic Committee.
4.
The Director General is the principal Executive Officer of the Institute.
He shall be responsible for the proper administration of the affairs of the Institute and he shall exercise his powers under the direction and guidance of the Executive Council.
5.
The decision of the learned single Judge that the Institutes is an instrumentality of the State and, therefore, it is the 'State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India falling under the category of 'other authorities' is not assailed by either of the parties in these two writ appeals.
6.
The main question in these two appeals pertains to the selection and appointment to one post each of (1) Director (Centre for Micro Planning); and (2) Director (Economics).
There is no dispute that both these posts are Class-I posts falling in Group 'A'.
7.
The General Council of the Institute made bye-laws.
As per bye-law 6, the appointing authority for Class-I posts is the Executive Council and for other posts the Director General is the appointing authority.
Bye-laws 7 and 8 which deal with mode of recruitment, read as follows :  "1.
Recruitment to a post under the Institute may be made : (i) by direct recruitments;  (ii) by promotion; and  (iii) by appointment of a borrowed employee.
2.
The appointing authority shall in each case determine the method by which a vacancy shall be filled.
3.
Those who are already in the service of the Institute will be eligible to apply for post proposed to be filled up by direct recruitment."
By-law 8 : Direct Recruitment :  The appointing authority may, on the recommendation of a Selection Committee make appointments to any post by direct recruitment;  (i) from amongst candidates recommended by the Employment Exchange on requisition; or  (ii) from amongst candidates applying in response to any advertisement; or  (ii) by inviting suitable persons.
Appointment to a post by promotion shall be made by selection on the basis of merit, with due regard to seniority, subject to the condition that every appointment to Class-I post shall be made solely on the basis of merit (Bye-law 9).
A borrowed employee may be appointed to any post on such terms and conditions as the sanctioning authority may deem proper, as provided in bye-law 9(a).
8.
The post of Director (Central for Micro Planning) fell vacant with effect from November 1, 1988 due to retirement of Dr. RN Tripathi pending appointment of regular director, Dr. Mrs. Thaha, the appellant in Writ Appeal No. 120 of 1992 who happened to be the senior most Deputy Director in the faculty of Micro (Centre for Micro Planning on purely temporary basis in addition to her own duties with effect from November 10, 1988 in the scale of Rs. 4,500-7,300/- during the period of her holding charge of the post of Director.
(vide Office order No. 717 dated January 13, 1989).
9.
The post of Director (Economics) fell vacant with effect from June 1, 1988 due to the retirement of Dr. PT George.
In this case also, pending recruitment of regular Director, the appellant in Writ Appeal No. 127 of 1992, who happened to be the senior most Deputy Director in the faculty of Economics, was given additional charge of the post of Director (Economics) on purely temporary basis in addition to his own duties with effect from June 1, 1988 (vide Office Order No. 164, dated June 1, 1988).
Bye-law 7 which has been extracted, provides that the appointing authority shall determine the method of recruitment and those who are already in the service of the Institute are eligible to apply to the post proposed to be filled up by direct recruitment.
10.
The scales of University Grants Commission for University Teachers were announced in March 1974 and they were later introduction in the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad and Calcutta, the Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi and six other institutes.
The Government of India, Ministry of Education and Social Welfare (Department of Education) addressed a letter dated November 2, 1974 to the State Governments on the subject relating to revision of pay scales of University and College Teachers, stating that the Government of India had decided to implement the scheme of the revised pay scales of University and College teachers in the Central Universes and other institutes fully financed by the Central Government with effect from the specified date.
The Government of India offered to the State Governments to provide assistance to the extent of 80% of the additional expenditure involved in giving effect to the revised scales of pay, subject to certain conditions including those stipulated in Appendix IV, to the letter.
One of the conditions is that recruitment to all categories of teachers - lecturers, readers and professors in University shall be made strictly on merit and on the basis of All India advertisement and selection.
11.
Mr. M Zaheer, Dean of the Institute moved the Government of India through his letter dated June 30, 1976 for immediate introduction of the scales of the University Grants Commission in the Institute due to the apprehension that sooner or latter all the competent members of the staff will leave the Institute as four members of the rank of Professor and three of the rank of Lecturer had already left the Institute, be cause they were offered better emoluments else-where.
Again on October 13, 1976, Mr. MA Qayum, Registrar of the Institute addressed a letter to the Security to Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation, Department of Rural Development on the subject of introduction of UGC Scales of Pay to the staff of the Institute, the relevant portion of which reads as follows :  "As for the duties/functions of the staff of NICO, it may be mentioned that the duties/functions of the faculty are in no way lesser than those of University Professors etc.
But on the other hand, they have an edge over University staff, particularly when the staff of the Institute is involved both in research as well as in training, whereas the University staff is mostly engaged in teaching.
It may also be mentioned that the following Institutions where the nature of duties/functions of their staff is similar to those of ours, Government have sanctioned UGC pay scales to their staff : 1.
Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.
2.
Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi.
3.
National Council of Education Research & Training, New Delhi.
4.
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Bombay.
Regarding the requisite qualifications for recruitment of Professors etc., in the Universities, it may be stated that the Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, Government of India, while sanctioning UGC, scales to the University staff have laid down certain guidelines.
According to these recruitment to all categories of teachers, lecturers, readers and professors in Universities is made strictly on merit and on the basis of all India advertisement and selection.
The qualifications prescribed for the post are essentially related to the academic attainments in the subject concerned and are not to be linked with language or regional considerations.
Thus, the qualifications which have been prescribed by the Institute for recruitment of Directors/Deputy Directors etc., are on similar lines.
The proposals for adoption of UGC scales have already been approved by the Executive Council at its meeting held on the 20th of July, 1976 and the same has been intimated to the Ministry in our letter No. 650/73/Admn/6779, dated the 1st September, 1976, with a request that Government's clearance to the above proposal, as approved by the Executive Council, is obtained and communicated early."
The request was, thereafter, reiterated on behalf of the Institute in a number of letters written to the Government of India.
Finally, in response to the letter dated November 16, 1978, the Government of India had taken a decision to revise the pay scales of the members of the staff of the Institute on par with the revised scales of University Grants Commission and the decision was communicated to the Institute through the letter dated February 3, 1979, the relevant portion of which is as follows :  "-------The scales of pay of the directing staff of the National Institute of Rural Development are brought at par with those prevalent in the Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi.
Accordingly the existing scales of pay of the four categories of posts are revised as under : S.No.
Category of Post Existing Scale Revised Scales 1.
Directors 1500-60-1800 1500-60-1800-100-2000-125/2,2500 2.
Joint Directors 1200-50-1600 1200-50-1300-60-1900 3.
Deputy Directors 1100-50-1600 1200-50-1300-60-1900 4.
Assistant Directors 650-30-740-35-810-EB-35-880-40-1000-EB-40-1200 700-40-1100-50-1600 In respect of the upgraded posts for future recruitment, the National Institute of Rural Development will adopt the same qualifications, prescribed for corresponding posts in the Indian Institute of Public Administration.
For the existing incumbents, the UGC guidelines for regularising the existing University staff at the time of introduction of revised UGC scales of pay will be adopted.
Specific proposals for allowing existing incumbents the revised scales of pay should be got approved by the Executive Council......."  In the light of that letter, the Executive Council of the Institute met on March 22, 1979 and approved the adoption of the revised scales of pay to the members of teaching staff of the Institute with effect from Ist January, 1979.
12.
The Executive Council referred to its earlier decision taken on 2nd January, 1979 that the vacant posts and the new posts sanctioned, shall be advertised in the light of the Government's Order on revision of pay scales.
It was also resolved that the Institute shall adopt the same qualifications prescribed for corresponding posts in the Indian Institute of Public Administration.
The correspondence referred to above that went on between the Institute and the Central Government clearly shows that the Institute one of the conditions to be complied with for extending the pay scales of University Grants Commission to the teaching staff of the Institute was that recruitment shall be made strictly on merit and on the basis of all India Advertisement and selection.
The Institute was from the beginning agreeable for the same.
13.
The Executive Council of the Institute decided to follow the condition imposed by the Government of India for extending the benefit of scales of University Grants Commission to the members of the teaching staff of the Institute that recruitment to the categories of Directors, Joint Directors, Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors shall be made strictly on merit and on the basis of all-India advertisement and selection.
Therefore, it is not correct that the Executive Council did not determine the method of recruitment to the post of Director.
The Executive Council had decided that the posts of Director, Economics and Micro-Planning shall be filled by direct recruitment of all-India basis.
14.
The Committee which was constituted to study the working of the Institute regarding its role as a nodal institution in the context of the emerging patterns of rural development, pointed out in its report submitted in March 1984 :  "The faculty for each discipline is headed by a Director in the grade of Rs. 1500-2500 (identical to the grade of Professor in Universities) with supportive staff at the level of Deputy Directors in the grade of Rs. 1200-1900 (identifical to that of reader), and Assistant Directors in the grade of Rs. 700-1600 (identical to that of lecturer).
The recruitment rules provide for only direct recruitment to all these grades."
The members of the academic staff working in the Institute carry scales of University Grants Commission.
Following the scheme of the University Grants Commission, appointments to the academic posts in the Institute are made on the basis of direct recruitment.
Thus, it is evident that the Executive Council of the Institute, which is the appointing authority for the post of Director, decided that the post of Director shall be filled by direct recruitment.
It is stated on behalf of the Institute that never before was the post of Director filled up by promotion and it was always filled up by direct recruitment only.
Therefore, we see no force in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that the Executive Council of the Institute did not determine the method of recruitment before the posts were advertised.
15.
The posts of Director (Economics) and Director (Centre for Micro Planning) along with some other posts of Director in other disciplines were advertised in the news letter of the Institute as well as the Employment News in October, November and December 1988, inviting applications.
The essential qualifications for the post of Director (Centres for Micro Planning) are :  (i) A first or high second class Master's degree in Economics/Geography/Regional Planning/Business Administration with PhD, in the relevant field Or its equivalent recongised by Government of India.
(ii) At least 10 years experience in Research and Training in Area Planning/Micro Planning and in handling large scale research projects in Area Planning/Micro Planning and work experience coupled with association in research and training for a period of 10 years.
(iii) Published Books/Papers based on original work in the field of Regional Planning/Integrated Area Development and Identification of Growth Centres/Micro Planning.
The desirable qualifications are :  (i) Knowledge of Financial & Economic Analysis of Development projects.
(ii) Deputation from Government Departments/Organisations are also acceptable.
For the post of Director (Economics), the essential qualifications are :  (1) A first or high second class Master's Degree in Economics with PhD, in the relevant discipline.
(2) Atleast 10 years experience in research and training in Economics and in handling large scale research projects in rural areas.
(3) Published Books/Papers based on original work in the field of Economics.
16.
The appellant in Writ Appeal No. 120 of 1992 is a Gold Medalist in MA, (Geography).
She acquired PhD, and also a Post-Graduate Diploma in specialisation in Urban and Regional Planning from the School of Planning, New Delhi.
She is the senior most Deputy Director of the Institute in Micro Planning having put in twelve years of services as Deputy Director.
She has been officiating as Director (Micro Planning) since November 10, 1988.
She was selected to the post of Deputy Director on the basis of direct recruitment.
17.
Altogether twenty applications were received for selection to the post of Director (Micro Planning).
Eleven candidates including the appellant were called for interview.
Out of them, six candidates including the appellant appeared for interview.
On June 22, 1989, the Committee on Administration interviewed the six candidates, the interview was followed by a presentation by two candidates who were short listed on the basis of interview.
The Committee ultimately selected Dr. BP Kythani and Dr. TB Lahiri, the third respondent in writ appeal No. 120 of 1992 and recommended for their appointment.
The Executive Council under the Chairmanship of Sri Janardhan Poojari.
Union Minister of State for Rural Development considered the recommendation of the Committee on Administration for the post of Director (Centre for Micro Planning) and accepted it at the meeting held on July 19, 1989.
Dr. BP Kythani had been appointed as Director of the Regional Centre of the Institute at Gauhati.
The selection of Dr. TB Lahiri was approved for appointment to the post of Director (Centre for Micro Planning) in the Institute on deputation basis.
Consequently, Dr. TB Lahiri was appointed as Director (Centre for Micro Planning), vide Order 654/89/Admn.
dated January 11, 1989.
18.
The Committee on Administration, which selected Dr. BP Kythani and Dr. TB Lahiri, consisted of :  (i) Sri RP Kapoor, Director General, National Institute of Rural Development Chairman (ii) Sri RP Singh, Joint Secretary (Finance) & Financial Advisor, Department of Rural Development, Minister of Agriculture Member (iii) Sri SR Tiwari, EC Member and General Secretary, All India Panchayat Parishad, Veerendra Bhavan, New Delhi Member (iv) Dr. SK Raju Member (v) Dr. NK Raj Member Out of them, Dr. SK Raju and Dr. KN Raj are members coopted by the Director General under Rule XIII(b)(iv).
19.
It is alleged by the appellant that the third respondent Dr. TB Lahiri, who has been working as Registrar of Viswabharati University, does not possess the requisite qualification of ten years experience in research and training.
The allegation has been denied by the Institute.
20.
The appellant in Writ Appeal No. 127 of 1992 holds a first class MA, Degree in Economics.
He acquired PhD, degree in Economics from the Andhra University.
He was awarded 'Sri Reghupathi Venkataratnam Naidu Medal for PhD, thesis.
He was also awarded US Government-Senior 'Fulbright' Fellowship for post doctoral research in Economics in the United States of America in 1979-80.
He was also selected by the Department of Rural Development, Government of India and the British Council for undergoing advanced level training on 'Planning and Management of Rural Development' in the United Kingdom in 1984, he was also selected as Professor, Reserve Bank of India (Chair) in 1986.
But he did not join the post.
He worked as Reader in Economics in the Post Graduate Department of Economics, DNR College, Bhimavaram and in the Autonomous Post Graduate Centre, University of Madras, Coimbatore from September, 1975 till July, 1981.
He has been working as Deputy Director (Economics) since August, 1982 in the Institute.
Being the senior most Deputy Director (Economics), he was kept in additional charge as Director (Economics) since June, 1988.
In response to the advertisement calling for applications for appointment to the post of Director (Economics), the appellant, the third respondent Dr. Rajendra Prasad Singh and some others applied.
The appellant, the third respondent and some others were called for interview by the Committee on Administration.
The Committee ultimately selected the third respondent.
The Executive Council of the Institute approved the selection of the third respondent at its meeting held on February 7, 1990.
Accordingly, Dr. RP Singh, the third respondent was offered appointment to the post of Director (Economics) through the letter dated April 5, 1990.
He was granted three months time for reporting for duty at this request.
21.
The Committee on Administration which selected the third respondent consisted of :  (i) Sri RP Kapoor, Director General, National Institute of Rural Development, Chairman  (ii) Sri.
NJ Kurian, Representative of Joint Secretary (Admn.
), Department of Rural Development, New Delhi, Member  (iii) Sri.
SR Tiwari, EC, Member and General Secretary, All India Panchayat Parishad, Veerendra Bhavan, New Delhi, Member  (iv) Professor K Krishna Murthy, Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi, ---, Member  (v) Dr. JC Kalla, NAARM, Hyderabad, Member  Out of them Professor K Krishna Murthy and Dr. JC Kalla were the members coopted by the Director General under Rule XIII(b)(iv).
22.
As we have already mentioned, the Committee on Administration consists of six members, namely -  The Director General of Institute - Chairman.
(ii) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Rural Development dealing with the Institute or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary - Member.
(iii) Joint Secretary (Finance) and Financial Adviser in the Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary - Member.
(iv) Three persons from among the members of the Executive Committee to be nominated by the Executive Council for such term as may be fixed by the Executive Council but not exceeding three years.
The Chairman has the power to coopt as member, such person or persons as may be necessary.
Four members of the Committee shall constitute the quorum.
The Committee on Administration which selected the candidates in both these cases consists of five members, out of whom two are the members coopted by Institute, representative of the Joint Secretary, one is the Joint Secretary (Finance) and one is the member nominated by the Executive Council.
23.
It is vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that the members coopted by the Director General of the Institute, cannot be treated as members of the Committee on Administration and if so, the other three members do not constitute the quorum.
In this context, it is further submitted that two representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development viz., Joint Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee and Joint Secretary (Finance) and Financial Adviser in the Ministry of Rural Development or his nominee, shall necessarily be present to constitute the quorum, as required in Rule XIII(b)(v).
As only one of them was present, the constitution of the Selection Committee is not in accordance with the Rule.
Therefore, it is urged that the selection made by such a Committee is illegal and improper.
24.
There can be no dispute that the Institute is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act and the rules made by the Executive Council have no statutory force.
However, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that the Institute, being an instrumentality of the State, must follow its rules and if it does not do so it can be compelled to follow the rules so as to ensure fair and equal treatment.
This contention is advanced on the basis of the decision of a Full Bench of this Court in Sri Konaseema Co-operative Central Bank Limited, Amalapuram v. N Seetharama Raju, AIR 1990 AP 171.
The learned counsel do not deny that this Court does not sit in appeal over the decision of the Selection Committee and scrutinise the relative merits of the candidates.
However, they emphasise that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Dalpat Abasahad Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, 1990(1) SLR 849 (SC) the Selection made by a Committee can be interfered with on the grounds of illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure or prove mala fides in selection.
The learned counsel have relied on two decisions of the Central Administrative Tribunal in AN Biswas and others v. Union of India and others, 1986(2) All India Service Law Journal, P. 155 and Chapal Khasnobish and others v. Union of India and others, 1988(7) SLR 278 in support of their contention and selection made by a Committee, which has not been constituted in accordance with the rules, will be invalid.
It was held by the Supreme Court that improper constitution of the Industrial Tribunal without the requisite number of members will be invalid (vide The United Commercial Bank Limited v. Their Workmen), AIR (38) 1951 SC 230.
As a general principle, it has been pointed out by the Supreme Court in Ishwar Chandra v. Satyanarain Sinha, 1972 SLR 385 (SC).  "
---------where there is no rule or regulation or any other provisions for fixing the quorum, the presence of the majority of the members would constitute it a valid meeting and matters considered thereat cannot be held to be invalid."
25.
The learned counsel for the respondent-Institute contended that the rules being non-statutory they are not enforceable.
Even otherwise, the deviation from the rule, if any, does not directly affect the right of the appellants who have appeared before the Selection Committee, submitted to their jurisdiction and failed to qualify for selection.
The learned counsel refers to the following principle enunciated by the Supreme Court in Narendra Kumar Maheshwari v. Union of India and others, AIR 1989 SC 2138 in support of his contention :  "It may, however, be stated that being not statutory in character, these guidelines are not enforceable...
Guidelines are issued by Governments and statutory authorities in various types of situations.
Where such guidelines are intended to clarify or implement the condition and requirements precedent to the exercise of certain rights conferred in favour of citizens or persons and a deviation therefrom directly affects the rights so vested the persons whose rights are affected have a clear right to approach the court for relief.
Sometimes guidelines control the choice of persons competing with one another for the grant of benefits largess or favours and, if the guidelines are departed from without rhyme or reason, an arbitrary discrimination may result which may call for judicial review.
In some other instances (as in the Ramanna Shetty case, the guidelines may prescribe certain standards or norms for the grant of certain benefits and a relaxation of or departure from, the norms may affect persons, not directly but indirectly, in the sense that though they did not seek the benefit or privilege as they were not eligible for it on the basis of the announced norms, they might also have entered the fray had the relaxed guidelines been made known.
In other words, they would have been potential competitors in case any relaxation or departure were to be made.
In a case of the present type, however, the guidelines operate in a totally different field.
The guidelines do not affect or regulate the right of any person other than the company applying for consent.
The manner of application of these guidelines, whether strict or lax, does not either directly or indirectly, affect the rights or potential rights of any others or deprive them, directly, on indirectly, of any advantages or benefits to which they were or would have been entitled.
In this context, there is only a very limited scope for judicial review on the ground that the guidelines have not been followed or have been deviated from..." 26.
The learned counsel for the respondent-Institute has placed strong reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Asif Hameed v. State of Jammu & Kashmir, 1989(3) SLR 735.
In that case, the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir reconstituted the competent authority consisting of three members by an order dated September 15, 1988 for the purpose of selection of candidates for admission to MBBS, Course.
The plea was that instead of three members, two members sat and finalised the selections.
Relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in The United Commercial Bank Limited v. Their Workmen, AIR (38) 1951 SC 230, it was contended that the selection by improperly constituted committee, was invalid.
Rejecting that contention, the Supreme Court pointed out that there were no specific allegations of favouritism or arbitrariness in the conduct of entrance examination or the viva voce, by the Committee consisting of two members, and the ratio of the decision in The United Commercial Bank Limited v. Their Workmen, was inapplicable to the committee constituted by executive order for performing purely administrative functions.
The learned Judges pointed out that selection of candidates for admission to medical colleges does not involve performance of any judicial or quasi-judicial functions, and that absence of any statutory provision to the contrary it was perfectly legitimate for the authority to function only with two members.
On the basis of those decisions, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent-Institute that the selection of the candidates for appointment to a post is purely administrative in nature and the rule prescribing quorum does not have any statutory force, the deviation, if any, does not invalidate the selection.
27.
It is not the case of the appellants that the members of the Committee were biased against them or acted mala fide.
It is not their case even that the members acted either unreasonably or arbitrarily in making the selections.
The Committee consisted of five members, out of whom two were the members co-opted by the Chairman of the Committee.
The function of the Committee was only to make recommendation in the matter of selection.
The ultimate authority to make the appointment was the Executive Council, which is the superior body.
The Executive Council ratified the selection made by the Committee.
According to the Rule, the quorum of the Committee shall be four.
The Committee consisted of three Committee members and two expert members on the subject co-opeted by the Chairman who has power to co-opt as member such person or persons as may be necessary.
The purpose of interview is to select the suitable candidate from the applicants.
The presence of the members who are experts in the subject ensures better standard of selection.
The Committee has one representative of the Government of India.
It is contended that in accordance with rule XII(b)(vi) the Committee shall have at least representatives of the Government of India and, therefore, the selection made by the Committee is invalid.
28.
In our view, the conduct of the appellants does not entitle them to raise the plea of improper constitution of the selection committee in view of the facts of circumstances of the case.
29.
The appellants were well aware who the members of the Committee were.
They also know that the appointment will be by direct recruitment.
They appeared for interview before the Committee and submitted themselves to its jurisdiction for the purpose of selection.
When they failed to get selected and some other person was selected, they filed the writ petitions questioning the selection.
The appellants did not raise any objection before the Committee against its composition though they knew fully well who the members of the Committee were.
They appeared voluntarily before the Committee and had taken a chance of having a favourable recommendation.
In such case, as was held by the Supreme Court in Dr. G Sarana v. University of Lucknow and others, 1976(2) SLR 509, it is not open to the appellants to turn round and question the constitution or composition of the Committee.
30.
On the principal contentions advanced in Smt. Swaran Lata v. Union of India and others, 1979(1) SLR 710 (SC) was that the post of Principal in the Government Central Crafts Institute for Women, Chandigarh was a deputation post which had to be filled-in by appointing a person on deputation from the State of Haryana and, therefore, Chandigarh administration could not have advertised the post for direct recruitment and that the relaxation of the essential qualifications of the candidates called for interview by the Union Public Service Commission was wholly arbitrary and illegal.
Repelling that contention, the Supreme Court observed :  "In any event, the appellant cannot approbate and reprobate.
She had willingly, of her own accord, and without any persuasion by anyone, applied for the post, in response to the advertisement issued by the Union Public Service Commission for direct recruitment.
She, therefore, took her chance and simply because the Selection Committee did not find her suitable for appointment, she cannot be heard to say that the selection of respondent 6, by direct recruitment through the Commission was invalid, as being contrary to the directions issued by the Central Government under Section 84 of the Act or that the Commission had exceeded its powers by usurping the functions of the Chandigarh Administration, in relaxing the essential qualifications of the candidates called for interview or that respondent 6 was not eligible for appointment inasmuch as she did not possess the requisite essential qualifications.
She fully knew that under the terms of the advertisement, the Commission had reserved to itself the power to relax any of the essential qualifications.
With this full knowledge, she applied for the post and she appeared at the interview.
We are clearly of the opinion that the appellant is precluded from urging these grounds."
31.
In both these cases the Committee consists of the Director General of the Institute, one representative of the Minister of Rural Development, one member of the Executive Committee nominated by the Executive Council and two members who are experts in the subject relating to the post and who have been co-opted by the Director General of the Institute.
It is averred in the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the Institute that the persons co-opted by the Director General are experts and are known for their contradiction and contribution in the areas of rural development and economics respectively.
In such circumstances no prejudice can be said to have been caused to the appellants by their inclusion in the Committee.
The superior body viz., the Executive Council which is the appointing authority approved the selection and made the appointments.
Therefore, the appellants are estopped from questioning the validity of the constitution and composition of the committee on Administration for the purpose of selection.
When the Selection Committee did not find them suitable, they questioned the selection.
32.
The advertisement published in the news letter of the Institute provided that for the post of Director (Centre for Micro Planning) persons on deputation from Government Departments/Organisation are also acceptable.
The third respondent in writ Appeal No. 120 of 1992 who had been working in the Viswabharati University had been offered appointment to the post of Director (Centre for Micro Planning) on deputation.
The objection raised by the appellant is that the third respondent is not an employee of either the Government or any organisation and, therefore, he is not eligible to be appointed on deputation.
We do not find force in this contention.
If an employee working in the Government Department/Organisation can be appointed on deputation, there is no reason why a person working in the university cannot be considered for appointment on deputation.
As the post of Director is connected with teaching, research and training, a person working in the University will be more suitable than a person working in any government department or organisation.
Apart from that, one of the general conditions included in one of the advertisements calling for applications provided that deputation from Government Department/Organisation/Universities and other institutions will also be considered.
33.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ appeals fail and they are accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.