AS Nehra, J - This appeal has been filed by the defendant-appellant Corporation against the judgment and decree dated 8.11.1989 passed by the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, by which the appeal filed by the plaintiff-respondent was allowed and the judgment and decree dated 181985 (dismissing the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent) was set aside.
2.
The facts of the case, in brief, are that the plaintiff-respondent was working as a Messenger in the Storage Depot of the Food Corporation of India (F.C.I.)
at Sunam.
The then District Manger, GS Turney, placed the plaintiff-respondent under suspension on 12111974.
The said suspension order was revoked by his success for GP Sonkar, vide his order dated 23/25.10.1978.
Kuldip Singh Sethi, Manager of the Food Corporation of India (defendant-appellant), on 21/2271980, ordered the termination of services of the plaintiff-respondent with effect from 30.1.1979.
It is this order of termination which was challenged in the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent, alleging that the same was illegal and void, as the services of any employee could not be terminated with retrospective effect.
The plaintiff-respondent also claimed arrears of pay to the tune of Rs. 15,45640 paise with effect from March 1979 to the date of filing the suit, i.e. 2811982.
3.
Upon notice, the defendant-appellant appeared through the District Manager and admitted the facts, as mentioned in the plaint, to be correct.
It was, however, stated by the defendant-appellant that the order of termination was quite legal and correct and the same was passed in accordance with the prescribed procedure; and that the plaintiff-respondent was not entitled to any arrears of pay etc.
It was further stated by the defendant-appellant that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit and that the suit is not maintainable in the present form.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 21/2271980 is bad, ultra vires and not binding on the plaintiff ?
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
3.
Whether this Court has jurisdiction ?
4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
5.
Whether no proper and legal notice has been served ?
6.
Relief.
The trial Court, after recording evidence, decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff-respondent.
Issues Nos. 2 to 5 were not decided because the defendant-appellant did not adduce any evidence.
The suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent was dismissed.
5.
The learned counsel for the appellant has argued that in view of the clear provisions of Regulation 63 of the Food Corporation of India Staff Regulations (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations), where any penalty is imposed upon an employee on the ground of conduct which led to his conviction on a criminal charge, no regular enquiry is to be held by the punishing authority before passing an order of dismissal.
In support of his argument, he has relied upon Regulation 63 of the Regulations, which is quoted below :-  "63.
Special Procedure In Certain Cases :-  Notwithstanding anything contained in Regulation 58 to Regulation 62 :  (i) where any penalty is imposed on an employee on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge, or  (ii) where the disciplinary authority is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry in the manner provided in these Regulations; (iii) where the Board is satisfied that, in the interest of security of the State, it is not expedient to hold any enquiry in the manner provided in these regulations the disciplinary authority may consider the circumstances of the case and make such orders thereon, as it deems fit."
6.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has argued that the finding of the Additional District Judge that the order of termination passed by the District Manager on 21/2271980 is illegal, null and void, is correct because no regular enquiry was held before terminating the services of the plaintiff-respondent.
In support of his argument, he has relied upon Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find force in the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant and hold that in view of the clear provisions of Regulation 63 of the Regulations, where any penalty is imposed upon an employee on the ground of conduct which led to his conviction on a criminal charge, no regular enquiry is to be held by the punishing authority before passing an order of dismissal.
8.
The principles of natural justice contained in Regulations 58 to 62 of the Regulations have be specifically taken away by Regulation 63 of the Regulations and, in the face of that statutory provision, the Court cannot apply the principles of natural justice so as to nullify the effect of Regulation 63 of the Regulations.
This views of mine finds support from a Full Bench judgment of this Court reported as Om Parkash v. The Director, Postal Services, Punjab Circle, Ambala and others, AIR 1973 Punjab & Haryana 1.
9.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has submitted that the impugned order of termination is liable to be set aside as the respondent has not been dismissed for the conduct which led to his conviction but for his conviction itself and, therefore, the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge is liable to be upheld.
10.
The impugned order dated 21/2271989 reads as under :-  "Consequent upon the conviction in a criminal case by Additional Sessions Judge, Sangrur, and subsequent dismissal of the appeal of Shri Chander Parkash, Messenger, by the Honourable Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh on 30.1.1979, the services of Shri Chander Parkash, Messenger, is hereby terminated w.e.f.
30.1.1979, i.e., the dated of order issued by Honourable Judge of Punjab & Haryana High Court, Chandigarh.
11.
The disciplinary action can be taken for the conduct which has led to conviction on a criminal charge, in such conduct constitutes misconduct according to the relevant Service Rules.
A Division Bench of this Court in Rajinder Singh v. Punjab State, 1969 Current Law Journal 821, has held that neither the language of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India nor the relevant Service Rules indicate that as soon as a public servant is convinced on a criminal charge, he must suffer one of the prescribed punishments.
On that basis, it was observed that, before inflicting any of the three major punishment, namely, dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, the competent authority has to apply its mind to the facts of the case to examine the conduct of the public servant concerned, which has led to his conviction, and to determine the nature and quantum of punishment which his conduct calls for.
I am in respectful agreement with the view expressed by the Division Bench in Rajinder Singh's case (supra) in that regard.
In this case, the plaintiff-respondent has been dismissed from service on account of his conviction alone without any finding about his conduct which led to his conviction.
Therefore, the impugned order dated 21/2271980 (Exhibit P-3) cannot be sustained in view of the decision in Rajinder Singh's case (supra).
12.
In view of the above-mentioned discussion, there is no merit in the appeal and, therefore, the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.