DP Mohapatra, J - The petitioner Sanjaya Kumar Das, who applied for a post of Probationary Munsif pursuance of the Advertisement No. 20 of 1986-87 (Annexure-I) issued by opposite party No. 2, the Orissa Public Service Commission, filed this writ application against the State of Orissa, represented through the Secretary, Department of Law, and the Orissa Public Service Commission with the prayer to quash the viva voce test held in pursuance of the advertisement and to direct the opposite parties to call the petitioner for viva voce test or, in the alternative to prohibit the State of Orissa from making any appointment in excess of the number of vacancies mentioned in the advertisement.
He also prayed to strike down Rule 18 of the Orissa Judicial Service Rules, 1984 as unconstitutional.
2.
The case of petitioner as set out in the writ application is that the Orissa Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission') published Advertisement No. 20 of 1986-87 dated 22986 inviting applications to reach the Commission by 17th November, 1986 for admission of candidates to a competitive examination to be held by it under the provisions of the Orissa Judicial Service Rules, 1964, (for short 'the Rules') as amended up-to-date, for recruitment of 20 probationary Munsifs in Class II of the Orissa Judicial Service.
In pursuance of the said advertisement, the petitioner filed his application.
He appeared in the written test held by the Commission and secured 309 marks out of 950 as evident from the marks sheet issued by the Commission as per Annexure 3.
The petitioner contends that under Rule 16 of the Rules as it stood on date of issue of the advertisement the Commission was to summon for viva voce test all candidates who secured in the written examination not less than the minimum qualifying marks obtained in all subjects taken together which was 30% of the total marks in all the papers.
Since the total marks secured by the petitioner works out to 325% he was eligible to appear at the viva voce test.
But the Commission did not summon him for the said test relying on the provisions of Rule 16 as amended by notification dated 26.12.86 wherein the minimum qualifying marks in the written examination was raised from 30% to 40 of the total marks in all the subjects It is the contention of the petitioner that the amended Rule was neither expressly not implicitly retrospective and therefore it has no application to his case which is governed by Rule 16 as it stood prior to amended in December, 1986.
Another aspect of the petitioner's case is that the advertisement in question stated the requirement to be 20 posts of Probationary Munsifs out of which 8 posts were reserved for scheduled caste and scheduled tribe candidates and 12 posts were meant for general candidates.
Against this requirement, the Commission called 34 candidates, who had secured 40% or more marks in the aggregate, to the viva voce test and selected only 17 candidates.
This selection was quashed by this Court in the case of Rama Sankar Mishra v. Orissa Public Service Commission, reported in (1989) 68 CLT 303 : AIR 1990 Orissa 57 on the ground of certain irregularities in awarding marks in the viva voce test.
Thereafter, all the 34 candidates were again called for viva voce test and the Commission sent the entire list of 34 candidates to the State Government.
It is alleged by the petitioner that the list did not include any Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe candidates.
According to the petitioner, since the advertisement was issued for 20 posts the Commission and the Government were to fill up such number of posts, if any further vacancy arose in the meantime, a fresh advertisement ought to have been issued.
A further contention has been raised by the petitioner that the Commission which is entrusted with the duty to select suitable candidates did not act legally and properly in forwarding the entire list of 34 candidates to the Government without making any selection or recommendation.
This action was purportedly taken under Rule 18.
This Rule places restrictions and limitations on the power of the Commission and thus violates Article 32 of the Constitution and it is therefore to be struck down as unconstitutional.
The State Government, the petitioner alleges, has called all 34 candidates in the list for medical test which prima facie indicates the intention to appoint them to service.
It is his contention that this mode of appointment has prejudiced him inasmuch as he has lost the prospect of appointment to the service and in case he gets into the service subsequently he will be junior to all the thirtyfour persons who are going to be appointed to the service.
In those circumstances, the petitioner has approached this Court for redress.
3.
Though the writ application was admitted on 20290 and a year has elapsed, no counter has been filed on behalf of the opposite parties.
We therefore, presume that the statement of fact made in the writ application, the gist of which has been discussed earlier is not controverted.
4.
The core question that arises for consideration is whether the selection of 34 candidates for appointment to the service was vitiated on account of the action taken by the Commission to call for the viva voce test only candidates who had secured 40% or more marks in all the papers taken together in the written test.
To put it a little differently, whether the Commission was right in applying the provisions of the amended Rule 16 which concededly came into force on 26.12.86 after issue of the advertisement on 22986.
As noted earlier, the contention of the petitioner is that since the amended Rule is neither expressly nor impliedly retrospective, it has no application to the advertisement in question and the recruitment process should have been made on the basis of the provisions of Rule 16 as it stood on the date of the advertisement.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the requirement of 40% marks in the written test has not been uniformly applied to all the candidates or that there was any oblique motive or mala fide in following the provisions of the amended rule.
5.
The Supreme Court, in the case of State of UP.
v. Rafiquddin, reported in AIR 1988 SC 162 : 1988 Lab IC 344 considered the question whether prior notice on the candidates was necessary before the Public Service Commission prescribed the minimum marks in the viva voce test under the UP Civil Service (Judicial Branch) Rules, 1951.
Drawing a difference between an examination held by a College or University or by body to award degree to candidates appearing at the examination and a competitive examination, the Court ruled that while in the former case it would be obligatory on the examining authority to prescribe marks for passing the examination as well as for securing different grades well in advance, the latter case, on the other hand, is of different character.
The Court observed that the purpose and object of the competitive examination is to select the most suitable candidates for appointment to public services.
A person may have obtained sufficiently high marks and yet he may not be selected on account of the limited number of posts and availability of persons of higher quality.
The Court held that having regard to the nature and characteristics of a competitive examination it is not possible or necessary to give notice to the candidates about the minimum marks which the Commission may determine for purposes of eliminating unsuitable candidates.
The rule of natural justice does not apply to a competitive examination.
Considering the present case in the light of the principle laid down by the apex Court in the aforementioned case in the absence of any allegation of motive or bias or mala fide or that the practice was not uniformly followed for all the candidates, it has to be taken that while insisting on 40% marks in the written examination as the requirement for appearing in the viva voce test, the intent and purpose of the Commission was to select the most meritorious and suitable candidates for appointment to the service.
That being the main object of holding a competitive examination by the Commission, as observed by the apex Court, the commission, in our view, cannot be faulted for having proceeded with the selection in the manner noted earlier.
6.
At this stage a few decisions cited by Sri BN Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner may be noted :  (i) In the case of P Mahondran v. State of Karnataka, reported in AIR 1990 SC 405 : 1990 Lab IC 369, it was laid down that in the absence of any express provision or necessary intendment, the rule cannot be given retrospective effect except in a matter of procedure and that since the amending Rule seeking change in the eligibility criteria for selection and appointment to the post of Motor Vehicles Inspectors was not retrospective, it could not adversely affect the right of those candidates who were qualified for selection and appointment on the date they applied for the post.
Moreover, as the process of selection had already commenced when the amending Rules came into force, the said Rules could not affect the existing rights of those candidates who were being considered for selection as they possessed the requisite qualifications prescribed by the Rules before its amendment.
It was further held that construction of amending Rules should be made in a reasonable manner to avoid unnecessary hardship to those who have no control over the subject-matter.
In that case the Commission had relied on the rule as it stood prior to the amendment which decision was upheld by the apex Court.
It was observed by the Court that it is true that a candidate does not get any right to the post by merely making an application for the same, but a right is created in his favour for being considered for the post in accordance with the terms and conditions of the advertisement and the existing recruitment rules.
If a candidate applies for a post in response to an advertisement issued by Public Service Commission in accordance with the recruitment rules, he acquires, not to be considered for selection in accordance with the then existing Rules.
(ii) In the case of PD Aggarwal v. State of UP.
reported in AIR 1987 SC 1676 : 1987 Lab IC 1307 the Court observed that undoubtedly the Government has got the power under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution to make rules and amend them giving retrospective effect.
Nevertheless, such retrospective amendments cannot take away the vested rights and the amendments must be reasonable and not arbitrary or discriminatory violating Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the Court held that the Asst.
Engineers who had already become members of the Service on being appointed substantively against temporary posts had already acquired the benefit of the 1936 Rules of having their seniority computed from the date of their becoming members of the Service; 1963 and 1971 amended rules take away this right of those temporary Asst.
Engineers by expressly providing that those Asst.
Engineers who are selected and appointed in permanent vacancies against 50% quota provided by Rule 6 of the amended 1969 Rules will only be considered for the purpose of computation of seniority from the date of their appointment against permanent vacancies.
Therefore, the temporary Asst.
Engineers are not only deprived of the right that accrued to them in the matter of determination of their seniority but they are driven in a very peculiar position inasmuch as they are to wait until they are selected and appointed against permanent vacancies in the quota set up for this purpose by the amended Rule 6.
In such circumstances the Court held that the amended rules more particularly Rules 3(c), 5 and 6 of 1969 Rules as well as Rule 23 of 1971 amended Rules are wholly arbitrary and discriminatory and so they are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The Court took the view that the benefits that had been conferred on the temporary Asst.
Engineers who had become members of the Service after being selected by the Public Service Commission in accordance with the service rules to have their seniority reckoned in accordance with the provision of Rule 23 as it was before amendment in 1971, i.e. from the date of their becoming member of the service cannot be taken away by giving retrospective effect to the Rules of 1969 and 1971 as it is arbitrary, irritational and not reasonable.
7.
From the principles laid down in the decided cases noted above, the position that emerges is :  (a) It is open to the State Govt. in exercise of its power under Article 309 of the Constitution to amend any service rule with retrospection effect; (b) if the amendment of the service rule is not retrospective either expressly or by necessary implication it cannot take away a vested right of any person in service except in matters relating to procedure; and (c) in matters relating to procedure and amendment of Rule will apply to pending cases unless a contrary intention is evident from the provisions of the amended rule.
8.
Let me consider the present case in the light of the principles noted above.
The first question for consideration is whether any vested right of the petitioner is sought to be taken away by the amended rule.
As noted earlier, it is the contention of the petitioner that under Rule 16 as it stood prior to the amendment any candidate securing 30% of the total marks in all papers was eligible to summoned for the viva voce test.
But under the proviso to the rule, it was laid down that the Govt. may after consultation with the High Court and Commission fix higher qualifying marks in any or all of the subjects in the written examination in respect of any particular recruitment.
It is, therefore, clear that under the Rule no right was created that on securing 30% marks in the aggregate in the written examination a candidate is bound to be called for viva voce test.
The proviso apparently was intended to empower the Government to prescribe higher qualifying marks in any or all the subjects in the written examination.
Considering the facts and circurnstances prevailing at the relevant time, the proviso was also in accord with the purpose of the recruitment rule which was to select the most meritorious candidates for the service.
It is relevant to mention here that in the advertisement issued by the Commission in response to which petitioner submitted his application for the post of Probationary Munsif, it was not stated that any candidate securing 30% marks in aggregate in all subjects in the written test shall be summoned to the viva voce test.
Therefore, neither under the provisions of Rule 16 as it stood then any absolute vested right was created in favour of the petitioner to be called for the viva voce test nor any such representation was made to him through the advertisement issued by the Commission.
At this stage it is relevant to notice that the advertisement (Annexure I) was issued on 22nd September, 1986 inviting applications so as to reach the Commission by 17th November, 1986.
The amendment of Rule 16 was notified in the gazette shortly thereafter on 26th December, 1986.
In all probability before the applications were processed, the amended Rule 16 had come into force.
The Commission processed and dealt with all the applications in accordance with the amended rule.
Therefore it cannot be said that the action of the Commission was arbitrary or irrational or prejudicial to the petitioner personally or to a group/section of the candidates.
9.
Another point which is relevant for disposal of the case is the question of delay on the part of the petitioner in approaching this Court.
The advertisement was of the year 1986; the written test was held in the month of September and October, 1987; (??)
the viva voce test was conducted on different dates in month of January, 1989 (??)
and the select list was prepared in February, 1989.
The said list was challenged in both of the writ applications which were disposed of by a Full Bench of this Court, reported in (1989) 68 CLT 303 : AIR 1990 Orissa 57 (Rama Shankar v. Orissa Public Service Commission.)
In the said decision, this Court directed the Commission to hold a fresh viva voce test of all the 35 candidates who had qualified in the written test under the amended Rule 16.
The petitioner had not raised any grievance against the list at that time.
As stated in paragraph 9 of the writ petition a fresh batch of candidates has already appeared in the viva voce test and is awaiting selection under emergency recruitment.
From the above discussions, it is clear that any interference with the selection and recommendation by the Commission will unsettle many settled things and may effect the further recruitment process which has been held in meantime.
10.
The contention of the petitioner that remains to be considered is regarding the validity of the proposed action of the State Government in appointing all the 34 candidates recommended by the Commission through advertisement was issued for twenty posts only.
It is the contention of the petitioner that the State Government is not competent to fill up more than twenty posts from amongst the candidates recommended by the Commission and the rest of the vacancies are to be advertised afresh.
This contention, in our view, is devoid of merit.
In the note under paragraph 1 of the advertisement it is stated, inter alia, that the number of vacancies both reserved and unreserved to be filled up on the basis of the recruitments, is however, subject to change without notice according to the exigencies of circumstances at the discretion of the Government.
In view of this clear information/representation to the candidates and to all concerned there is neither any lack of competency on the part of the Government to fill up the vacancies in excess of the number mentioned in the advertisement nor will such action prejudicially affect any candidate.
11.
Though the constitutional validity of Rule 18 was challenged in the writ petition no argument was advanced on behalf of the petitioner in support of the challenge.
As such we do not deem it necessary to consider the question.
12.
On the premises discussed above, we do not feel called upon to interfere with the selection made by the Commission and the action being taken by the State Government to fill up the vacancies on the basis of its recommendation.
The writ application being devoid of merit is dismissed.
There will be no order for costs of this proceeding.
13.
I agree.
Application dismissed.