GR Majithia, J - This judgment dispose of C.W.P.
Nos 10980 and 12525 of 1990 since common questions of law and fact arise for determination therein.
2.
The petitioners have impugned the order of appointment dated July 11, 1990, passed by Chairman, Department Selection Committee and Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar in favour of Sh. Rajinder Singh respondent No. 4, as 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar against a vacancy reserved for handicaped candidate and also sought a mandate to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to appoint them on the post of 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar in accordance with the merit list of handicapped persons.
3.
Reference to relevant facts for resolving the dispute has been made from the pleadings of CWP No. 10980 of 1990.
4.
The petitioner is an orthopaedically handicaped having 40 per cent disability; that he obtained Degrees of Bachelor of Arts and of Laws from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar; that the Punjab Government, Department of Welfare (Social Welfare Branch) vide letter dated November 24, 1982, decided that 3 per cent of vacancies to be filled by direct recruitment in Class III and IV posts of the State Government services should be reserved for the physically handicapped persons of the State; in the year 1988, the reservation was reduced to 2% that in 1986, a post of Naib Tehsildar filling to the share of physically handicapped fell vacant; that it was advertised along with other posts without being treated as reserved for the category of physically handicapped; that on July 14, 1989, the Social Welfare Branch of the Punjab Government issued instructions for the strict implementation of the reservation in favour of the handicapped persons; that the instructions further mentioned that "it will be personal responsibility of the Heads of Departments/Appointing Authorities to ensure proper implementation of the reservation instructions by the Department of Social and Women's Welfare"; that 40 posts of Naib Tehsildar were advertised by the Departmental Selection Committee, Patiala on December 20, 1987; that in the advertisement it was mentioned that candidates who had already applied in response to the earlier advertisements need not apply afresh; that the petitioner appeared in the written examination under Roll No. 31237 and was declared successful; that he was called for interview but was not selected; that respondent No. 4, who had appeared in the written examination under Roll No. 10412, did not qualify the same but was selected against the category of physically handicapped; that respondent No. 4 moved Civil Writ Petition No. 2401 of 1991 in this Court and the following orders were passed on various dates  "26.2.1990 Present : Mr. JL Gupta, Sr. Advocate (Miss Nirmaljit Kaur, Advocate with him).
Notice of motion for March 26, 1990.
On the oral prayer of the counsel for the petitioner, Commissioner, Jalandhar Division is permitted to be impleaded as respondent No. 3.
The respondents are directed to permit the petitioner to be interviewed alongwith another candidates on February 28, 1990.
The petitioner shall appear in this interview at his own risk and responsibility subject to the final decision of this writ petition.
March 26 1990.
Present : Mr. JL Gupta, for the petitioner.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, AAG (Punjab.)
for the respondents.
To come up for arguments on 24.4.1990."
April 24, 1990 : Present : Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Return has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
To come up for arguments on May 16 1990,  May 16, 1990 : Mr. JL Gupta, Sr. Advocate with Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, Advocate.
Mrs. C Tuli, AAG (Punjab).
Return has been filed on behalf of the respondent No. 2.
The same is allowed to be placed on record subject to payment of Rs. 200/- as costs.
To come up for arguments on 2671990.
July 30, 1990 : Present : Mr. JL Gupta, Advocate with Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur for the petitioner.
Mr. SS Saron, AAG, Punjab.
Counsel for the respondents has placed on record a letter from Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee, dated July 11, 1990 to the effect that the petitioner has been selected as, "At Class Naib Tehsildar against a vacancy reserved for a handicapped candidate.
He has been directed thereby to submit his joining report to the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, for appointment.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, the petitioner is directed to report to Commissioner, Patiala Division, for appointment on 2081990.
To come up for further proceedings on August 30,1990.
A copy of this order be sent to the Commissioner, Patiala Division, for information."
5.
The petitioner's grouse against the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 as 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar is that the latter had obtained the orders from the High Court without disclosing true facts and impleading the petitioner as party respondent to the writ petition; that he was affected party and that respondent No. 4 had managed to obtain the order of appointment without even having qualified the written examination.
6.
Written statement on behalf of respondent No. 1 to 3 has been filed by Shri NK Arora, Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar (Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee).
It was pleaded therein that the petitioner appeared in the written examination under Roll No. 31237; that he was included in the list of handicapped persons called for interview and was duly inter-viewed by the Departmental Selection Commitee; that in the merit list of handicapped person prepared on the basis of the written examination and viva voce test, he was placed at serial No. 3; that respondent No. 4 applied under the category of backward-Class (Socially) and appeared in the written examination under Roll No. 10412; that he did not pass the written examination and thus did not qualify for interview; that respondent No. 4 filed C.W.P.
No. 2401 of 1990 in this Court and this Court directed that he be interviewed by the Deparartmental Selection Committee; that respondent No. 4 was selected under the category of handicapped persons and that after his selection, he was directed to report for appointment to the Commissioner.
Patiala Division, Patiala.
7.
From the pleadings of the parties, it emerged that respondent No. 4 played a dubious game.
The interim orders passed on various dates by the Court clearly indicate that respondent No. 4 manoeuvred to get an order from this Court that he be interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee and the interview will be subject to the result of the writ petition.
The Chairman of the Department Selection Committee, instead of defending its action, fell prey to the manoeuvrability and mechanism of respondent No. 4 or connived at his schemism.
I summoned the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee, who is Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar and recorded his statement.
The manner and method in which the record is maintained regarding written test, interview and selection deserve to be deprecated.
It will be relevant to reproduce his statement in extenso :  "Approximately 10,000 candidates appeared in the written test.
I have brought four registers, Exhibits A/1 to A/4, containing the marks awareded to candidates who appeared in the written test.
(Notes : (i) The witness is making statement in Court with the assistance of Mr. Gurnam Singh, Superintendent, Commissioner's Office.
Jalandhar Division.
(ii) The witness is not personally aware of any facts as is revealed to me.
(iii) The witness who is assisted by the Superintendent is making calculations with the help of the record in Court.)
Exhibits A-1 to A-4 contain the marks obtained by each candidate in each paper in the written test.
These exhibits do not bear the signature of any officer/official.
NOTE : Exhibits A-1 to A-4 contain overwritings.
The Reader of this Court is directed to seal the record forthwith.
Apart from the registers, Exhibits A-1 to A-4, there is no other document containing the marks obtained by the candidates appearing the written test.
In Register A-1, the candidates appearing against Roll Nos. 14385 to 14488 have not been shown any award.
Exhibits A-1 to A-4 do not contain the certificate by any officer under whose supervision these were prepared.
Similarly, there is no certificate showing how many pages each register has and that no page marking has been done on these registers.
Registers, Exhibits A-1 to A-4, were in the personal custody of Mrs. Kalpana Mittal Baruah, who single-handedly collected the answer scripts of approximately 10,000 candidates appearing in the written test and compiled the result on the basis of the marks obtained by each candidate.
The registers and other relevant record were in her personal custody and were never seen by the Members of the Departmental Selection Committee.
"Q : Do the registers, Exhibits A-1 to A-4, which you have produced in Court justify what you have stated above ?
Ans : The four registers only contain the marks supposed to have been obtained by the candidates who appeared in the written test.
Q : Do Exhibits A-1 to A-4 verify the statement made by you ?
Ans : There is nothing to that effect in these exhibits.
Q : Please state how the merit list was prepared; whether it was prepared on the basis of the marks awarded to the candidates whose roll numbers are recorded in Exhibits A-1 to A-4 ?
Ans : The merit list was prepared on the basis of the marks obtained by each candidate categorywise.
I cannot say if the merit list was prepared on the basis of Ex. A-1 to A-4.
Q : Please state how the list of the candidates was prepared for summoning the individual candidates for interview ?
Ans : The list of candidates for interview was prepared category-wise and on the basis of the performance of the candidates belonging to particular category.
The list came from Mrs. Kalpana Mittal Baruah certifying that she had checked up on the basis of the written examination.
I personally do not know on what basis the merit list was prepared.
Exhibit A-5 running into 11 pages is the list of candidates of all categories who were called for interview.
The list is not signed by any officer.
Even the source from which the list was prepared is not indicated on the list.
The list does not contain page numbers.
The result of the selected candidates is contained in lists, Exhibits A-6 and A-7.
Exhibit A-7 is signed by the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee, but Exhibit A-6 is not signed by anyone.
Candidate appearing under Roll No. 10412 applied under the category of Backward Classes.
The reservation for this category was 5 per cent of 40 posts and the share for Backward Classes category came to 2 posts.
The aforesaid candidate obtained 179 marks out of 300 marks in the written examination.
There were two vacancies for the Backward Classes.
11 candidates were called for interview.
Of them, 10 belonged to the category of riot-affected category, who as per the advertisement in 1987, were exempt from appearing in the written examination but were given a right to appear for interview.
Percentage of marks obtained in the written test plus the marks obtained in the interview by the candidate who appeared in the written examination were to be compared with the percentage of marks obtained by the riot-affected candidates only in viva voce .
Supposing a candidate obtains 200 marks in the written test and 40 marks in viva voce out of 300 and 100 marks respectively the percentage of marks obtained by him comes to 60.
A candidate belonging to the riot-affected category obtains only 45 marks out of 100 in viva voce.
The percentage of 60 would be compared qua the percentage of 45 obtained by the riot affected candidate.
Q : Was there any reservation for the riot-affected or terrorists victims ?
Ans : No such reservation was provided for in the advertisement.
However, their merit was considered category-wise.
By category-wise, I mean reservation for the various categories as per the Government's directive.
Q : Did the name of the candidate appearing under Roll No. 10412 figure in the first 11 candidates to be considered for appointment out of the Backward Classes category ?
Ans : The candidate appearing under Roll No. 10412 did not figure in the first 11 candidates to be considered for appointment out of the Backward Classes category.
Consequently, the question of his selection from out of the category under which he had applied did not arise.
Q : Please state the exact number of persons who had applied under the Physically Handicaped category.
Was any reservation made for such persons in the original advertisement and how many candidates were considered for selection from amongst the Physically Handicaped ?
Ans : I cannot state the exact number of person who had be applied under the physically handicapped persons.
In fact, no reservation was made for them in the original advertisement.
However, reservation had to be made as required under the Central Government's instructions.
These instruction enjoined upon the Selection Committee to make reservation for physically handicapped persons.
From amongst the physically handicaped candidates, only one candidate was to be selected on the basis of reservation.
As per record, initially 6 candidates were called for interview under the physically handicaped category.
Of them, the candidate with Roll No. 30365 had obtained maximum marks, i.e. 171 in the written test and 2933 marks in viva voce .
In aggregate, he got 20033 marks.
The candidate appearing under Roll No. 10412 was selected by the Selection Committee under mis-construction of the High Court's order.
Cross-examination by Mr. Rajiv Atam Ram, Advocate :  It is a fact that the advertisement did not prescribe reservation for physically handicapped persons; but such persons did apply under the category of physically handicaped and their merits were considered as per the Government's directive.
The candidate had intimated the Selection Committee before the start of interview that their cases be considered under the physically handicaped category and some of them had originally mentioned in their applications that they were physically handicaped and had enclosed certificates to that effect."
Cross-examination by Mr. DS Bhandal, Advocate :  Nil (Opportunity given).
Cross-examination by Mr. NS Boparai, AAG, Punjab :  Nil (Opportunity given).
8.
A bare reading of the statement of Shri NK Arora in unmistakable terms suggests that no proper record was maintained regarding the written test, viva voce test and the merit list of different categories.
According to the witness, more than 10,000 candidates appeared in the written test.
Registers Exhibits A-1 to A-4 contain the marks awarded to the candidates appearing in the written test and these registers contain the result of the written examination of less than 800 candidates.
Thus, it is impossible to rely upon this record for the reason that these registers do not contain the award list of 10,000 candidates who allegedly appeared in the written test as deposed by the witness.
It is painful how the Departmental Selection Committee dealing with the selection of public servants maintains the record of selection.
To say the least, it was done in a most perfunctory manner.
I do not want to comment further since the Chairman when appearing in the witness box was straight forward and he made a clean breast of every thing.
Respondent.
No. 4 did not qualify in the written test.
He was ineligible to be called for interview.
He secured a march over the candidates in the category of physically handicapped persons by procuring an order from this Court that he be interviewed at his own risk and responsibility subject to the final decision of the writ petition filed by him.
This order was understood by the Department Selection Committee as if he (respondent No. 4) had to be selected in the category of physically handicaped persons.
The order was misunderstood.
The interim order dated July 30, 1990 indicates that the Departmental Selection Committee showed lack of understanding of the tenor of this Court's order dated February 26, 1990 and has tended to do what it was not required to do and let respondent No. 4 to accomplish what otherwise he had failed to do.
The selection and thereafter appointment of respondent No. 4 cannot be upheld for the reason that the same is the result of fraud and evil mechanism and I accordingly quash it.
9.
The petitioner cannot be granted the second relief as claimed in the writ petition.
Since I have not quashed the entire selection to the posts of 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar, I leave it open to the Departmental Selection Committee to reconsider the case of the petitioner for selection as 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar keeping in view the observations made in this judgment.
10.
For the reason stated above, C.W.P.
No. 10980 of 1990 succeeds.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 Shri Rajinder Singh to the post of 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar is quashed, with costs.
Counsel's fee is assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
In C.W.P.
No. 12525 of 1990, the petitioner has impugned the selection of respondent No. 4 Shri Rajinder Singh as 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar.
I have, in the earlier part of the judgment, quashed the selection of Shri Rajinder Singh while disposing of CWP No. 10980 of 1990.
In this view of the matter, no further directions are called for in this writ petition and the same is disposed of in terms of the decision rendered in CWP.
No. 10980 of 1990.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition disposed of.