NK Sodhi, J - The facts in the instant case are few and simple.
Through an advertisement issued on December 21, 1987, applications were invited from Indian Nationals for filling up 40 posts of Naib Tehsildars in the State of Punjab in the scale of Rs. 700-1200/-.
These appointments are governed by the statutory rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and known as the Punjab Naib Tehsildars (Class III) Service Rules, 1984 (hereinafter called 'the Rules').
Recruitment to the service is made (i) 50% by direct appointment and (ii) 50% by promotion from amongst different categories of officials.
The advertised forty posts were to be filled up by direct appointment and it is the admitted case of the parties that one post out of these had been served for a 'sportsman'.
The petitioner and respondent No. 4 were both candidates and had applied for the appointment in pursuance of the aforementioned advertisement.
According to Rule 10 of the Rules, the recruiting authority held a competitive examination and also interviewed the candidates for selection who had to be brought on Register 'A' in accordance with the regulations.
Both the petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 who has been selected applied for the solitary post meant for 'sportsman'.
The petitioner who is a Grade-B Sportsman having been adjudged as such by the Director of Sports, Chandigarh, which certificate has been counter-signed by the competent authority of the Sports Department in the State of Punjab claims appointment to this reserved post in presence to respondent No. 4 on the ground that the letter was only 'C'-Grade sportsman.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner is a sportsman of National Standing having participated and won credits in shooting event held from time to time at National and State level championships.
Respondent No. 4, on the other hand, is a sportsman of State Standing and would fall in Grade - 'C' as contemplated by the instructions issued by the State of Punjab on 681986.
The stand of the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents in the written statement and their case as set out in pare 13 of the written statement is as under :  "It is, however, admitted to the extent that the petitioner attained III place in the Service Rifle Three Position Championship as per a copy of Special Certificate of merit issued by the National Rifle Association of India held in the XXIII NSCC at Chandigarh in March, 1980.
The order of merit has to be determined according to the aggregate of marks obtained in the written examination and interview in terms of Rule 4 of the Punjab Naib Tehsildars (Competitive Examination) Regulations, 1984.
Respondent No. 4 secured 1st position in a State Level Championship and as such he was eligible to be considered for reserved vacancy meant for sportsmen.
He is at No. 1 of the merit list of the candidates belonging to the category of sportsmen.
Thus respondent No. 4 has rightly been selected on merit and eligibility under the category of sportsmen under the Government rules/instructions.
2-3.
In order to appreciate the controversy between the parties, it is necessary to refer to the government instructions issued from time to time in the matter of reservation of seats for sportsmen in technical/medical institutions and in the services of the State Government.
The first set of instructions on the subject had been issued by the State Government on January 11, 1962.
(Annexure P12 with the writ petition) whereby the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab, notified the government policy in that regard.
It was provided that with a view to encourage sports talent the Government had decided to reserve certain percentage of seats for sportsmen/sportswomen for admission to technical/medical institutions in the State and recruitment to services under the State, through Punjab Public Service Commission/Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The policy postulated that the sportsmen shall be graded as follows :  (i) Grade-A : Sportsmen of International standing i.e. those who have represented India in International tournaments, meets, events, competitions etc. (ii) Grade-B : Sportsmen of national standing i.e. those who have represented their State, University, Services, School etc., or who hold National records in any events.
(iii) Grade - C : Sportsmen who have achieved State status by representing their colleges, school, service etc. in State Tournaments, Matches contests etc. or hold State Records in any events.
(iv) Grade - D : Sportsmen who claim to have played for their school, college or institution.
</< TD> 4.
In regard to the award of 'sportsmen' candidates, the Punjab Public Service Commission or the Punjab Subordinate Service Selection Board or other bodies responsible for selection were required to adopt the system of making each department fixing a quantum of marks which could not exceed 25 marks.
The quantum, however, was variable from service to service at the disorient of the recruiting department.
The candidates were advised to obtain certificates from the Sports Department and only such persons who are in possession of the certificates issued by the Sports Department would be eligible for the concessions.
These instructions did not provide that a candidate with grade 'A' Certificates would be preferred over the candidate possessing a 'B' Grade certificate.
Thereafter, the State Government kept on issuing further instructions from time to time and the earlier ones were modified/superseded.
The instructions were then modified in the year 1982 and again in the year 1983 and finally the instructions on the subject with which we are now concerned were issued by the State Government on August 6, 1986 by which the criteria for the grant of sports gradation certificate for entitlement to the concessions based thereon was revised.
It was specifically mentioned in these instructions that the certificate shall be in the following descending order of merits :-  Grade-A : Sportsmen of International standing.
Grade-B : Sportsman of National standing.
Grade-C : Sportsman of State standing.
Grade-D : Sportsman of District standing.
These instructions also restricted the sports discipliners in which the performance of the candidate could be considered for grant of concessions and also laid down the order of precedence.
The participation in a lower grade was made a pre-requisite or acceptability in the higher grade.
For instance, no achievement in grade-A would be recognised if it is not shown to have been achieved through participation in grade - B, C AND D.  These government instructions came up for consideration in some judgments of this Court.
In Mohinder Kaur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1985 Pb.
& Hry.
46, instructions of January 11, 1962 were considered and also the presidential order dated August 30, 1984 which in the admission test in respect of sportsmen/sportswomen based upon their sports gradation, as mentioned below :  (i) Grade-A : 8% of the marks secured in the written test.
(ii) Grade-B : 5% of the marks secured in the written test.
(iii) Grade-C : 3% of the marks secured in the written test.
(iv) Grade-D : 2% of the marks secured in the written test.
The learned Judge (now Hon'ble the Acting Chief Justice) took the view that through the reservation had been made with a view to encourage sports talent, yet, on the basis of formula adopted by the Government, the best possible sportsman having 'A' grade certificates had to be ignored and the candidates mostly possessing 'D' and 'C' Grade certificates were given admission to the colleges and that, according to the learned Judge, was not only irrational but also arbitrary.
It was held that if the policy of reservation for sportsman was to have any meaning then essentially qua the sportsmen/sportwomen who had qualified the entrance test and had come to form a class by themselves, the only consideration that should prevail with the authorities for the purpose of admission has to be the rating of the candidates in the light of their performance in the field of sports.
The rule of weightages prescribed by the presidential order was quashed which meant that, the claim of 'A' - grade sportsmen had to be preferred over 'B'- grade sportsmen irrespective of their academic merit.
The corrections of this decision was doubted by a Division Bench consisting of SP Goyal and DV Sehgal, JJ in C.W.P.
4478 of 1986 and when the matter was finally heard by RN Mittal and MM Punchhi, JJ in Ranbir Singh v. Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology Patiala, 1987 (4) S.L.R.
233, the view expressed by the learned Judge in Maninder Kaur's case (supra) was over-ruled.
The view taken by the Division Bench was that the admission related to a professional college and not to a sports college and that in order to pass an examination in such professional colleges a candidate should have good academic career otherwise it may not be possible for him to pass the same.
5.
This matter again came up for consideration before a Division Bench in Daljeet Kaur v. State of Punjab, C.W.P.
No. 10623 of 1989, in which in somewhat similar circumstances though the matter pertained to admissions to educational institutions it was reiterated after referring to the various instructions, that relative merit amongst the sports category candidates would determine the admissions and that relative merit would have to be redrawn by giving weightages on the basis of grades of certificates as mentioned in the presidential order.
It was also observed that nowhere been held as an obstruct proposition of law that when sportsmen are given a reservation their sports eminence is to predominate over academic excellence.
The learned Judge also observed that the government policy right from the beginning has been to give some marks to sportsmen over and above what they earn academically so as to induct them in professional colleges and government services and the policy in Punjab has never been to throw academic excellence to the winds.
Against the judgment of this court in Daljit Kaur's case (supra), the matter was taken in appeal to the Supreme Court in Sandeep Brar v. State of Punjab, JT 1990 (T) SC 94 and the Hon'ble Judges after granting special leave, pronounced their conclusions and observed that a reasoned judgment would be delivered later on.
As per the conclusions, the judgment of this Court in Daljit Kaur case has been set aside.
6.
Let me at this stage dispose of a contention advanced on behalf of respondent 4.
It was urged that the decision of the Supreme Court in Sandeep Brar's case could only prospectively overrule the judgment in Daljit Kaur's case and, therefore, no fault could be found with the appointment of respondent No. 4 as it was made prior to the decision in Sandeep Brar's case and in accordance with the law as it then stood in Daljit Kaur's case.
In support of this contention, learned counsel placed strong reliance on the following observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramjan Khan, AIR 1991 SC 47 :  "There have been several decisions in different High Courts which, following the Forty-Second amendment have taken the view that it is no longer necessary to furnish a copy of the inquiry report to delinquent officers.
Even on some occasions this Court has taken that view.
Since we have reached a different conclusion the judgment in the different High Courts taking the contrary view must be taken to be longer laying down good law.
We have not been shown any decision of a coordinate or a larger Bench of this Court taking this view.
Therefore, the conclusion to the contrary reached by any two-Judge Beach in this Court will also no longer be taken to be laying down good law, but this shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on the ground."
This contention has only to be noticed to be rejected.
When a judgment is overruled by a higher Court then the higher Court only declares the law as it always stood and it must be presumed that it was never the law otherwise.
In Mohd.
Ramzan Mian's case (supra) their Lordships had to specifically as they did not want all the concluded inquiries to be reopened.
The observations on which strong reliance was placed do not lay down that when a judgment is overruled it always takes prospective effect.
Their observations to my mind do not advance the contention raised on behalf of respondent No. 4.
This being the position, the appointment of respondent No. 4 cannot be said to have been made in accordance with law as it then 'stood though for the reasons stated hereinafter I am of the view that the instructions of 1966 are not applicable and the appointment of respondent No. 4 is otherwise valid being in accordance with statutory Rules.
7.
While strongly relying upon the conclusions of the Supreme Court and in view of the fact that the judgment of this Court in Daljit Kaur's case has been set aside by the Supreme Court, the counsel for the petitioner contended that in the matter of appointments against the posts reserved for sportsmen/sportswomen, it is the proficiency in the field of sports which alone should determine the merit of the candidates provided they all fulfil the qualifications relating to eligibility.
It is true, as contended by the learned councel for the petitioner, that if the matter was to be governed only by instruction of August 6, 1986 then for the sports category candidates the merit will have to be determined in the light of their performance in the field of sports.
According to the instructions dated August 6, 1986 which lay down the depending order of merit, candidates possessing 'A' - grade.
certificates are to be given preference over the candidate's possessing 'B' grade certificates and similarly, as in the instant case, a candidate with 'B' - grade certificates has to be preferred over the candidate with 'C' - grade certificates and so on.
It is also true that the object of making reservation for sportsmen was to encourage their sports talent and howsoever inclined I may be to accept this contention of the counsel, the matter here pertains to appointment to the service governed by Rules which, as already observed have been framed under Articles 309 of the Rules or regulations framed thereunder then to that extent the Rules shall prevail.
It is a settled principle of law that administrative instructions cannot override the Rules.
The service, as mentioned earlier, is governed by the Rules and recruitment to the service is by way of direct appointment and promotion.
According to Rule 8 the following Registers of candidates have to be maintained by each Commissioner, namely, (i) Register 'A' in which the names of candidates for direct appointment on the basis of recommendations of the recruiting authority in order of merit assigned to them by the authority are entered (ii) Registers 'B', 'C' & 'D' (we are not concerned with the Registers in the present case).
Appointment to the service is hen made from amongst the candidates whose names have been duly entered in the Register of candidates maintained under Rule B Rules 10 then provide for a competitive examination and read as under :-  "The recruiting authority shall hold a competitive examination and interview for selection of candidates to be brought on Register 'A' in accordance with the regulations."
In exercise of powers conferred by Rule 24 the Rules, read with Rule 10 the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) has framed regulations known as 'The Punjab Tehsildars Competitive Examination [Regulation], 1984, Regulation 4 of these Regulations tells us the manner in which the order of merit of the candidates is to be settled in the case of direct recruitment.
It reads as under :-  "Regulation 4-Order of Merit - The name of candidates shall be arranged in the order of merit according to the aggregate of marks obtained in the written examination and interview."
Rule 10 read with Regulation 4 makes it abundantly clear that every candidate who seeks appointment to the post of Naib Tehsildar by way of direct recruitment will have to sit in the competitive examination and their order of merit shall be determined according to the aggregate of marks obtained in the written examination and interview.
This Rule and Regulation 4 do not exempt the candidates who are competing for the post reserved for sportsmen.
It is for this reason that both the petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 sat in the competitive examination and cleared the same.
It is not in dispute that respondent No. 4 was placed higher in merit than the petitioner on the basis of written examination and interview and it is for this reason, as per the stand of the respondent in the written statement, that he was given the appointment.
The claim of the petitioner that he should have been appointed in preference to the said respondent merely on the ground that the possessor of 'B' grade certificate as order of said respondent had been categorised in grade - 'C' as a sportsman of state ascending only, cannot be accented in view of the statutory rules governing the service and in my opinion, the executive instructions dated August 6, 1986 on which strong reliance was placed by the petitioner would not apply.
From amongst the candidate who applied for the reserved post, the one should secure higher marks in the competitive examination would be entitled to be appointed to that post.
In other words, merit of the candidates competing for the reserved post would be the governing yardstick for giving appointment against that post and this is precisely what the State has done in the instant case.
8.
As already observed earlier, the State Government had been issuing instructions in the matter of reservation for sportsman in the State services from time to time but finally to clinch the matter the President of India in the year 1988, framed statutory rules in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution on February 1, 1988 called "The Punjab Recruitment Sportsmen Rules, 1988 (hereinafter called the 1988 Rules).
These Rules apply to all services and posts connected with affairs of the State of Punjab and regulate the recruitment of the sportsmen to the State Civil Services.
With the promulgation of these Rules, all the earlier executive instructions regarding reservation for sportsmen seem to be no longer of any consequence.
The word 'sportsman' for the purposes of recruitment to State services has been defined but it is not necessary to refer to them as they are not applicable in the present case.
The vacancies here not only existed prior to their promulgation but were even notified in the year 1987.
It is well settled that vacancies which occur prior to the promulgation of the new Rules would be governed by the old Rules or instructions which were prevalent prior to the promulgation of the new Rules.
In the instant case, the 1986 instructions were in the field and so were the rule, I have already held above that the appointments in the instant case are governed by the service Rules and not by the instructions.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.