NK Sodhi, J - There has been going on a see-saw battle between the petitioner Shri DN Sudhir (who for the sake of convenience will hereinafter be referred to as 'Sudhir') and respondent No. 5 Shri KK Khanna (who too will be referred to as 'Khanna') in regard to their inter se seniority and this judgment will dispose of two writ petition Nos. 2919 of 1980 & 3948 of 1982 filed by them and also another Civil Writ Petition No 1787 of 1983.
2.
In October, 1957, the Chief Secretary to Govt. Punjab, issued instructions on behalf of the State Govt. prescribing an Assistant Grade Examination for promotion from the post of a Clerk to the post of an Assistant.
This examination to begin with was introduced for the employees in the Punjab Civil Secretariat and since this system of promotion through a qualifying test worked satisfactorily, the State Govt. decided that a similar qualifying test be forthwith introduced in other departments as well for the purposes of promotion from Clerks to Assistants.
This decision of the State Government was also contained in the Punjab Govt. letter dated October 23, 1957.
Thereafter, the Chief Secretary, Government Punjab, issued a letter dated September 5, 1958 to all the Heads of Departments, the Registrar, Punjab High Court, Commissioners of Ambala, Patiala, and Jullundhar Divisions, the District & Sessions Judges and the Deputy Commissioners in Punjab, which read as under :-  "I am directed to invite a reference to Pb.
Govt. letter No. 4809-GII- 57/21176 dated 23rd/24th October, 1957, on the subject noted above and to enclose a copy of the instructions laying down the procedure for regulating appointments to the cadre of Assistants in Punjab Civil Secretariat, Government, however, do not consider it necessary to issue any rigid instructions for needs of different Heads of Departments and District Offices may not conform to one rigid pattern.
I am accordingly to request you to issue instructions which are generally on these lines in respect of your departments although they need not be strict identical.
A copy of the instructions framed by you may be forwarded to Government within two months of the issue of this letter."
In pursuance of the directions issued by the Chief Secretary, the then Home Secretary to Government Punjab being the Administrative Secretary of the Home Guards Department issued instructions vide his letter dated March 6, 1959 laying down conditions of service of the employees of the Home Guards Department wherein the Clerks eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant were required to pass a qualifying test as required by the Punjab Government in its letter dated October 23, 1957.
It was made clear in the letter that in case Clerks working in the Directorate did not fulfil the conditions or qualify the test, recruitment to the post of Assistants could be made by importing qualified persons from other Departments/Secretariat.
It is the admitted position that there have never been any statutory rules governing the service conditions of the employees of the Home Guards Department.
3.
Sudhir was appointed as a Clerk in the year 1957 in the Panchayat Department and was then transferred to the office of the Commandant, Home Guards and Director, Civil Defence, Punjab, Chandigarh, where he joined on 1.12.1959.
He was then promoted as an Assistant on 141961 being the senior-most Clerk but subject to passing the Assistant Grade Examination which examination he cleared on November 25, 1962.
There was need for more Assistants in the Department but in the absence of qualified persons, Khanna was brought in from the Co-operative Department and appointed as an Assistant for the first time in the Department of Home Guards on December 1, 1962.
It may be mentioned that Khanna had passed the Assistant Grade Examination in June, 1962 ie earlier than Sudhir.
The Home Guards Department then circulated seniority list of Assistants as on June 1, 1968.
Sudhir was shown at Sr. No. 2 whereas Khanna was at Sr. No. 3.
Presumably, the seniority was determined from the date of appointment as Assistants.
Khanna represented to the Department and contended that he should be placed senior to Sudhir as he had passed the Assistant Grade Examination earlier than Sudhir.
The representation was accepted and by an order dated November 30, 1971 passed by the Deputy Secretary, Home, Khanna was placed at Sr. No. 1 and Sudhir was placed at No. 3 (i.e. below Khanna).
4.
In the meantime, one Shamsher Jung Bahadur, an employee of the Punjab Civil Secretariat who was reverted from the post of an Assistant to that of a Clerk in the year 1960 on the ground that he failed to qualify the Assistant Grade Examination prescribed by the administrative instructions of the State Government, challenged his conversion in a civil suit which was decreed upto the High Court.
When the matter was taken in appeal to the Supreme Court, their Lordships observed that the employees of the Punjab Civil Secretariat at the relevant time were governed by the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Services Class III) Rules, 1952 framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and those Rules could not be amended or superseded by administrative instructions.
It was held that since the instructions issued by the Government added to the qualifications already prescribed by the statutory Rules, the Government had really altered the conditions of service of the employees by issuing instructions which it could not do.
The appeal filed by the State of Haryana was, thus, dismissed.
The Government instructions of 1957 gave rise to yet another facet of litigation.
In compliance with the directions of the Chief Secretary contained in the letters dated October 23, 1957 and September 5, 1958, referred to herein before, the Commissioner, Patiala Division, by executive instructions.
issued on July 5, 1960, made it incumbent for an official to pass the Assistant Grade Examination for promotion to the post of an Assistant from that of a Clerk.
One Harnam Singh who was reverted from the post of an Assistant to that of a Clerk by an order passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, implementing the instructions issued by the Commissioner, Patiala Division, challenged the legality of his reversion in the Court of the Subordinate Judge 1st Class, Sangrur on the ground that the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary in 1957 and 1958 as also the instructions issued in compliance thereto by the Commissioner, Patiala Division, were illegal and unconstitutional being violative of Article 309 of the Constitution as it was only the Governor who could make the Rules regulating appointment and conditions of service of the employees and the Chief Secretary had no authority to issue any such instructions.
The suit was decreed and it was held that the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary to all the Heads of the Departments in 1957 and 1958 as also the instructions issued by the Commissioner, Patiala Division in compliance to the instructions of the Chief Secretary were illegal, without jurisdiction and null & void being ultra vires the provisions of Article 309 of the Constitution.
According to the learned Subordinate Judge, it was the Governor alone who could frame service rules or could delegate his authority to the Chief Secretary and he found that no such authority had been delegated and, therefore, the Chief Secretary could not issue the instructions which he did.
The Judgment and decree passed by the subordinate judge was upheld in appeal and the Second Appeal filed by the State of Punjab (RSA No. 892 of 1964) was dismissed by this Court on September 18, 1964.
5.
The decision of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana versus Shamsher Jung Bahadur (1972 S.L.R.
441) and the judgment of the subordinate Judge in Harnam Singh's case were then considered by the State Government and the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab vide letter dated June 17, 1976 addressed to all the Heads of the Departments, conveyed amongst others the following decisions of the State Government :  "Consequently upon the above-mentioned instructions, relating to the condition of passing Assistant Grade Examination having been declared ultra vires of the Constitution by the Court, Government have considered the whole matter thoroughly and have decided that with a view to implementing the decision of the Supreme Court in letter and spirit, the steps enumerated in the Departments, wherever required.
RESCINDING OF INSTRUCTIONS :  The instructions dated 23rd October, 1957 and 5th September, 1958 referred to above, including any subsequent instructions issued with a view to elaborating the policy with regard to promotion as Assistant, should be deemed to have been rescinded in view of the verdict of the Court holding them ultra vires.
VACATING THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT EFFECT OF INSTRUCTIONS.
The departments who were acting directly on the basis of the aforesaid instructions for imposing the condition of passing the Assistant Grade Examination before promotion or were indirectly relying upon these instructions, while giving effect to general provisions in their respective service rules that for promotion to the rank of Assistant it shall be necessary to pass such Assistant Grade Examination as specified by Government shall also vacate the effect of the instructions in question, unless the departments concerned had made specific provisions in the form of Rules under Article 309 of the Constitution for holding such an examination.
INDEPENDENT CONDITION OF ASSISTANT GRADE EXAMINATION NOT VALID WITHOUT THE ORDER OF THE COMPETENT AUTHORITY.
In services in respect of which no rules have been framed so far and in respect of which no order of the competent authority providing for holding of Assistant Grade Examination in the manner specified in Articles 309 or 320 of the Constitution of India or independent terms and conditions relating to certain posts have been issued, the condition of Assistant Grade Examination imposed so far shall also not be valid."
6.
Now, that the Government instructions of 1957 and 1958 as also those issued by the Home Secretary on March 6, 1959 had been rescinded by the State Government and also declared unconstitutional by the Court in Harnam Singh's case, the Government again considered the case of seniority of Sudhir, Khanna and others in the Home Guards Department.
Since passing of the Assistant Grade Examination was not to be regarded as a condition precedent for promotion from the post of a Clerk to that of an Assistant, sonority was again fixed by the Department on the basis of length of service as Assistants and Sudhir was placed at No. 1 whereas Khanna was placed at No. 3.
There was another official in between the two of them with whom we are not concerned in these two writ petitions.
This seniority was fixed by the Government vide letter dated August 16, 1976.
Obviously, Khanna felt aggrieved against this fixation of seniority and approached this Court by filing C.W.P.
3041 of 1977.
This petition was heard by a Division Bench of this Court and the same was allowed by an order dated 19101977.
It was observed that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Shamsher Jung Bahadur's case (supra) would not apply in the case of the employees working in the Home Guards Department as there were no statutory rules governing the service conditions of the employees there.
It was held while relying on an earlier Division Bench judgment in Rajinder Nath Malhotra v. State of Punjab, 1980 P.L.R.
32 that in the absence of any statutory rules, the instructions issued by the State Government would apply.
Shamsher Jung Bhadur's case pertained to the Punjab Civil Secretariat Service which was governed by the statutory rules and, therefore, the executive instructions issued by the State Government could not apply there.
While disposing of the writ petition filed by Khanna, the learned Judges observed as under :  "For the reasons given in Rajinder Nath Malhotra's case (supra) in this regard, we accept both the writ petitions and set aside the reframed seniority lists copies of which are Annexure P10 with Civil Writ No. 3041 of 1977 and Annexure P6/A with Civil Writ No. 2636 of 1977.
However, if any of the respondents feels that his case is covered by the judgment in Harnam Singh's case (supra), it will be open to him to approach the authorities concerned for passing appropriate orders.
The authorities concerned may pass the appropriate orders after hearing all the affected parsons in accordance with law."
Sudhir was one of the respondents in the aforesaid writ petition filed by Khanna.
In pursuance of the observations made by the Division Bench, Sudhir filed a representation claiming that he was senior to Khanna and the instructions issued by the State Government were not valid having been struck down as unconstitutional by the Court in Harnam Singh's case and that they had been rescinded by the Government itself.
While this representation was pending, Sudhir filed the present Civil Writ Petition 2919 of 1981 for a mandamus directing the State to declare him senior to Khanna.
The Deputy Secretary, Home, vide his communication dated September 6, 1982 accepted the representation made by Sudhir and he was placed at No. 1 in the seniority list.
7.
Now it was the turn of Khanna to approach this Court again.
He filed Civil Writ Petition 3948 of 1982 challenging the order dated September 6, '1982 whereby Sudhir was made senior to him and it is this writ petition also that is being disposed of.
The only prayer which Sudhir has made in his writ petition is that he should be declared senior to Khanna.
This prayer of his having been accepted by the State, his writ petition becomes infructuous.
Khanna in his writ petition has challenged the order of September 6, 1982 whereby Sudhir was made senior to him.
Khanna can succeed only if the executive instructions issued by the Chief Secretary are made applicable.
It is true that the Division Bench while allowing the earlier writ petition filed by Khanna held that the government instructions of 1957 and 1958 as also those issued by the Home Secretary on March, 1959 would apply to the Department of Home Guards as there were no statutory rules governing the service conditions of the employees of that Department.
At the same time, the learned Judges of the Division Bench were conscious of the fact that the instructions had been quashed by the Court in Harnam Singh's case and, therefore, specifically gave a right to the respondents in that writ petition to make representation to the Department in the light of the decision in Harnam Singh's case.
The instructions having been struck down, these cannot obviously be made applicable.
If the Chief Secretary had no authority to issue instructions to all the Heads of the Departments, how could the latter in compliance with those instructions issue further instructions making the passing of the Assistant Grade Examination a condition for promotion to the post of Assistant from that of a Clerk.
Be that as it may, the instructions issued by the Government in 1957 and 1958 were rescinded by the Government itself on June 17, 1976 in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Shamsher Jung Bahadur's case and also the decision in Harnam Singh's case and consequently, there is no escape from the conclusion that the instructions issued by the State Government could not apply.
In this view of the matter, Khanna cannot be placed senior to Sudhir who was admittedly appointed as an Assistant much eairler than Khanna.
Thus, there is no merit in Civil Writ Petition 3948 of 1982 filed by Khanna.
8.
There is yet another Civil Writ Petition 1787 of 1983 which can also be conveniently disposed of with this judgment as the question of law involved is the same as in the earlier two petitions.
9.
The petitioners herein belonged to the Food & Supplies Department, Punjab where again there were no statutory rules governing their conditions of service.
In compliance with the instructions of the Chief Secretary dated October 23, 1957 and September 5, 1958 referred to earlier, the Director, Food & Supplies and Deputy Secretary to Government Punjab had similarly issued instructions to all the District Food and Supplies Controllers/Assistant Food& Supplies Officers in the State wherein passing of a competitive test was made a condition precedent for promotion to the post of an Assistant from that of a Clerk.
After the decision of the Supreme Court in Shamsher Jung Bahadur's case (supra) and the decision in Harnam Singh's case (supra), the Chief Secretary rescinded the earlier instructions vide letter dated June 17, 1976.
Even otherwise, as already observed above, these instructions had been declared unconstitutional in Harnam Singh's case.
Consequently, a fresh seniority list was drawn up by the Department and circulated vide letter dated June 29, 1977 (Annexure P7 with the writ petition).
In this seniority list, the petitioners were shown senior to the private respondents.
Some of the respondents challenged this seniority list in this Court by filing Civil Writ Petition 2636 of 1977 and the petitioners were respondents therein.
This writ petition was decided by Division Bench of this court along with Civil Writ Petition 3041 of 1977 filed by Khanna to which a detailed reference has already been made above.
Although this writ petition (2636 of 1977) was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court, the respondents therein were specifically given a right to make a representation in the light of the decision in Harnam Singh's case The petitioners filed a detailed representation claiming that they were senior to the respondents and that seniority inter se had to be fixed as if no test had ever been prescribed.
The representation was rejected vide letter dated December 2, 1981 on the ground that Harnam Singh's case was not applicable as there were no statutory service rules in the Food & Supplies Department to which Department the petitioners and the respondents belonged.
It is this order which has been impugned in this writ petition.
10.
Having heard counsel for the parties at length, I am of the view that civil writ petition 1787 of 1983 deserves to be allowed.
In Harnam Singh's case (supra) instructions issued by the Chief Secretary on 23.10.1957 and 5.9.1958 were struck down as unconstitutional and it was in compliance with these instructions that the Director Food & Supplies, Punjab, had prescribed a competitive test as a condition precedent for promotion to the post of an Assistant.
After the decision in Harnam Singh's case, the State Government itself had rescinded its earlier instructions and, therefore, the seniority had to be refixed as if the test had never been prescribed.
If this test had not been prescribed, then admittedly the petitioners were senior to the respondents and the Department should refix (??)
them so vide seniority list dated June 29, 1977.
In this view of the matter, the Department was not justified in rejecting the representation made by the petitioners and the order dated December 2, 1981 has to be quashed.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, Civil Writ Petitions 2919 of 1980 and 3948 and of 1982 are dismissed whereas Civil Writ Petition 1787 of 1983 is allowed and the order dated December 2, 1982 quashed.
Respondents 1 to 3 in Civil Writ Petition 1787 of 1983 are directed to refix the seniority of the petitioners and the private respondents as Assistants as if no test had been prescribed by the State Government.
The respondents are also directed to refix the seniority of the parties as Deputy Superintendents and Superintendents to which posts they all were subsequently promoted.
In doing so, if the seniority of the petitioners is refixed at a higher place, then in that event their pay will have to be refixed and if the pay so fixed is higher than the one which the petitioners were drawing at the time of their retirement, their pension would also be accordingly revised and arrears of pension paid to them within six months from today.
It is made clear that the petitioners would not be entitled to any arrears of salary in case they are found entitled to promotion from a date earlier than the one were actually given promotion as they did not actually work against the higher posts.
Parties shall bear their own costs in each case.
Order accordingly.