RS Mongia, J - This judgment of mine shall dispose of C.W.P.
No. 1605 of 1990 and C.W.P.
No. 13685 of 1991, as these are cross petitions, the former by the Management and the latter by the workman, which have been filed against the same award of the Labour Court.
I will also finally dispose of Civil Misc. No. 2850 of 1991 in C.W.P.
No. 1605 of 1990, which was filed by the workman under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter called the Act).
The facts of the case are as follows :  2.
Haryana Dairy Development Cooperative Federation Ltd, Chandigarh (hereinafter called the Management), had appointed Mam Chand, respondent (hereinafter called the workman) as a sweeper on 24th August, 1979.
The workman was charge-sheet by the Management on 13th January, 1983, to the following effect :-  "Shri Mam Chand Safai Karamchari, Milk Plant committed following acts due to which he is guilty of misconduct :- i) On 3151982 at 1000 am rice pieces and cigarette ends were found lying about in front of the Milk Plant.
The petitioner was asked by the Security Officer to clean the area properly but the petitioner not only refused to comply with the directions but used rude language.
2) On 1061982 the Dairy Development Minister was to visit the plant.
The front portion of the plant was not cleaned despite directions from the Security Officer and the petitioner used bad language against him as well as the Minister.
3) On 1261982 the petitioner was asked by the Security Officer through Hari Om attendant to clean the Guest House but the petitioner refused to clean and misbehaved with the Security Officer.
4) Remained absent without leave on 2461982.
Sd/-  Managing Director.
List of misconducts of Shri Mam Chand Safai Karamchari, Milk Plant Ballabhgarh.
Shri Mam Chand, Safai Karamchari, Milk Plant Ballabhgarh is guilty of the following misconducts :-  i) Disobeying orders of superiors and use of bad language against them.
ii) Absence without permission of competent authority.
Sd/-  Managing Director."
The Enquiry Officer (Shri Amrik Singh, District Manager), held the workman guilty and a show cause notice dated 29th May, 1984 was issued to the workman by the Managing Director, as to why his services be not dispensed with on the basis of the enquiry report.
After consideration of the reply, the services of the workman were terminated on 23rd June, 1984, which led to the raising of an industrial dispute by the workman, which was referred by the Government for adjudication to the Labour Court, Faridabad.
3.
One of the issues before the Labour Court, was whether the domestic enquiry was fair and Roper.
It was argued on behalf of the workman before the Labour Court that the Enquiry Officer, Shri Amrik Singh, District Manager of the Management, was the General Manager of the concerned Milk Plant and as such was in personal knowledge of the material facts and as a matter of fact he was the complainant against the workman and he could not be a judge against the workman since he had conducted a vague and false enquiry against him.
The learned Labour Court vide its order dated 1st June, 1988 held as under :-  "After going through the file, I am of the opinion that this Officer should not have been appointed as an Enquiry Officer in the matter since he was overall Incharge, General Manager of Milk Plant where Shri Mam Chand was working as a Sweeper and he had been receiving complaints against him from time to time.
This very General Manager had appointed Shri Rajbir Singh, Security Officer, as Presenting Officer of Milk Plant before the Enquiry Officer namely himself.
Complaints Ex.M-8, M-9, M-11 and M-12 are addressed by several employees to this General Manager and it is he who had passed orders for his explanation.
In this matter he was directly involved in the case and he must not have been appointed as an Enquiry Officer in the case.
It might not be illegal but definitely it was not proper to do so and propriety demands that some other person should have been appointed Enquiry Officer in this case.
In view of this wrong approach of the respondent finding of the said Enquiry Officer cannot be called as free from doubt and colour."
4.
It was further held by the Labour Court that there was substance and force in the contention of the workman that during the course of domestic enquiry, complaints, Exhibits M-8 to M-12 (which had been produced before the Labour Court) were not produced by the Management before the Enquiry Officer.
Therefore, it had prejudiced the defence of the workman.
It was also held by the Labour Court that the enquiry report had not been supplied to the workman alongwith the show cause notice.
Because of the findings on these counts, Labour Court held that in its opinion there had not been proper enquiry in the matter and further that Shri Amrik Singh, Enquiry Officer, was the General Manager of the concerned Milk Plant and was already in the knowledge of everything.
He could not be a proper person in recording an independent finding in the matter and as such the report submitted by him was quashed.
The issue was accordingly decided against the Management.
The Management had made a request to grant permission to it to lead evidence on merits of the case in case it was held that there had been no proper and fair enquiry in the matter.
Consequently, the Labour Court gave an opportunity to the Management to prove the charge independently before it, and the case was adjourned for that matter.
5.
On 25th August, 1988, Shri Raghbir Singh, Security Officer of the Management appeared and gave evidence before the Labour Court.
He was also cross-examined on behalf of the workman.
Ultimately, vide award dated 29th September, 1989, after appreciating the evidence produced before it, the Labour Court held that the allegations levelled against the workman about insubordination, disobedience and using of unparliamentary language had been proved.
However, after holding the workman guilty of the charges, as observed above, the learned Labour Court held that since the element of violence was missing in the case, as such a lenient view be taken against the workman.
Invoking the provision of Section 11-A of the Act, the Labour Court revoked the order of termination and instead substituted the same by ordering reinstatement of the workman in the job with continuity of service and half of the back wages were allowed to him with effect from 24th June, 1985, i.e. the date when the demand notice was served by the workman on the Management.
As observed in the opening paragraph of the judgment, two cross writ petitions have been filed against this award.
The Management has pressed that the award to be set aside in toto, whereas the workman has filed the writ petition for modifying the award to the extent it only gives half of the back wages.
6.
The learned counsel for the workman argued that there was no evidence to record a finding as had been arrived at by the Labour Court and the evidence of Rajbir Singh has not been corroborated.
Further, according to the learned counsel for the workman, past record had been taken into consideration.
The whole basis of the charge-sheet, according to the learned counsel was, that the workman had refused to do the menial job at the house of the General Manager of cleaning his house and utensils.
7.
I have gone through the award of the Labour Court.
After earlier holding that the enquiry was not proper, the Labour Court gave chance to both sides to lead evidence and it was only after appreciating the evidence that he has recorded the finding that the charges against the workman are proved.
Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, I cannot reappraise the evidence.
There is evidence on the record which has been duly appreciated by the Labour Court.
Consequently, there is nothing wrong in the finding of the Labour Court.
As far as the argument of consideration of past record of the workman by the Labour Court is concerned, the Labour Court has not based the finding or the punishment on the basis of the past record.
Only in passing, it has observed in the award that the workman is being haunted by his past service record, since according to the same, he had been irregular, un- punctual and a rude employee.
I have no hesitation in negativing this submission of the learned counsel.
Apart from the above, this writ petition seems to be a counter blast to the writ petition of the Management, which was filed in February, 1990, whereas the writ petition by the workman was filed in September, 1991.
8.
Now coming to the writ petition of the Management, the learned counsel for the petitioner-Management submitted that once the Labour Court had come to a finding that the charges were proved against the workman, it was not justified to substitute the punishment which was awarded by the Management, unless it had come to the finding that the punishment was not commensurate with the gravity of the offence charged.
It had to see whether the punishment awarded was disproportionate to the extent that it suggested victimisation.
According to the learned counsel, the Labour Court for awarding lesser punishment took into consideration only the fact that element of violence was missing.
The learned counsel argued that it is only in cases where the workman is attributed violence that punishment of dismissal/termination of services can be awarded.
The learned counsel relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court, reported as P G Institute of Medical and Research, Chandigarh v. Labour Court, Chandigarh, 1990(1) LLJ 70, wherein it has been observed as under :-  "It is a well recognised principle of jurisprudence which permits penalty to be imposed for misconduct that the penalty must be commensurate with the gravity of the offence charged.
This view of ours finds support from 1983(1) S.L.R.
135, Rama Kant Misra v. State of UP.
(S.C).
However, where the finding of misconduct is plausible conclusion flowing from the evidence, the Labour Court has no jurisdiction to sit in judgment over the decision of employer as an appellate body.
Once the misconduct is proved, either in the enquiry conducted by an employer or by the evidence placed before Labour Court/Tribunal for the first time, punishment imposed cannot be interfered by it except in cases where the punishment is so harsh as to suggest victimisation."
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the submissions made by the learned counsel for the Management are well founded.
There is no doubt that the Labour Court can interfere with the quantum of punishment, but it has to come to a conclusion that the punishment is so dis-proportionate that it tantamount to victimisation or in other words it is so disproportionate to the gravity of the offence that it shocks judicial conscience.
Simply because the element of violence was missing in the case was no ground to interfere in the quantum of punishment.
The charges of insubordination and use of unparliamentary language are quite serious.
Consequently, I hold that the Labour Court was not justified in interfering with the punishment awarded by the Management of terminating the services of the workman.
I, therefore, hold that this part of the award, where the punishment has been reduced, is not sustainable and punishment of termination of services of the workman is justified.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, writ petition No. 12685 of 1991 is dismissed, while writ petition No. 1605 of 1990 is allowed, as indicated above.
There will be no order as to costs.
11.
Now coming to the Misc.
Application under Section 17-B of the Act, the learned counsel for the workman submitted that, irrespective of the decision of the writ petitions, the workman is entitled to the future wages under Section 17-B of the Act, in case the High Court stays the operation of the award regarding reinstatement.
The learned counsel for the workman has given satisfactory explanation as to why this application could not be moved earlier.
The spirit behind Section 17-B of the Act is that the workman is deemed to be working with the Management and is entitled to the wages.
In other words, option is given to the Management either to get work from the workman by reinstating him or to give future wages.
In this view of the matter, though the writ petition is being dismissed, yet for the interregnum period, i.e. from the date the stay order was wanted granted regarding the operation of the award, i.e. 8th February, 1990 till date, the workman will be entitled to the wages.
However, the Management is entitled to deduct the wages which may have already been paid for any part of the period indicated above.
With the above observations, Civil Application stands disposed of.
Order accordingly.