Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The common question of law of substantial and general importance that has been referred for consideration by a Full Bench in this writ petition, R.S.A.
Nos. 542, 2862 and 2864 of 1986 and LPA No. 892 of 1984, is whether the order dispensing with the services of a government employee simpliciter (whether on ad hoc or temporary basis), in accordance with the contract of employment, would be ipso facto arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, if his juniors are retained.
2.
Before advering directly to the question posed, it would be apt to examine the status, nature and tenure of a temporary government servant.
This matter has been the subject-matter of a large number of decisions of the Supreme Court as also of various High Courts.
As far back as in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, 1988 SCR 828, it was held that a temporary Government servant had no right to hold the post and his services were liable to be terminated at any time, either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of his service.
However, in case the order of termination was punitive in nature and was in the nature of a punishment sought to be imposed, then the provisions and procedure set out in Article 311 of the Constitution would have to be followed, but where the services were sought to be terminated in terms of the contract of service or the relevant rules, the provisions of the said Article were not required to be complied with, as such an order did not involve any evil consequences on the employee.
The evil consequences visualised in Parshotam Lal Dhingra's case (supra), did not include the termination of the services of a temporary government employee in accordance with the terms and conditions of his service.
The view taken by the Constitution Bench in Parshotam Lal Dhingra's case (supra) was reiterated in The State of Orissa and another v. Ram.
Narayan Das, 1961(1) SCR 606, RC Lacy v. The State of Bihar, CA No. 590 of 1962 decided on 23101963, Champaklal Chaimanlal Shah v. The Union of India, 1964(5) SCR 190, Jagdish Mitter v. The Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 449, AG Benjamin v. Union of India, CA No. 1341 of 1966, Shamsher Singh and another v. State of Punjab, 1975(1) SCR 814, State of Punjab and another v. Shri Sukh Raj Bahadur, 1964(3) SCR 284, and State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) S.C.T.
760 : JT 1991(1) SC 108.
3.
The question which has been posed before this Bench was earlier posed before another Full Bench in YK Bhatia v. The State of Haryana, ILR (1977)1 Pb.
96.
The Full Bench after examining the position of law, as emerging from the various judgments of the Supreme Court, came to the following conclusions :-  "Having regard to the abundance of pronouncements by the Supreme Court on this question, we consider it unnecessary to refer to the judgments of various High Courts to which our attention was invited by Shri Jawahar Lal Gupta.
We are firmly of the opinion that the termination of the services of a temporary Government employee does not offend Article 16(1) of the Constitution merely because his juniors are retained in service and that the reversion of a government employee temporarily promoted to a higher post does not also offend Article 16(1) merely because his juniors are not also reverted.
Any other conclusion will only lead to confusion since there may be thousands of temporary employees in the State and to insist that the comparative merits of all the temporary employees should be considered before the services of any employee are terminated or before any one who is temporarily promoted is reverted will be to ask the impossible.
Of course, it will be open to the persons affected in individual cases to establish discriminatory treatment which cannot be explained except on the basis of 'malice in law' or 'malice in fact', there can be no question of invoking the aid of Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India against an order of termination of service or reversion of a temporary employee merely because juniors are continuing."
4.
Subsequent to YK Bhatia's case a decision of the Supreme Court in The Manager, Government Branch Press v. DB Balliapa, 1979(1) SLR 351, raised certain doubts about the correctness of the view recorded in former case.
The matter was then examined by this Court in Krishan Chand Goyal v. Punjab State, 1980(2) SLR 623, in the light of DB Balliapa's case (supra) and the following conclusions were drawn :-  "Therefore, DB Balliapa's case is a decision on its own facts and no general rule was laid down which was different from the earlier decision of the Supreme Court which were followed in the Full Bench decision of this Court.
The ultimate analysis, on reading all the earlier Supreme Court decisions and DB Balliapa's case (supra), is as follows :-  (i) The fact that the service of a temporary government servant is terminated, either in accordance with the conditions of appointment or service rules, while his juniors are retained in service per se would not prove unequal treatment nor would it be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
(ii) If in a given case the temporary government servant is able to show that the simple order of termination of service in accordance with the terms of appointment or service rule was actuated by improper motives or on charge of unfair discrimination specifying the facts in that regard and those facts are either not controverted or stand proved, then the simple order of termination of service may be quashed by a Court of law even if he was the juniormost."
It will be seen from the passage quoted above that the judgment in YK Bhatia's case (supra) was held to hold the field even in the light of DB Balliapa's case.
5.
The matter was again put in doubt by another decision of the Supreme Court in Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1986(2) SLR 157, in whcih it was held that the protection of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution would be available even to a temporary government servant, if he was arbitrarily discriminated against and singled out for harsh treatment in preference to his juniors similarly circumstanced.
It is the doubt created by Jarnail Singh's case (supra) that has necessitated the present reference.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and find that the judgment in YK Bhatia's case (supra), as explained in Krishan Chand Goyal's case, still holds the field and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jarnail Singh's case (supra) has not departed from the earlier legal proposition.
In YK Bhatia's case it was held by the Full Bench in the passage already quoted above, that the termination of service of a temporary government servant does not offend Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, merely because his juniors are retained in service, but it is open to the persons affected to establish discriminatory treatment which cannot be explained except on the basis of 'malice in law' or 'malice in fact.'
The above words cannot be read in isolation.
The status of a temporary government employee, who, as already indicated above, has no right to hold the post and his tenure is tenuous and fragile as his services are liable to be terminated at any time in terms of the contract or the service rules.
That being so, the onus is on the government employee, who claims to have been discriminated against, to show by producing relevant material that he has temporary employees, who are junior to him.
'Malice in law' or 'malice in fact' to which reference has been made by the Full Bench in YK Bhatia's case (supra) is, in fact, a manifestation of arbitrary action which would attract the vice of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is also to be kept in view that Jarnail Singh's case (supra) on which primary reliance has been placed by the petitioner, has itself indicated the extent to which the protection of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution would be available to a temporary government employee.
While examining DB Bhalliapa's case (supra), the Supreme Court held that the protection of these Articles would be available to government servant, if he is being arbitrarily discriminated against and singled out for harsh treatment in preference to his junior similar circumstanced.
The italicised words are significant in their import.
It is only when the seniors and juniors are similarly circumstanced and a preference is made in facour of the junior employee, would there be a violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Conversely, if the senior employee is found unsuitable on account of his work and conduct and his services are terminated and the junior employees retained, the action cannot be dubbed as arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16.
The reliance put by the petitioner on Civil Appeal No. 4152 of 1985 (Jag Pal Vig v. State of Punjab) on 15th July, 1985, is also misplaced, as in this case, the termination of the services of a temporary employee was sought to be justified solely on the ground that he being a temporary servant, had no right to hold the post and, as such, his services could be terminated at any time.
This plea was put forth on behalf of the State that the services were terminated on the ground of unsuitability or for any other valid reason.
It was in this situation that the following observations were made :-  "The State has no right to terminate the service even of a temporary employee without any valid reason if juniors to the employee are retained in service.
If there is a valid reason such as non-suitability, the State Government may terminate the service of a temporary employee so long it does not cast stigma on the employee so as to attract the applicability of Article 311 of the Constitution but the State Government cannot act arbitrarily, because the thrust of Article 14 as interpreted in several decisions of this Court including Royappa's case and Maneka Gandhi's case is against arbitrariness in State action.
Here no justification at all has been shown by the State Government for terminating the service of the appellant nor has any justification been alleged even in the affidavit filed in reply to the special leave petition."
From the passage quoted above, it would be clear that the Supreme Court has implicitly even in this judgment held that if discriminatory treatment can be shown by the senior employees that action will be arbitrary, but, if the services have been terminated on the ground of unsuitability so long as it does not cast a stigma) the State Government cannot be said to have acted arbitrarily.
7.
The burden of this Full Bench has, however, been considerably lightened in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kaushal Kishore Shukla's case (supra).
While dealing with the very question now posed before us, this is what the Court had to say :  In our opinion, the principle of 'last come first go' is applicable to a case where on account of reduction of work or shrinkage of cadre retrenchment takes place and the services of employees are terminated on account of retrenchment.
In the event of retrenchment the principle of 'last come first go' is applicable under which senior in service is retained while the junior's services are terminated.
But this principle is not applicable to a case whether the services of a temporary employee are terminated on the assessment of his work and suitability in accordance with terms and conditions of his service.
If out of several temporary employees working in a department a senior is found unsuitable on account of his work and conduct, it is open to the competent authority to terminate his services and retain the services of juniors who may be found suitable for the service.
Such a procedure does not violate principle of equality, enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
If a juninor employee is hardworking, efficient and honest his service could not be terminated with a view to accommodate the senior employee even though he is found unsuitable for the serivce.
If this principle is not accepted there would be discrimiantion and the order of termination of a junior employee would be unreasonable and discriminatory."
The above-quoted passage would show that in the case where the services of a temporary employee are terminated on the assessment of his work and suitability in accordance with the terms and conditions of his service, that would not amount to retrenchment and, as such, the principle of 'last come first go' would not be applicable.
It has also been held that if the services of a junior temporary employee, who is more proficient in his work are sought to be terminated while retaining the services of a senior, though inefficient temporary employee, this action of the government would, in fact, amount to discrimination and would be unreasonable.
8.
A distinction must also be drawn on the principle of 'last come first go', as applicable to Industrial Law, and the law relating to public servants.
It has been pointed out that the frequent cause of labour unrest being the victimisation of employees in the guise of retrenchment, the principle of 'last come first go' has been evolved.
The primary object, however, of the law relating to public servants is to secure efficient in government service.
The said rule although salutary in principle, cannot be rigidly employed in the case of Public Servants.
This is the conclusion that has specifically been drawn in YK Bhatia's case (supra).
9.
In the light of the discussions made above, we are of the view that the judgments of this Court in YK Bhatia's case (supra) and in Krishan Chand Goyal's case (supra) lay down the correct proposition of law.
The mere fact that the services of a temporary government employee are terminated in terms of his contract of service or the statutory rules which govern it, would not ipso facto be held to be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, if his juniors are retained.
However, if a government employee can make out a case of discrimination by showing from the material placed on the record that he being senior and similarly circumstanced as his junior in service has been singled out for discriminatory treatment, the action of the government can be struck down as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The question referred to having been answered as above, the various cases would now go before the appropriate Benches for decision on merits.
Reference answered.