Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4282 and 4843 of 1988 involving common questions of law and facts.
For the purpose of judgment, the facts have been picked up from Civil Petition No. 4282 of 1988.
2.
The petitioner, who was 92 years old at the time of filing of this writ petition, had filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of writ of certiorari to strike down sub-section (4) of Section 7-A of the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances & Pensions of Members), Act, 1975 to the extent it disentitles the members to the pension who were elected before the commencement of Constitution of India being arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India with a further prayer to direct the respondents to grant him pension w.e.f.
April 7, 1977.
3.
The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was elected as Member of the Punjab Legislative Council in the year 1926 from Ambala Division (Sikh) constituency and continued as such till 1930.
The gazette notification declaring him elected as member was published by the Government on December 10, 1926 by virtue of the provisions of sub-rule (8) of Rule 14 of the Punjab Electoral.
In the year 1977, the State of Haryana took a decision to introduce a provision in law for allowing pension to the Members of Vidhan Sabha in order to maintain the dignity and respect of the office of the members.
Consequently, the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pensions of Members) Act, 1975 was amended vide Haryana Act No. 6 of 1977 and new Section 7-A was inserted therein making provision for pension to every person who has served for a period of five years, whether continuous or not, as member.
As per amended provision, a member of Haryana Legislative Assembly who has served for a period of five years whether continuous or not, it to get Rs. 300/- per month as pension.
In the year 1978, the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pensions of Members), Act, 1975, was further amended due to the reason that under the earlier provision only the members of Legislative Council were entitled to the benefit of pension.
As per newly added sub-section (4) in the Haryana Legislative Assembly (allowances Commencement and Pension of Members) Amendment Act, 1978, a person who after the commencement of the Constitution has been a member of -  i) the Haryana Legislative Assembly; or ii) the Punjab Legislative Assembly; or iii) The Punjab Legislative Council; or iv) State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union, or v) partly as member of the one and partly as a member of the other, representing any of the territories of the State of Haryana as formed by Section 3 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966 and who is ordinarily resident of the said territories, is entitled to the benefit of pension.
The Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances & Pensions of Members), Act, 1975 was again amended in the year 1985.
As per this amendment, a member is to be paid a pension of Rs. 500/- instead of Rs. 300/- per mensum.
By this amendment, the period of five years to 'any period' was also relaxed.
4.
Aggrieved by the amendment of sub-section (4) of section 7-A of the Act, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
According to the Counsel for the petitioner this amendment has adversely affected the right of the petitioner.
The Counsel has relied upon DS Nakra & others v. Union of India, AIR 1988 S.C. 130.
5.
The respondent No. 2 has filed detailed written statement wherein a categoric stand has been taken that the Punjab Legislative Council of which the petitioner had been a member from 1926 to 1930, had since been abolished by the Government of India Act, 1935 when the provincial Assemblies were constituted.
Further the provincial Assemblies had too been abolished by the Indian Independence Act, 1947.
According to the Council, only those Members of Legislative Assemblies or Legislative Councils are entitled to the benefit of pension, who served as members after the commencement of the Constitution of India.
Since the petitioner was not a member of the Legislative Council, after the Constitution of India came into force, as such the benefit of pension was not admissible to him.
Further stand taken by the respondent is that the Legislature is only competent to enact the law for the grant of pension to a person, who has served as a member after the commencement of the Constitution of India.
The provisions of the Act are perfectly legal, valid and in accordance with provisions of the Constitution of India.
6.
I have perused the paper-book and considered the respective stands of the Council for the parties.
I find that in the return filed by the State, the main ground taken to deny this benefit is that the benefit is available only to those persons who have served as Members of the Haryana Legislative Assembly, Punjab Legislative Assembly, Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile States of Punjab and the East Punjab States Union "after the commencement of the Constitution of India."
It was this denial which had led the petitioner to challenge the validity of provisions of Section 7-A(4) of the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pension of Members) Act, 1975.
The challenge was on the ground that there is no reasonable basis for denial of this benefit to a person who has served a legislative body.
The purpose of giving the pension is given in the Statement of objects and reasons of enacting the Act of 1975.
The purpose is to maintain the dignity and respect of the office of the Members of the Vidhan Sabha.
The argument is that such a pension should also be made available to the petitioner who had served a legislative body.
The petitioner has relied upon the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in Bhagat Ram v Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 740 to contend that he cannot be denied the benefit of pension.
No doubt in the case, referred to above, the Supreme Court has made certain observations, which do help the petitioner.
The relevant observations in this regard are contained in Paras 13 and 14 of the judgment.
It may, however, be seen that there is one distinguishing feature between the case of the petitioner and the case of Bhagat Ram (supra) before the Supreme Court.
In the case of Bhagat Ram, he had served the Legislative Assembly from 1937 to 211951.
It is clear that he was a Member of the Legislative Assembly even after coming into force of Constitution of India.
As such he was entitled to the benefit of the pension on a plain reading of the statutory provision and the direction given by the Supreme Court that his case be considered by the State of Himachal Pradesh could not be taken exception to.
The case of the petitioner is to be considered independently of the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Bhagat Ram.
7.
It may be seen that undisputed fact is that the petitioner has served the Punjab Legislative Council and he represented the Ambala Division (Sikh Constituency).
The relevant notification has been reproduced in para 2 of the writ petition.
Now the sole question is as to whether the petitioner can be denied the benefit when such a benefit has been extended to other persons who have also served on the legislative bodies.
No doubt Courts are not supposed to add words to a statute yet if interpretation helps in saving a particular provision from being declared ultra vires, then it should be adopted.
This is well known principle of law and should be made applicable in the present case.
8.
In this regard, the views expressed by the Supreme Court in DS Nakara's case (supra) are relevant.
In this case the pension was being denied on the basis of a date of retirement.
It is in this case the Suprme Court posed the question "is the date of retirement a relevant consideration for eligibility with the revised formula for computation of pension is ushered and to be made effective from a specified site.
Would differential treatment to pensioners related to the date of retirement qua the revised formula or computation of pension attract Article 14 of the Constitution and the element of discrimination liable to be declared unconstitutional being violative of Article 14."
It was the above question and to quote again the Supreme Court observed that "these are the related questions debated in this group of petitions fall for an answer in the backdrop of a welfare state and bearing in mind that pension is socio-economic justice measure providing relief when advancing age gradually but irrevocably impairs capacity to stand on one's own feet."
The Supreme Court considered the question of payment of pension in the light of the above socio-economic problem and was of the view that the pension should not be denied on the basis of date of retirement.
The principle of reading down the provision as enunciated in the case of All Saints High School v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1980 S.C. 1042 was made applicable in the case of DS Nakara as well.
In Para 59, it was observed as under :-  "In reading down the memoranda, is this Court legislating ?
Of course 'not'.
When we delete basis of classification as violative of Article 14, we merely set at naught the unconstitutional portion retaining the constitutional portion."
Dealing with the question further it was held that the words which limit the scope of a particular benefit can be ignored with a view to enlarge the scope of the main provision.
The Court stated :-  "Whenever classification is held to be impermissible and the measure can be retained by removing the unconstitutional portion of classification, by striking down words of limitation,l the resultant effect may be of enlarging the class.
In such a situation, the Court can strike down the words of limitation in an enactment."
9.
Applying the above principle, it would be reasonable to so interpret the Act of 1975 that the words "after the commencement of the Constitution" should be treated as non-existent in the statute referred to above.
This would again be in consonance with the view expressed in DS Nakara's case (supra) as held in para 60 which reads as under :  "Therefore the principle of removing or taking out the unconstitutional provision from an otherwise constitutional measure has been well recognised.
It would be just and proper that the provision in the memorandum while retaining the date for its implementation, but providing that in respect of Government servants who were in service on the 31st March, 1979 but retiring from service in or after the date, can be legally and validly severed and must be struck down."
10.
Thus following the views expressed in the case of DS Nakara (supra) and by reading down the provision and by severing that portion which cuts down the scope of the provision the conclusion is inevitable that the petitioner who was a member of the Legislative Council in the late twenties is entitled to the benefit of pension.
The provision of the Act of 1975 limiting the grant of pension to only those persons who have served the legislative bodies after the coming into force of the Constitution is not reasonable or rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
It is accordingly declared that the petitioner is entitled to the pension on the same basis on which other Members of the Legislative Bodies have been given the benefit.
11.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to release the pension to the petitioner w.e.f.
April, 1977 and the arrears thereof be paid within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.