Santosh Duggal, J. (Oral) - The appellant, Shri Bishan Dass, was working as a Mono Caster Operator in an ad hoc capacity on a temporary basis, having been appointed to the said post by order dated 10th October, 1972 when his services were terminated by order dated 23rd March, 1977 in exercise of the powers under sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
It was this Order which subject-matter of challenge in the civil suit filed by the appellant, seeking a declaration that the said order be declared illegal and unconstitutional for the reason that it has been passed by way of punishment and since the procedure of show cause notice and enquiry was not followed, the order was not sustainable.
2.
The contention of the plaintiff in the suit was that while he was on duty on 22nd March, 1977, a security check was alleged to have been carried out and he was alleged to have been found during a routine security check in possession of 2 Kgs.
type metal ingot, with the implication that the same had been stolen by him from the Press where he was on duty.
He contended that instead of holding an enquiry and reporting the matter to the police, the Manger of the Printing Press issued an order terminating plaintiff's services under sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 of the Rules.
3.
The defence was that the plaintiff had been apprehended red-handed with 2 kgs.
type metal ingot, concealed under his clothes, and that before that also, his conduct had come under adverse notice and he had been visited with the penalty of withholding of increment for six months without commulative effect vide order dated 24th February, 1974.
Consequently, the authorities came to the conclusion that he was not a fit person to be retained in service and being temporary employee, his services were terminated by an order of termination simpliciter, without visiting him with any consequences of dismissal etc.
It was pointed out that this order of termination did not carry any stigma and was not punitive in nature, and did not attract the provisions of Articles 311(2) of the Constitution.
4.
The suit was decreed by the trial Court on the view that the real basis for termination of plaintiff's services being the allegation of theft; it was an order which was punitive in nature and attracted the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
5.
On appeal being filed by the Union of India, the judgment and decree of the trial court was reversed by the Additional District Judge, Delhi vide judgment dated 7th September, 1979.
The learned Additional District Judge examined the relevant law on the point starting from Parshottam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36, and other decisions having a bearing on the point but came to the conclusion that in the event of an order being passed in the case of a temporary government servant, who does not hold any right to a post, and which order is in simple exercise of the powers vested in the Government under the Temporary Service Rules, and the government servant concerned is not visited by any evil consequences by virtue of the said order; then the order was not liable to be challenged as it would not attract the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
In coming to this view, reliance was placed on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The State of UP v. Ram Chandra Trivedi, AIR 1976 SC 2547.
6.
Aggrieved by this judgment in appeal, this regular second appeal was filed, which has been heard at length.
Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned counsel for the appellant, has argued primarily on the basis of the facts stated in the written statement to the effect that as a sequel to the incident of 22nd March, 1977, when the appellant was alleged to have been caught red-handed in possession of government property concealed in his clothes, it was decided to terminate his services, and since he was a temporary employee with no right to the service, it was not incumbent upon the employing authority to take recourse to the provisions of Article 311(2).
The learned counsel submitted that there was a catena of authorities in support of the view that the provisions of Article 311(2) would be attracted even in the case of temporary government servants, in the event of the impugned order being of punitive nature.
He pleaded that since in this case it is plainly stated in the written statement that the decision to terminate the services of the appellant was taken because of the incident of theft in which he was apprehended the previous day, it has to be taken to be a case where the order was passed by way of punishment and that the proper course would have been to hold an enquiry and give an opportunity to the appellant to show cause.
He also argued that in such cases it is open to the Court to lift the veil, and see as to what was the impelling reason for such an order being passed, and not be influenced by the fact that the order was that of termination simpliciter.
Though Mr. Rohatgi referred to the judgment in the case of Purshottam Lal Dhingra (supra), but placed reliance on two recent decisions - one reported as 1986(2) S.L.R.
278, Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(3) S.L.R.
4, Shesh Narain Awasthy v. State of UP and others.
7.
As against that, Mr. SK Tewari, appearing for Union of India, placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Chandra Trivedi (supra), where, after taking note of the judgment of the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Purshottam Lal Dhingra (supra), which is considered to be the basic judgment on the subject, it was held that a temporary government servant has not right to the post, and his services were liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason provided such a termination order is under the statutory rules, governing the terms and conditions of service of a temporary government servant or in terms of the contract of service.
Mr. Tewari pointed out that in this judgment it has been clearly held that in case the order of termination is passed simpliciter, without any stigma being attached, and without being punitive in nature, and which result in simple termination of service without entailing the consequences of dismissal from service, then the order was not liable to challenge.
He pointed out that the judgment of the first appellate court was unassailable as it is based on the above quoted decision of the Supreme Court.
8.
I have given my careful thought to the matter in the light of the respective contentions and facts of the case.
It is not disputed that the appellant was a temporary government servant, on the post of Mono Caster Operator at the time of termination of his services.
That being so, he had no right to the post and it was terminable in the ordinary course by the employer by the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule 5 of the Rules.
The order of appointment, to the temporary post of Mono Caster Operator, in ad hoc capacity was proved on record as Ex. P-4, and reads as under :  Shri Bishan Dass, Labourer, is appointed to the temporary post of Mono Caster Operator on Rs. 110/- PM in the pay scale of Rs. 110-3-131-143-EB-4-155 with effect from the forenoon of 10101972.
The appointment is purely on ad hoc basis and will not confer upon him any claim for seniority etc. in the grade of Mono Caster Operator nor will he have any claim for regular appointment in the post of Mono Caster Operator.
9.
It may be noted that even before ad hoc appointment, as Mono Caster Operator, the appellant was working against a temporary post, as a labourer.
10.
It is thus clear that both under the contract of service as well as under the statutory rules applicable to him, the appellant was holding a temporary post with no right to said post, and the employing authority had under the statutory rules power to terminate his services without assigning and reason, and by giving one month's notice or by paying salary equivalent to the pay and allowances of one month's salary.
The order of termination ExP-1 has been passed without indicating any background, and in plain exercise of the powers in terms of the statutory rules, clearly mentioning that the plaintiff shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of pay plus allowances for the period of notice.
It is thus an order of termination simpliciter, in the same sense, as it was in the case of Ram Chandra Trivedi (supra).
11.
The judgment in the case of Ram Chandra Trivedi (supra), by a Bench of three judges of the Supreme Court, after taking full note of the observations of the Constitutional Bench in Purshottam Lal Dhingra's case (supra) held that in case where the order of termination simpliciter of services of temporary government servant was passed without visiting him with any evil consequence, then motive for such order being passed was not relevant and in case there was a right under statutory rules or contract of service to terminate the services, without assigning any reason, then such a right could be exercised.
The position was summed up as under :-  "Any and every termination of service is not a dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
A termination of service brought about by the exercise of a contractual right is not per se dismissal or removal, as has been held by this Court in Satish Chander Anand v. The Union of India (supra), Likewise the termination of service by compulsory retirement in terms of a specific rule regulating the conditions of service is not tantamount to the infliction of a punishment and does not attract Article 311(2), as has also been held by this Court in Shyam Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 369," It was further held that :  "It is true that the misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or other disqualification may be motive or the inducing factor which influences the government to take action under the terms of the contract of employment or the specific service rule, nevertheless, if a right exists, under the contract or the rules, to terminate the service the motive operative on the mind of the Government is, as Chagla, CJ has said in Shrinivas Ganesh v. Union of India, AIR 1956 Bom.
455 wholly irrelevant."
12.
This was a case where because of some misconduct on the part of the temporary government servant, after he had been in employment for seven years, that consisted of making a colleague of his sit for him in the departmental examination, and although there was material to show that the department had contemplated some punishment, but eventually the Chief Engineer, who was the appointing authority, simply passed and order of termination, the Court held that when no stigma is attached to him in terms of the order, and there was no right in the post, the order was not liable to the challenged.
13.
In the case of Jarnail Singh (supra), the facts were distinguishable from the present case because in that case the order of termination was cumulative result of adverse entries against the petitioner therein, and also allegations of embezzlement of funds, and in that setting of facts it was held that although the order was couched in innocuous terms as being made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment, yet the impugned orders of termination of services were in fact made by way of punishment, being based on the misconduct.
It may be noted, with all respects, that in this case of Jarnail Singh (supra), AIR 1976 SC 2547 has not been considered.
It may further be mentioned that this is a judgment by a Bench of two Judges, whereas the judgment in the case of Ram Chandra Trivedi (supra) was by a Bench of three Judges, and respectfully following the dictum of the Supreme Court in the above mentioned judgment that so far as High Courts are concerned, in the event of conflict between the view expressed by a larger and small Benches of this Court, the proper course for a High Court in such a case is to find out and follow the opinion expressed by larger Bench, in preference to those expressed by small Bench.
14.
In so far as the case of Shesh Narain Awasthy (supra) is concerned, there is again no reference to the judgment of Ram Chandra Trivedi (supra), and this is also a judgment by Bench of two Judges.
;  15.
Although the view held in the case of Ram Chandra Trivedi (supra) is conclusive of the matter so far as this Court is concerned, it has been reiterated in a very recent judgment, reported as JT 1991(1) SC 108, which is again a decision by three Judges.
The view has been affirmed clearly and explicitly to the effect that a temporary government servant has no right to hold the post and his services were liable to be terminated by giving one months's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary government servants.
It was made clear beyond any doubt in this judgment that whenever the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a government servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service of the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary government servant (emphasis supplied).
It is only when the decision is to take punitive action that a formal inquiry by framing charges and giving opportunity to the government servant as contemplated under Article 311 of the Constitution is necessary.
This judgment takes full note of the judgment in Purshottam Lal Dhingra's case (supra), and then reiterates that the evil consequences as contemplated in Purashotttam Lal Dhingra's case do not include the termination of services of a temporary government servant, in accordance with the terms and conditions of service, and where the termination order does not indict the respondent for any misconduct, then the order of termination, which is couched in simple terms, in exercise of the power under the statutory rules or the contract of service, then it was not liable to challenge.
it is pertinent to note that in this case, the order of termination was passed on account of some allegations of unauthorised audit of a fund.
Nevertheless, it was held that since the order was worded in innocuous terms, and without visiting the government servant with any evil consequences, and not by way of punishment or disciplinary action, but in simple exercise of the powers under the rules or the contract of service, the order cannot be held to be invalid or unlawful.
16.
The legal position that emerges on a cumulative reading of the above cited decisions is that the employing authority has abundant power to take a decision whether to retain a temporary government servant in service not after it comes to the conclusion that he is not fit to be so retained on account of either unsatisfactory performance or misconduct, and once this decision is reached, it can be implemented by resort to the Temporary Service Rules, by passing a simple order of termination, and in such an even provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution are not attracted.
17.
The impugned order is one such order and thus not legally assailable.
Since the judgment of the first appellate court does not suffer from any infirmity or illegality, this regular second appeal is devoid of any merit and is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.