Arun Kumar, J - The sole question for determination in this writ petition is whether the impugned order of reversion is one of reversion simpliciter or the same is by way of penalty.
The facts giving rise to the controversy are in a narrow compass.
2.
The petitioner was an employee of the Department of Food, Government of India and was holding the post of Director (General) which was a gazetted class I post.
On the establishment of the Food Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) under the Food Corporation of India Act, 1954, the services of the petitioner stood transferred to the Corporation and he came to be known as a food transferee which was a term used for those employees in the Corporation who were transferred from the Deptt.
of Food, Govt. of India as distinguished from the employees recruited by the Corporation itself.
3.
The petitioner was promoted as a Joint Manager (General) in June 1982.
The petitioner was again promoted from the post of Joint Manager (General) to the post of Manager (General) w.e.f.
191988.
The said promotion was on probation for a period of one year as per Corporation's Staff Regulations of 1971.
The Regulations provided that probation period could be extended at the discretion of the appointing authority for a further period not exceeding one year.
Though the petitioner completed his initial one year period of probation on 31st August, 1989, by an order dated 18th June, 1990 the probation period was extended with retrospective effect, i.e. w.e.f.
191989 for a further period of one year in terms of Regulation 15(2) of the Staff Regulations, 1971.
This was followed by another office order dated 9th August, 1990 whereby the probation of the petitioner was terminated with immediate effect and the petitioner was reverted from the post of Manager (General) to that of Joint Manager (General).
4.
The petitioner has challenged both these orders, i.e. the order dated 18th June, 1990 whereby his probation period was extended by one year w.e.f.
191989 and the order dated 9th August, 1990 whereby his probation was terminated and he was reverted to his substantive post.
5.
In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent Corporation the main defence is that the respondent has acted in accordance with the Staff Regulations and there being no challenge to the Staff Regulations, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
It is submitted that the Staff Regulations provide that an employee promoted from a lower post to a higher post shall be liable to be reverted to a lower post without notice and without assigning reason during the probation period.
The order of reversion does not mention any reason, therefore, it is innocuous in nature and does not contain any stigma and, therefore, it cannot be said that the same is by way of punishment.
The order is, therefore, said to be perfectly legal and valid and in accordance with the powers vested in the appointing authority by the Staff Regulations.
Interestingly though the stand taken in the counter-affidavit is that the order of reversion is innocuous in nature and is one of reversion simpliciter, the counter-affidavit is replete with allegations of misconduct against the petitioner and there is specific and unequivocal plea of the respondent in the counter-affidavit that the action against the petitioner is on account of his "questionable conduct".
At another place it is stated "this act of the petitioner is contrary to Staff Regulations 32 which has resulted in his reversion on account of the petitioner having acted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the Corporation."
At yet another place in the counter-affidavit it has been stated "when the petitioner has been found acting in a manner prejudicial of the interest of the Corporation, it is within the competence of the appointing authority not to keep such officer on the promoted post.
Further when his conduct is questionable and against the interest of the Corporation which in other words amounts to misconduct during the discharge of duties while remaining under the period of probation and it is not fit and proper for the Management to keep the petitioner or retain him on the promotion post when his conduct is neither honest nor faithful in the interest of the Corporation X X XX".
It is also stated in the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent that the petitioner has been charge-sheeted under Regulation 58 of the Staff Regulations and the memo dated 25th October, 1990 containing the charge-sheet and imputations of misconduct has already been served on the petitioner and an inquiry was proposed to be held.
6.
Since reference has been made by both sides to the Food Corporation of India Staff Regulations, 1971 it may be worthwhile to reproduce the same here.
"15.
Probation:  (1) Every person regularly appointed to any post in the Corporation under Sub-clause (a) of Clause (1) of Regulation 7 shall be required to be on probation for a period of one year from the date of appointment.
(2) The appointing authority may in his discretion extend the period of probation by a further period not exceeding one year.
(3) During the period of probation an employee directly recruited shall be liable to be discharged from service without assigning any reason by giving him a notice of 30 days or pay and allowances in lieu thereof.
An employee promoted from a lower post to a higher post shall be liable to be reverted to the power post without notice and without assigning any reason.
(4) Any employee who has satisfactorily completed his probation in any post shall thereafter be confirmed.
7.
On the basis of the said Regulations, the petitioner urges that when he completed his initial one year period of probation, there was nothing against him and there was no material before the appointing authority to enable it to exercise its discretion to extend the period of probation.
Therefore, the petitioner wishes it to be declared that he would be deemed to be confirmed on his successful completion of one year probation period.
According to the petitioner the extension of probation has been made after expiry of nine months and the same is mala fide because the basis of extension is the alleged misconduct of the petitioner.
As a matter of fact this has been admitted by the respondent in the counter-affidavit when it has been stated at running page 36 of the paper book "X X X a serious lapse committed by the petitioner came to the notice of the respondent and his probation was extended".
The extension of probation, therefore, being mala fide, it is urged that the petitioner be declared to have been confirmed on his successfully completing the one year of probation.
There is nothing on record to show that during this one year initial period of probation there was anything against the petitioner.
There is a circular of the respondent bearing No. 69/83 dated 23rd September, 1983 which has been placed on record by the petitioner which requires that half yearly reports of officers on probation should be sent to the Head Office in respect of category I officers within 15 days of the expiry of the half year.
Therefore, as per the circular, half yearly reports of the probationer were required to be sent and if no such report was sent, there was violation of this circular and the benefit should go to petitioner.
Thus the argument is that in the absence of issuance of an order confirmation on the expiry of one year, the petitioner ought to be considered/deemed to be confirmed in view of the facts and circumstances of the case.
8.
So far as the question of deemed confirmation is concerned, the petitioner heavily relies on the failure of the respondent to get the half yearly probation reports.
According to the petitioner though the circular has no statutory force, it at least has the force of administrative instructions as the circular is meant to facilitate compliance of ther statutory Regulations.
The fifteen day period fixed in the circular from submission of the half yearly reports on probation cannot be said to be a mandatory provision and, therefore, failure to send such reports as per the circular cannot be said to be such a serious lapse as may enable the petitioner to derive the benefit of deemed confirmation.
The instructions contained in the circular can at best be called directory and any lapse in compliance thereof cannot lead to what the petitioner wants me to infer therefrom.
This view of mine gets support from a Full Bench decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court, reported as GND University, Amritsar v. Iqbal Kaur, 1975(2) S.L.R.
483.
9.
So far as the question of deemed confirmation is concerned, I am of the view that in the facts and circumstances of the present case and the point on which I propose to decide this petition hereinafter, I need not go into the said question.
10.
Before coming to the real issue which will decide the fate of this case I may clear another point raised by counsel for the respondent.
It was submitted that the Food Corporation of India is a statutory body and the employees of the Corporation are not Govt. servants and, therefore, Article 311 of the Constitution of India can be applied to them.
According to the counsel, the Corporation has its own rules and regulations to govern the service conditions of its employees and the action of management ought to be tested on the basis of the said rules and regulations.
This argument overlooks the fact that the petitioner is a food transferee, i.e. he is an erstwhile employee of the Food Department of the Govt. of India whose services stood transferred to the Corporation on coming into force of the FCI Act 1954.
The service conditions of such employees have been duly protected and they are also entitled to the protection available to Govt. servants including those under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
This question already stands concluded vide decision of this court reported in 1984(1) All India Service Law Journal 336.
I am in unrespectful agreement with the view expressed in the said judgment and, therefore, I am not impressed by this objection taken by the learned counsel for the respondent.
The same is hereby rejected.
11.
Another aspect of this case which needs reference is the extension of probation period after a lapse of nearly nine months from the date when the initial probation period expired.
In the present case it is really not necessary for me to decide the question whether probation period can be extended after lapse of such a long time.
However, the peculiar circumstances of the case leading to extension of probation need be mentioned.
The question is normally when is the occasion to extend probation.
Possibly it may be that the appointing authority is not fully satisfied with the work and conduct of the officer during initial probation period and it wants to give him further opportunity to show his worth.
If that be so, it will be a pre-requisite that at the time of completion of initial period of probation there is some material before the appointing authority which enables it to exercise its discretion as to whether there should be extension of probation or confirmation nor reversion.
In the present case admittedly there was no such material before the appointing authority to make up its mind at the relevant time.
On the contrary I have already pointed out the admission on the part of the respondent that the extension of probation was solely on account of alleged serious lapse on the part of the petitioner.
This only shows that the respondent thought that it may be easier to get rid of the petitioner from the post on which he was on probation, if he was allowed to continue on probation, otherwise what could be the object in extending the probation period.
If an inquiry had to be held regarding the alleged misconduct of the petitioner, the same could be held whether the petitioner was holding the post of Manager or that of Joint Manager.
The extension of probation period in the facts and circumstances of the case, therefore, appears to be totally mala fide.
12.
This leads to the main question for determination in the present case i.e. whether it is a case of reversion simpliciter in accordance with the Service Regulations or it is a case of action by way of punishment.
The law is almost settled on the point that it is not the frame or the form of the order which is material for this purpose ; what is material is the substance.
Reference in this connection is invited to Debesh Chandra Dass v. Union of India, 1969 SLR 485; State of Bihar v. Shiva Bhikshuk Mishra, AIR 1971 SC 1011; Jagdish Parshad Shastri v. State of UP & others, 1970 SLR 938; State of UP v. Sughar Singh, 1974(1) SLR 435; Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, 1974(2) SLR 701 and State of Maharashtra v. VR Saboji, AIR 1980 SC 42.
In Debesh Chandra Dass (supra) it was observed :-  "Reversion to a lower post does not per se amount to a stigma.
But we have here evidence that the reversion is accompanied by stigma.
In the first letter issued to him on June 20, 1966 by Mr. Dharma Vira (Cabinet Secretary) it was said that Government was considering whether the persons at top level administrative posts were capable of meeting the new challenges or must make room for younger men.
The letter goes on to say that he may choose one of three alternatives : accept a lower post at the Centre, go back to a post carrying lower post at the Centre, go back to a post carrying lower salary in Assam or take leave preparatory to retirement.
The offer of a lower post in Delhi is a clear pointer to the fact of his demotion.
It clearly tells him that his reversion is not due to any exigency of service but because he is found wanting.
The three alternatives speak volumes.
This was not a case of reverting him to Assam at the end of a deputation or tenure.
He can be retained in the Central Services provided he accepts a lower post, and the final alternative that the may retire clearly shows that the Government is bent upon removing him from his present post.
In the next letter this fact is recognised because on September 7, 1966 he is offered only two alternatives.
The alternative of a lower post is advisedly dropped because it discloses too clearly a stigma.
If any doubt remained it is cleared by the affidavit which is now filed.
Paragraphs 7 and 10 of the affidavit reads as follows :- "7.
With reference to the allegations made in paragraphs 13 to 23 of the said application, I make no admission in respect thereof except, what appears from relevant records.
I further say that the performance of the petitioner did not come to the standard expected to a Secretary to the Government of India."
"10.
The allegations made in paragraph 26 of the said application are correct.
I further say that the said representation was rejected by the Prime Minister in view of the standard of the performance of the petitioner."
"Now it has been ruled again and again in this Court that reduction in rank accompanied by a stigma must follow the procedure of Art. 311 (2) of the Constitution.
It is manifest that if this was a reduction in rank, it was accompanied by stigma.
We are satisfied that there was a stigma attaching to the reversion and that it was not a pure accident of service."
Again in State of Bihar (supra) the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "An order of termination of service in unexceptionable form preceded by an enquiry launched by the superior authorities only to ascertain whether the public servant should be retained in service does not attract the operation of Art. 311 of the Constitution.
If there be a full-scale departmental enquiry envisaged by Art. 311, i.e. and Enquiry Officer is appointed, a charge-sheet submitted, explanation called for and considered, any order of termination of service made thereafter will attract the operation of the said Article.
The argument sought to be raised on behalf of the appellant is that the order or reversion of the respondent to his substantive post casts no aspersion against his character or integrity.
Even if the motive behind the making of the order was the report of the Deputy Inspector General dated November 1, 1950 consequent on the communication received from the Commandant involving an assault by the respondent on his orderly it would not be a case of reversion by way of punishment.
A great deal of stress is laid on the fact that no departmental enquiry as envisaged by Art. 311 was made into the above mentioned incident before reversion was ordered.
Our attention has been invited to this court's decision in the Union of India v. RS Dhaba, Income Tax Officer, Hoshiarpur, Civil Appeal No. 882 of 1966 (AIR 1969 NSC 21) in which Mr. Pillai, the then Commissioner of Income-tax had said that the officer concerned should be reverted because of the large number of complaints which the department had received against his integrity and the bad reports received by him from his superiors.
The successor of Mr. Pillai Mr. SR Mehta made an order on May 22, 1964 to the effect that Dhaba officiating Income-tax Officer Class II had been found unsuitable, after trial, to hold that post, his reversion was ordered as Officiating Inspector, Income-tax.
It was held by this court that the order of reversion had not been made by way of punishment and the decision of the High Court to the contrary was set aside.
A large measure of support is sought to be derived from this decision because of the previous opinion of the Commissioner of Income-tax which was highly prejudicial to Dhaba and the argument raised there was that the reversion of Dhaba was the direct result of the note of Mr. Pillai.
This is what was observed by this court in that case :  "The test for attracting Art. 311(2) of the Constitution in such a case is whether the misconduct or negligence is a mere motive for the order of reversion or termination of service or it is very foundation of the order of termination of service of the temporary employee.
In the present case, however, the order of reversion does not contain any express words of stigma attributed to the conduct of the respondent and, therefore, it cannot be held that the order of reversion was made by way of punishment and the provisions of Art. 311 of the Constitution are consequently attracted."
"We are unable to acceded to the contention of the appellant that the ratio of the above decision is that so long as there are no express words of stigma attributed to the conduct of a Government Officer in the impugned order it cannot be held to have been made by way of punishment."
Justice Pathak (as His Lordship then was) made the following observations in State of Maharashtra v. VR Saboji (supra) :-  "The law, it seems to me, is that where the services of a temporary Government servant or a probationer Government servant are terminated by an order which does not ex facie disclose any stigma or penal consequences against the Government servant and is merely a termination order simpliciter, there is no case ordinarily for assuming that it is anything but what it purports to be.
Where, however, the order discloses on the face of it that a stigma is cast on the Government servant or that it visits him with penal consequences, then plainly the case is one of punishment.
There may still be another kind of case where although the termination of services is intended by way of punishment, the order is framed as termination simpliciter.
In such a case, if the Government servant is able to establish by material on the record that the order is in fact passed by way of punishment, the innocence of the language in which the order is framed will not protect it if the procedural safeguards contemplated by Art. 311(2) of the Constitution have not been satisfied.
In a given case, the Government servant may succeed in making out a prima facie case that the order was by way of punishment but an attempt to rebut the case by the authorities may necessitate sending for the official records for the purpose of determining the truth.
It is in such a case generally that the official records may be called for by the Court.
It is not open to the Court to send for the official records on a mere allegation by the Government servant that the order is by way of punishment.
For, unless there is material on the record before the Court in support of that allegation, an attempt by the Court to find out from the record whether the termination of service is based on the unsuitability of the Government servant in relation to the post held by him or is in reality an order by way of punishment will in effect be an unwarranted attempt to delve into the official records for the purpose of determining the nature of the order on the basis of a mere allegation of the Government servant.
On a sufficient case being made out on the merits before that Court by the Government servant it is open to the Court to resort to scrutiny of the official records for the purpose of verifying the truth.
I am unable to see why the Court should decline to pursue the official records in an appropriate case and why, where considerations of privilege and confidentiality do not suffer, the information set forth in the records should not be made available to the Government servant.
The mere possibility that the official records could confirm what the Government servant could confirm what the Government servant had set out to prove and prima facie had, indeed, proved should not shut out disclosure of the information."
13.
In view of the aforesaid statement of law it is clear that the form of the order is not conclusive and the court is entitled to find out as to what is the real basis and purport of the impugned order.
Fortunately in the facts of the present case it is respondent's own case that the impugned order was passed on the basis of the alleged incident of misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
Therefore, clearly the impugned order was by way of punishment and as such violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
14.
On the face of it the impugned order dated 9th August, 1990 appears to be in accordance with the Staff Regulations to which reference has already been made hereinbefore.
However, the facts disclosed in the counter-affidavit of the respondent clearly show that the impugned order casts a stigma in the petitioner and is penal in consequences.
It is not a case of reversion simpliciter during the probation period.
Admittedly the probation period itself has been extended in view of an alleged incident of misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
Further, as noticed earlier, the counter-affidavit is full of such allegations of misconduct against the petitioner.
These allegations are the basis of the impugned action, the same cannot be sustained.
As held in AIR 1980 SC 42 and various other decisions even a probationer is entitled to protection under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
Counsel for the respondent in this connection argued that the case of the petitioner should stand on its own legs, i.e. the petitioner should make out a case in the petitioner itself and cannot be permitted to rely on the averments made in the counter-affidavit to sustain his case.
This argument is devoid of any merit.
In such matters it is always open to the court to have the official records produced in order to satisfy itself about the fact whether the impugned order is by way of punishment or is a termination/reversion simpliciter.
The disclosure of facts in the counter-affidavit itself which otherwise the Court might have had to gather from official records does not make the position of the petitioner worse.
The courts have always relied on the affidavits of the Govt. as well as on official records in such matter.
Reference in this connection can be made to Dr. Kulwant Singh v. Dr. D.R.
Marwaha & Anr, 1974(1) SLR 195; State of UP & Others v. Sughar Singh, 1974(1) SLR 435; Debesh Chandra Dass v. Union of India, 1969 SLR 485; and State of Maharashtra v. VR Saboji & Anr., AIR 1980 SC 42.
The following observations from the last cited judgment of the Supreme Court are relevant in this context.
"No definite principle as a rule of law appears to have been laid down in that case on the point and the court has merely suggested that the question whether it should be open to the courts in such cases to go behind the order should be examined de novo, and it recommended that an order reverting a probationer from a higher to a lower post, or discharging a temporary servant from service should not be questioned except on the basis of mala fides on making the order.
From the further comments of the Court, it appears that observation was made with a view to lightening the burden of the Court having regard to the heavy load of work presently occupying it.
Until the day that the recommendation is accepted, I believe it to be true that the jurisdiction of the courts extends to examining and scrutinising the official records in the circumstances to which I have specifically adverted."
15.
On the basis of above discussion I hold that the impugned order dated 9th August, 1990 is illegal and the same is hereby quashed.
the petitioner will be entitled to costs of proceedings which I quantify as Rs. 2000/-.
Order accordingly.