RS Mongia.
J - This is an appeal by the management of the Modella Wollens Ltd, Chandigarh, against the judgment of the learned Single Judge, by which the writ petition of Shri OP Sharma, Workman, was allowed, holding that the Industrial Tribunal for Union Territory of Chandigarh at Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Tribunal) should have gone into the matter of victimisation and unfair labour practice and mala fides, which it has not done.
Accordingly, the learned Single Judge set aside the award of the Tribunal to that extent and remanded the case to the Tribunal with a direction to redecide the matter on the basis of the evidence already produced by the parties.
The Bench admitting the appeal had stayed further proceedings before the Tribunal.
The facts giving rise to the present appeal are :  2.
Respondent-workman, Shri OP Sharma, was appointed by the appellant, as a Senior Accounts Assistant on 6th August, 1964.
Accordingly to the respondent-workman, after being duly confirmed, he was issued several letters by the Management appreciating his work.
Since, according to him, the service conditions in the factory of the Management were very unsatisfactory, he organised the workman into a Union under the name and style of "Modella Textile Workers' Union" in the year 1967 and he was elected its founder President on 26th January, 1968.
On 21st March, 1968, the Management placed before the Union a proposal for introduction of Relay-shift system and it also announced additional increments to certain categories of workmen with effect from 1st February, 1968.
This proposal of the Management was considered by the Working Committee of the Union on 25th March, 1968 and later by the General Body.
It was decided that the proposal of the Management could be accepted provided the workmen were compensated adequately for the additional work load and also for the inconvenience that would be caused as a result of the introduction of Relay-shift system.
It was averred in the writ petition that as the proposal of the Management was not accepted by the Union unconditionally therefore, the Management got annoyed and as a first reaction withdrew the additional increments which had been announced.
It was further the case of the writ petitioner that the Union protested against the Management for withdrawing the increments and on 9th April, 1968, the petitioner personally delivered two letters, one protesting against the action of the Management in getting thumb impression of Sardara Singh on a resignation letter and the other against the violation of the agreement dated 22nd September, 1967.
It is further alleged that the petitioner was called by Shri HN Motwani, Labour Officer of the Management and told him not to aggravate the situation by giving such letters and also threatened him that in case he did not withdraw the letter with regard to Sardara Singh, he would issue charge-sheet to him and to one RC Bhaskar, the General Secretary of the Union.
Since the petitioner refused to do so, he was issued a charge-sheet, which is Annexure 'D' to the writ petition.
The petitioner gave reply to the charge-sheet denying these charges and stated that he had been victimized for his trade union activities.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed and after recording detailed evidence, the Enquiry Officer gave enquiry report against the petitioner and the Management acting on the findings of the enquiry report, passed termination order on 3rd June, 1968.
It may be stated here that prior to the date of termination of services of the petitioner, the Union had submitted certain other demands to the Management and since these were not met, the workmen went on strike from 22nd April, 1968.
Ultimately, an industrial dispute arising out of the dismissal of the petitioner along with other disputes relating to the matters covered by the demand notice were referred to the Tribunal by the Union Territory Administration on 4th July, 1968.
Many issues were framed by the Tribunal, but the issue with which we are concerned, is issue No. 6, which reads as under :  "(6) Whether the termination of Sucha Singh, Saheb Singh, OP Sharma and RC Bhaskar was justified and if so, to what relief they are entitled ?"
Out of the above persons, we are only concerned with respondent Shri Om Parkash Sharma (writ petitioner).
The Tribunal decided the issue in favour of the Management and held that the enquiry held against Shri Sharma was fair and proper and upheld the order of termination of the petitioner's services.
It was this award that was challenged by the writ petitioner before the learned Judge and as stated in the opening paragraph, the writ petition was partly allowed and case remanded to the Tribunal.
Dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Management, as observed above, has come up in the present appeal.
3.
The primary submission of Mr. NK Sodhi, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the appellant, is that once it is found by the Tribunal that the gross misconduct is established, as required, on legal evidence, in a fairly conducted domestic enquiry, there cannot be any question of victimization arising in those circumstances.
According to the learned counsel, the victimisaiton will only arise if without holding any enquiry or only holding a sham enquiry, the Management gets rid of the workman on the grounds of alleged misconduct.
If, according to the learned counsel, there are allegations of misconduct which are proved by leading legal evidence in a domestic enquiry which is held fairly and properly, then the question of victimisation does not arise at all.
To substantiate this submission, the learned counsel cited judgment of the Apex Court in M/s. Bharat Iron Works v. Bhagubhai Balubhai Patel and others, A.I.R. 1976 Supreme Court 98.
He drew our pointed attention to para 11 of the judgment, which is as under :-  "Again victimisation must be directly connected with the activities of the concerned employee inevitably leading to the penal action without the necessary proof of a valid charge against him.
The question to be asked is : Is the reason for the punishment attributable to a gross misconduct about which there is no doubt or to his particular trade union activity which is frowned upon by the employer ?
To take an example, suppose there is a tense atmosphere prevailing in a company because of a strike consequent upon raising of certain demands by the union, each party calling the order highly unreasonable or even provocative, the Tribunal will not readily accept a plea of victimisation as answer to a gross misconduct even when an employee, be he an active office-bearer of the union, commits assault, let us say, upon the Manager, and there is reliable legal evidence to that effect.
In such a case the employee, found guilty, cannot be equated with a victim or a scapegoat and the plea of victimisation as a defence will fall flat.
This is why once, in the opinion of the Tribunal a gross misconduct is established, as required, on legal evidence either in a fairly conducted domestic enquiry or before the Tribunal on merits, the plea of victimisation will not carry the case of the employee any further.
A proved misconduct is antithesis of victimisation as understood in industrial relations.
This is not to say that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to interfere with an order of dismissal on proof of victimisation."
From the perusal of the judgment of the Supreme Court in M/s. Bharat Iron Works' case (supra), it is clear that a proved misconduct in a fairly conducted domestic enquiry is the antithesis of victimisation as understood in industrial relations.
In the present case, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the domestic enquiry was fair and proper and the findings of the Enquiry Officer on all the charges were based on evidence and were perfectly justified.
The learned Tribunal has observed in the award as follows :-  "The findings of the Enquiry Officer regarding all these charges were based in the evidence ........
These witnesses were lengthily cross-examined by the workmen but nothing adverse could be brought out.
I have perused the statements of these witnesses and find myself in agreement with the enquiry that on the basis of these statements, the charges against the workman, Shri OP Sharma are proved."
Regarding the objection by the workman that no proper opportunity was given to him by the Enquiry Officer the learned Tribunal observed as under :-  "I have perused the enquiry file and find that so many opportunities were given to him for producing evidence, but he was not keen to produce it and was taking dates on one excuse or the other.
The Enquiry Officer in his report has given the details of these dates taken to produce defence evidence and the flimsy purposes for which these dates were taken.
Ultimately the date 25.5.1968 was fixed for producing the defence evidence.
On that date, however, none appeared on behalf of the workman, although on some previous dates an undertaking was given by the workman that the evidence would positively be produced on 25.5.1968.
It was in these circumstances that the defence was closed and the Enquiry Officer submitted his findings on the basis of the evidence which had already been recorded.
I find, therefore, that there was ample justification for closing the defence and submitting the report by the Enquiry Officer as had done.
It is urged on behalf of the workman that a telegram was sent to the Enquiry Officer on 2451968 seeking adjournment on the ground of illness.
This telegram is Ex. A.8.
The Enquiry Officer has stated in this respect that this telegram was found lying at his house when he returned there on 26.4.1968.
It appears that the statement of the Enquiry Officer, in this connection, is correct, because admittedly this telegram fell into the hands of one Shri Roshan Lal, examined on behalf of the workman.
According to this witness Roshan Lal he had received this telegram on 25.5.1968, as it was delivered to him by the Postman by mistake.
According to him he delivered this telegram to the Enquiry Officer, Shri Gupta at about 4.30 a.m. Now this statement of Shri Roshan Lal appears to be quite unnatural.
Even if the telegram had been wrongly delivered to him, he was not expected to wake up at that time.
He was expected to deliver this telegram to him in the morning at about 6 or 7 am Shri Gupta has stated that he left for Chandigarh for holding the enquiry at about 8 am In fact he should not have opened the telegram, because it was expected to be addressed in the name of Shri Gupta and if he had immediately opened it, as is stated by him, he was expected to return it to the postman concerned immediately.
The statement of this witness Roshan Lal, when perused, would show that it does not inspire confidence at all.
It on the other hand, shows that the telegram did not reach the Enquiry Officer Shri Gupta on 25.5.1968.
There is no mention in the telegram as to whether the medical certificate would follow etc. nor it seems that any cogent evidence has been adduced on behalf of the workman, that he was ill on 2451968.
On the other hand the statement of the Enquiry Officer would show that he had seen him outside the factory on the date 25.5.1968, taking part in the strike.
In these circumstances, coupled with the previous dates taken by the workman, to produce defence evidence, it clearly appears that his intention, on the other hand, as it appears was only to delay the result of the enquiry.
-------  The Enquiry Officer rather seems to be liberal in granting these dates to him and ultimately had to close the defence."
4.
Mr. JC Verma, learned Senior Advocate, for the workman, however, submitted that the Tribunal would interfere when there is want of good faith in the Management or when there is a victimisation or unfair labour practice or there is violation of principles of natural justice or the findings are completely baseless or perverse.
According to him, even if the findings of the Tribunal are that the enquiry was fair and proper and the misconduct stood proved but if victimisation is also proved, then irrespective of the findings of misconduct, the workman cannot be removed from service.
For this proposition he wanted to derive support from a Supreme Court judgment in M/s. Indian Iron and Steel Co Ltd and another v. Their Workmen, A.I.R. 1958 Supreme Court 130, wherein it has been observed as under :-  Undoubtedly, the management of a concern has power to direct its own internal administration and discipline; but the power is not unlimited and when a dispute arises, Industrial Tribunals have been given the power to see whether the termination of service of a workman is justified and to give appropriate relief.
In cases of dismissal on misconduct, the Tribunal does not, however, act as a Court of appeal and substitute its own judgment for that of the management.
It will interfere : (i) when there is want of good faith, (ii) when there is victimisation or unfair labour practice, (iii) when the management has been guilty of a basic error or violation of a principle of natural justice, and (iv) when on the materials, the finding is completely baseless or perverse."
5.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the learned Single Judge fell in error in setting aside the award to the extent that the Tribunal had not gone into the matter of victimisation and unfair labour practice.
The learned Single Judge has not held that the domestic enquiry was not fair and proper.
In view of the Supreme Court judgment in M/s. Bharat Iron Works' case (supra), once it is held that the enquiry was fair and proper and the findings of misconduct are well based, the question of victimisation would not arise.
Victimization and a finding of misconduct on evidence do not go hand in hand.
As observed by the Supreme Court a proved misconduct is antithesis of victimisation as understood in industrial relations.
The Supreme Court in M/s. Indian Iron and Steel Co's case (supra), never held that once a misconduct is proved in a fairly held domestic enquiry, the question of victimisation has still to be gone into.
6.
With respect to the learned Single Judge, we do not agree with the finding that the Enquiry Officer seemed to be in a hurry in concluding the enquiry proceedings.
The Tribunal had correctly come to the conclusion that a proper opportunity was given to the workman to defend himself and rather the workman was indulging in delaying tactics to prolong the proceedings.
Therefore, there was no basis for the learned Single judge to hold that the enquiry was not fair on this ground.
A detailed reference has been made above on this aspect of the matter regarding the opportunity was granted by the Enquiry Officer to the workman to adduce evidence.
The further finding of the learned Single Judge that 20 witnesses produced by the petitioner-workman were relevant for the determination of the dispute, is also not well based.
Only some witnesses had given evidence regarding Issue No. 6, which has been duly discussed by the learned Tribunal.
It is well settled that while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India the High Court would not reappraise the evidence which has been led before the Enquiry Officer or before the Tribunal.
The learned Single Judge's observation that the charge that on 2nd April, 1968, at about 10 am, the petitioner along with Shri Bhaskar went to the officer of Shri OP Bansal, Labour Officer, and asked him to return the resignation tendered by Sardara Singh workman and on Mr. Bansal's refusal, he tried to remove the file from the table and threatened him (Mr. Bansal) with dire consequences, seems to be false on the face of it, is beyond the scope of the power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Judge could not have reappraised the evidence.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the Letters Patent Appeal is allowed and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside, with the result that the award of the Labour Court, dated 8th March, 1972, Annexure "C" is upheld.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.