RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The facts necessary for disposal of this writ petition are that an F.I.R. No. 162, dated 2nd July, 1980 was lodged against the petitioner under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act while he was in service of the State of Haryana as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
He had retired on attaining the age of superannuation on July 31, 1980.
The trial arising out of the above-mentioned F.I.R. ended in conviction of the petitioner by the trial Court on 12th January, 1982.
He was, however, acquitted on appeal by this Court on 15th July, 1983.
2.
During the investigation/trial of the first F.I.R., another F.I.R. No. 5 under Sections 467/471/161 I.P.C. read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, was lodged against the petitioner on 13th March, 1981.
The trial arising out of the second F.I.R. ended in conviction of the petitioner by the trial Court on 30th July, 1986, which was upheld by this Court in appeal on 7th March, 1989, though the sentence was reduced to that of already undergone.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on 3rd August, 1989 by the respondent-Authorities as to why the pension and gratuity and other service benefits arising out of the service be not permanently withheld because of the conviction of the petitioner, referred to above.
After considering the reply of the petitioner to the said show cause notice, which was sent on 12th September, 1989, the respondent-Authorities vide order dated 18th January, 1990 (Annexure P. 23), it was decided that full pension and gratuity of the petitioner be withheld permanently.
It is this order of the State Government that has been impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. SP Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that under Rule 22(c)(1) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, as applicable to Haryana, (hereinafter called the Rules) where any judicial proceeding is instituted under clause (b) of Rule 22. of the Rules, the Officer is entitled to be paid provisional pension under the Rules during the period commencing from the date of his retirement to the date on which, upon conclusion of such proceedings, final orders are passed.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner had retired on 31st July, 1980 and the conviction arising out of F.I.R. No. 162 dated 2nd July, 1980 was on 12th January, 1982 by the trial Court.
According to him, he was entitled to provisional pension with effect from 1st August, 1980 to 11th July, 1982 in the first instance, but since he was acquitted on 15th July, 1983 by this Court in appeal, the provisional pension should have been paid again from 12th January, 1982 onwards till the conviction, if any, arising out of the second F.I.R. No. 5 dated 13th December, 1981.
Since, according to him, the second conviction by the trial Court (which was upheld by the High Court) was on 6th July, 1986, the petitioner was entitled to provisional pension right from 1st August, 1980 to 30th July, 1986.
He further argued that once such a provisional pension was paid even if thereafter there was an order withholding the pension in its entirety, the provisional pension was not recoverable under the provisions of Rule 22 (c)(2) of the Rules.
4.
The learned counsel further, agreed that without prejudice to his submissions made above, in fact the petitioner was entitled to the provisional pension till 18th January, 1990, when the impugned order was passed and in any case upto 3rd August, 1989 when a show cause notice was issued as to why the pensionary benefits be not withheld.
He further submitted that in any case this was not a fit case in which the pension and gratuity should have been withheld in entirety.
He also faintly argued that though a show cause notice had been served petitioner should have been afforded an opportunity of personal hearing before passing the impugned order.
5.
To appreciate the first submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner, it will be apposite at this stage to reproduce Rules 22(c)(1) and (2) of the Rules :  "(c)(1) Where any departmental or judicial proceeding is instituted under clause (b) of rule 22 or where a departmental proceeding is continued, under clause (i) of the proviso thereto against an officer who has retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement or otherwise, he shall be paid during the period commencing from the date of his retirement to the date on which, upon conclusion of such proceedings, final orders are passed, a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of his qualifying service up to the date of retirement or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement up to date immediately preceding to the date on which he was placed under suspension; but no gratuity or death-cum-retirement gratuity shall be paid to him until the conclusion of such proceedings and of final orders thereon.
The gratuity, if allowed to be drawn by the competent authority on the conclusion of the proceedings, will be deemed to have fallen due on the date of issue of final orders by the competent authority.
(2) Payment of provisional pension made under Sub-clause (1) shall be adjusted against the final retirement benefits sanctioned to such officer upon conclusion of the aforesaid proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or for a specified period."
A reading of Rule 22(c)(1), quoted above, makes it clear that a delinquent officer who has refired, but judicial proceedings are continued or instituted after his retirement, is entitled to provisional pension till final orders are passed in the judicial proceedings.
In this case, the conviction in the first F.I.R. was recorded on 12th January, 1982, and, consequently, I find no justification with the respondents not to have paid the provisional pension from 1st August, 1980 to 12th January, 1982.
Further, as the petitioner was acquitted on 15th July, 1983 by the High Court, he became entitled to provisional pension from 12th January, 1982 onwards till any conviction was recorded by the trial Court in the second F.I.R., which was lodged on 13th March, 1981.
The conviction arising out of the second F.I.R. was recorded on 21st July, 1986, and, therefore, in accordance with Rule 22(c)(1) of the Rules, the petitioner was entitled to provisional pension with effect from 1st August, 1980 to 30th July, 1986.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents could not successfully dispute this interpretation of the Rules.
Consequently, I hold that the petitioner is entitled to get provisional pension according to the Rules with effect from 1st August, 1980 to 30th July, 1986.
I may also observe here that there was some justification with the respondents not to have paid the provisional pension with effect from 12th January, 1982 to 15th July, 1983 i.e. the interregnum period between the first conviction and the acquittal, but there was no justification not to pay the provisional pension after 15th July, 1983.
Consequently, the petitioner would be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 1st September, 1980, the date when the provisional pension became due for the first month till the date of payment excepting the period from 12th January, 1982 to 15th July, 1983.
7.
So far as the other submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner are concerned, that in fact, the petitioner was entitled to the provisional pension till the passing of the impugned order, I am unable to agree with him.
Rule 22(c)(1) clearly envisages the payment of provisional pension from the date of retirement till the final orders are passed in the judicial proceedings.
By just passing of the order by the trial Court in the judicial proceedings, the liability of the State to pay provisional pension automatically came to an end.
The show cause notice as to whether the entire pension is to be withheld or a part thereof, has nothing to do with the payment of the provisional pension.
Till an order in the judicial proceedings is passed by the trial Court, a delinquent officer is only entitled to provisional pension, and not pension.
The liability of the State Government to withhold pension in its entirety or a part thereof arises when the order to that effect is passed and till that order is not passed, the petitioner would not be ipso facto entitled to pension, but as observed above, only to provisional pension till final orders are passed in the judicial proceedings.
8.
There is no law that before passing the order of the type of the impugned order, a personal hearing is required to be given to the delinquent officer.
A show cause notice is enough and in this case the petitioner did avail the opportunity of replying to the show cause notice, which according to me, is sufficient compliance with the rules of natural justice.
Further it is not for this Court to go into whether the entire pensionary benefits are to be withheld or only part thereof.
It is for the competent authority to decide.
Unless such an order is wholly arbitrary, this Court would not interfere in writ jurisdiction.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is partly allowed to the extent as indicated above.
Let the arrears of provisional pension, including interest as indicated above, be calculated and released to the petitioner within a period of three months from the receipt of this order.
I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.