MR Agnihotri, J - This Civil writ petition filed by Bhag Singh, Head Analyst of the Directorate of Food and Supplies Department, Punjab, against the State of Punjab through the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Food and Supplies Department, respondent No. 1, the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab, respondent No. 2, the Rattan Chand Anmol, Respondent No. 3, had been finally allowed by AL Bahri, J by his judgement dated 31st March, 1989.
Later on, when CM No. 11721-A of 1989 for review of the said judgment was made by respondent No. 3 on the ground that he was not served in the writ petition, the learned Judge recalled his judgement dated 31st March, 1989, and set aside the same on 8th September, 1989.
Resultantly, the case has been listed for de novo hearing before me.
2.
Briefly stated, Bhag Singh, Head Analyst, office of Food and Supplies Controller, Ferozepore, challenges in this petition, filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution, orders Annexure P/5 and P/6, dated January 18/19, 1988, vide which he was reverted as Junior Analyst and respondent No. 3 Rattan Chand Anmol was promoted as Head Analyst.
3.
Bhag Singh petitioner was recruited as Sub inspector in the Food and Supplies Department, Punjab, in 1970.
He is a Graduate in Arts (BA).
In 1973, he was promoted as Junior Analyst vide order copy Annexure P/1.
In 1974, he was posted as Inspector vide order Annexure P/2.
Thereafter, on July 22, 1986, vide order Annexure P/3, he was promoted as Head Analyst.
Respondent No. 3 Rattan Chand Anmol challenged this order by filing an appeal.
The appeal was allowed vide order Annexure P/5 dated January 19, 1988, by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Food and Supplies Department.
In consequence order Annexure P/6 was issued on that very day reverting the petitioner and promoting Rattan Chand Anmol.
4.
Earlier, the promotion of Bhag Singh petitioner as Head Analyst was challenged in this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4952 of 1986 (Kamal Neelam and another v. State of Punjab and others) which has now been decided by IS Tiwana and MR Agnihotri, JJ on January 2, 1989.
The order of promotion of Bhag Singh was affirmed.
In this judgment reference was made to decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1630 of 1980, Romesh Pangila v. State of Punjab and others, decided by SS Kang, J on June 4, 1981, inter alia, holding that for the purposes of promotion to the post of head Analyst the academic qualifications of B.Sc/BA with physics and Mathematics was not necessary in the case of Junior Analyst and further that necessary experience of three years of Junior Analyst as well as of Inspector as the nature of the duties of these posts was similar, could be clubbed.
5.
Along with the writ petition, copy of the written statement filed on behalf of the State in Kamal Neelam's case was produced as Annexure P/7 wherein the State had taken the stand, as briefly noticed, as taken in the case of Ramesh Pangila, as held above.
6.
The written statement on behalf of the State of Punjab in the present writ petition has been filed by Under Secretary (General), Food and Supplies Department, inter alia, taking up a contrary stand to the one which was taken in the written statement filed in Kamal Neelam's case as noticed above.
This stand appears to have been taken now as in the impugned order Annexure P/5 the Secretary has held so.
7.
At the time the impugned order, Annexure P/5, was passed on January 19, 1988, the decision of this Court in Romesh Pangila's case had been delivered.
However, in the impugned order the said judgment was by-passed by observing as under:-  "The facts of the present case are, therefore, not on all fours with the facts of Civil Writ No. 1630 of 1980 and the interpretation of the High Court as also the averments of the department have been stretched to an unrealistic extent.
Even at the time permission of the then Secretary was taken to allow clubbing just prior to promotion of Shri Bhag Singh, the intention was only to count the service of Inspectors who had lien as Junior Analysts."
8.
The approach of the Secretary in passing the impugned order and ignoring the interpretation placed on the Rules by this Court is not healthy.
The interpretation placed by the High Court on the Rules will be binding unless set aside by the Higher Court.
In the present case, the view expressed by SS Kang, J in Romesh Pangila's case was fully approved by Division Bench in Kamal Neelam's case.
9.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for respondent No. 3, has made an attempt to justify the impugned order by invoking to his aid the single bench judgement of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 853 of 1977 (Mohinder Partap Sharma v. The State of Punjab), dated 25th August, 1983, against which Letters Patent Appeal No. 1033 of 1983 has also been dismissed in limine on 13th December, 1983.
10.
I have closely gone through the judgment in the aforesaid case and find that it is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case for the reason, that it was a case where seniority was claimed as Junior Analyst even though petitioner Mohinder Partap Sharma in that case was later on confirmed as Sub-Inspector as also promoted as Inspector.
The learned Judge took the view that since the petitioner was confirmed as Sub-Inspector, he was not entitled to fixation of seniority as Junior Analyst.
Firstly, this is not the position in the present case as petitioner Bhag Singh had not been confirmed as an Inspector before his promotion as Head Analyst.
Secondly, assuming for the sake of argument that the petitioner had been confirmed as Inspector, even then his right to be considered for promotion to the post of Head Analyst from the post of Junior Analyst could not be taken away in view of the law laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in TR Sharma v. Prithvi Singh and another etc., 1976(1) S.L.R.
55.
The Supreme Court while reversing the judgment reported as Tuhi Ram Sharma v. State, 1971(2), S.L.R.
184, held that even though appellant Tuhi Ram Sharma had joined service as Agriculture Inspector in 1945 and appointed as Block Development and Panchayat Officer in 1961, on which post he was later on confirmed in 1966, he could still be considered for promotion in 1969 to the post of District Agricultural Officer by treating him as an Agricultural Inspector.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that by confirming Tuhi Ram Sharma as Block Development and Panchayat officer in 1966, his earlier rights to be considered for promotion on the higher post in the Agriculture Department could not be taken away, unless the appellant had requested in writing for his confirmation as Block Development and Panchayat Officer, thereby snapping his ties with the Agriculture Department for all times to come.
This is neither the position in the present case nor has any suggestion of this type been made by the respondents.
11.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition, quash the impugned orders, Annexure P5 and P6, and direct the respondents to release to the petitioner the benefits of seniority and promotion as Head Analyst along with all the arrears of salary and allowances, etc. to which he would have been entitled, had the impugned orders not passed.
The petitioner shall be also be entitled to the costs of this petition whic are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.