Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 5042 and 6005 of 1990, 5470/90 and 6605 of 1990 as the question of law and facts involved in them is common.
In all these petitions, there is a pristine dispute between the admission seekers and the heads of the medical institutions to highly prestigious degree courses, though here the scope of controversy is very limited.
The common question mainly involved in these petitions relates to institutional preference in the matter of admission to the MD/Diploma Courses in the Punjab State Medical College, Patiala/Amritsar for the session-1990.
Though in CWP No. 6005 of 1990, some additional attacks were made demonstrating discrimination between those who have not done any house job and not put in three years' rural service and those who claim to have fulfilled these requisites, but by an interim order of the Admitting Bench dated 1751990, it was observed that the above controversy stood resolved by a decision of this Court in CWP 6192 of 1990.
Therefore, CWP No. 6005 of 1990 was admitted qua the issue of institutional preference alone.
2.
The facts canvassed in these petitions lie in a very narrow compass and may thus, be noticed as under :  3.
The petitioners are holding MBBS degree and they have done their house-jobs from General Hospital, Chandigarh, which, according to them, is recognised by the Medical Council of India, for all intents and purposes.
Annexures P-1 and P-2 are the Certificates on the record in this regard.
By an advertisement issued by the Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala, applications were invited from Medical Graduates for admission to Post-graduate Medical Degree/Diploma Courses in various subjects in the two colleges Amritsar and Patiala.
Amongst other sources, 40 per cent seats were to be strictly filled up on merit from fresh Medical graduates, Punjab Civil Medical Service-II Officers and Registrars/Demonstrators.
Sixty per cent seats were to be first filled up, from amongst Registrars/Demonstrators and remaining seats by offering to PCMS II Officers with a minimum three years rural service.
All the PCMS II Doctors, who had served the State Government for a minimum period of three years rural regular service followed by regular service, were eligible for admission to Post-graduate Medical Degree/Diploma Courses.
All the petitioners have done their house-job from General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh which is recognised by the respondent for the purpose of eligibility for admission to the Post-Graduate courses.
All the petitioners submitted their application forms indicating therein their choices for the specialities as required by the advertisement.
The interview date for making admission was 16.4.1990.
The candidates who had done one year house-job in the Hospital attached to the Medical College, Patiala, Faridkot, Amritsar is given 50 marks and 25 marks for six months' house-job by way of weightage for admission to the Post-graduate Courses/Diploma Course, respectively.
4.
There is also a provision of weightage vide Punjab Government Memo dated 9th January, 1990, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure R/2 to the written statement.
5.
The petitioners' grievance is that giving of weightage on the basis of institutional preference is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was urged that the grant of 50 marks to the students, who have done their house-jobs from the teaching Institutions, has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved and the petitioners' right to seek admission on the merit has been jeopardised.
6.
The respondents have filed a detailed written statement and relied upon this Court's decision rendered in C.W.P.
No. 3954 of 1987 (Dr. Gautam Singh Sikand and others v. State of Punjab).
The Court following the ratio of DN Chanchala and others v. The State of Mysore and others, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 1762, held that the criterion does not lead to the selection of less meritorious students.
The candidates completing one year's house-job from different hospitals acquire different standard of proficiency and they do not fall in the same class.
7.
The perusal of the entire record indicates that the candidates, who had done their house-job from the Medical Colleges situated in the State of Punjab are given weightage and are thus given institutional preferential treatment whereas the other candidates, who had done their house-job from other hospitals are treated as belonging to the general category candidates and no weightage of marks and preference is given to them.
8.
Earlier the matter of institutional preference came up before the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta, A.I.R. 1989 SC 177, which was a case of college-based institutional preference in respect of five medical colleges in Rajasthan under the same University.
The impugned Ordinance of the University provided for addition of 5 per cent of the aggregate of marks which work out to be to 1375 marks by way of institutional preference in the sense of preference dependent on the particular medical college from which the concerned candidate has passed his final MBBS Examination.
This college wise institutional preference has been disapproved by the Supreme Court in that case and the impugned Ordinance was struck down.
8A.
The question of institutional preference was again considered in the case of Greater Bombay Municipal Corporation v. Thukral Anjani, AIR 1989 SC 1195.
In this case, the rules provided for college-wise institutional preference for admission in the post-graduate medical courses.
The High Court of Bombay came to the conclusion that the college wise preference is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The rule in question gave preference to candidates applying for admission at the parent institution.
The parent institution was defined as the medical college at which the candidate had passed his qualifying examination.
Preference was again sought to be given from other Municipal Medical Colleges in Brihan Mumbai.
After considering the case the Supreme Court concluded that this institutional preference is bad.
It was observed in para 19 as under :  "After giving our thoughtful consideration to the question of college wise institutional preference or reservation of seats is not permissible and the High Court has rightly struck down both the impugned Rule 4(A) framed by the Bombay Municipal Corporation and part of Rule 5 framed under the Government resolution that is to say, only in respect of its application to the grant Medical College in the City of Bombay relating to admission to Post-graduate MD Course pursuant to the impugned rules, their admission shall not be interfered with or disturbed."
An MBBS Doctor has to do house-job for the purposes of entering into medical profession or for admission to post-graduate course.
The seats being limited in medical colleges, the MBBS Doctors have to do house-job either from Government Hospitals or from private Hospitals for seeking admission to post-graduate course.
The respondents for the purpose of making merit list for admission to post-graduate course gave weightage of 50 marks preference to the candidates of the Punjabi University, Patiala and Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, who had done the house-job from teaching institutions which is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as meritorious candidates of other Universities shall be denied admission.
The ratio of decision in DN Chanchala's case (supra) has no bearing, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta's case and Greater Bombay Municipal Corporation's case (supra).
9.
In view of the discussion and following the ratio of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, I am of the view that the respondent-State's decision dated 911990, a copy of which is Annexure P-4 is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution hence is hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for admission to post-graduate course afresh as per their eligibility not possible to accommodate them in the current academic session, they are to be accommodated in the next session.
However, it is made clear that the candidates who have already been admitted to post-graduate courses by giving weightage, their admission shall not be disturbed.
10.
This petition is disposed of in the terms indicated above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.