GR Majithia, J - The petitioners have impugned the appointment of respondent No. 3 as Lecturer in Sanskrit (Research) at Vishveshwar and Vishwa Bandhu Institute of Sanskrit and Indological Studies, Hoshiarpur for short (VVBIS & IS) in this writ petition.
2.
The facts :-  The respondent No. 1 invited applications for five posts of Lecturers in Sanskrit (Research) at VVBIS & IS vide advertisement No. 11/79 Petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 3 applied for one of the advertised posts.
Respondent No. 3 was neither called for interview by the Selection Committee nor he appeared before it.
However, his name was recommended at Sr. No. 4.
His selection has been challenged simply on the ground that he did not fulfil the requisite qualifications and was appointed for extraneous considerations at the instance of respondent No. 2, the Vice Chancellor.
It is stated that respondent No. 3 was appointed for a period of one year but before the expiry of the period he was given regular appointment on 2181982.
3.
Respondent No. 2 filed written statement in the form of affidavit play and denied the allegations made against him.
It was stated that respondent No. 3 represented to him that he was fully eligible for appointment as a Lecturer but he was not called for interview.
On receipt of representation, he allowed him to appear for interview before the Selection Committee.
The order permitting him to appear for interview was passed on March 6, 1980.
However his name could not be included in the list prepared by the office.
The office by mistake while preparing the proceedings of the Selection Committee did not include his name amongst the candidates who were called for interview.
The Selection Committee selected respondent No. 3 as is revealed from its original proceedings.
The allegation that he was personally interested in respondent No. 3 was denied.
4.
On behalf of respondent No. 1, affidavit was filed by the Registrar controverting the allegations made in the petition.
It was pleaded that respondent No. 2 vide his order dated March 6, 1980 permitted respondent No. 3 to appear from the interview.
Letter No. 4436/Estt.
dated 731980 was issued to respondent No. 3.
He actually appeared before the Selection Committee.
Since the respondent No. 3 had been called for interview at a later stage, his name was not included in the list containing the names of thirty three candidates summoned for interview to whom letters for interview were initially issued.
While typing out the proceedings of the Selection Committee, the name of respondent No. 3 and placed him at Sr. No. 4 in the order of merit.
It was denied that respondent No. 3 did not fulfil the requisite qualifications prescribed for the post.
The Syndicate in its meeting dated March 17, 1980 decided to appoint the persons whose names appared at Sr. No. 1, 2 and 3 in order of merit.
The Syndicate did not take any decision regarding respondent No. 3.
The Syndicate did not take any decision regardig respondent No. 3.
The Syndicate considered the case of respondent No. 3 for his appointment as Lecturer (Research) in its meeting dated June 17, 1981 and decided that respondent No. 3 be appointed on one year's probation subject to clearance of the points raised by Dr. Dhawan.
The objections raised by Dr. Dhawan were cleared and therefore the appointment was offeered to respondent No. 3.
He was intially appointed for one year.
The Syndicate in its meeting dated September 18, 1982 approved the appointment of respondent No. 3 as a Lecturer and the Senate in its meeting held on 19121982 approved the recommendation of the Syndicate.
The proceedings of the Syndicate and the Senate were placed on record through Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 20586 of 1986.
Notice of the Civil Misc. was given to the contesting parties but no written objection was filed and no objection was taken even at the time of arguments of the case.
5.
The learned counsel submits that respondent No. 3 was ineligible for the post of Lecturer since he did not fulfil the requisite qualifications and that his name was entered in the list of selectees by the Selection Committee for extraneous considerations.
The submission is untenable.
The Selection Committee found respondent No. 3 to be fully eligible for selection and selected him against the post of Lecturer.
The Syndicate accepted the recommendation of the Selection Committee and appointed him on one year probation.
The Syndicate in its meeting dated September 18, 1982 approved his appointment on regular basis and the decision of the Syndicate was approved by the Senate on December 19, 1982.
This court is not to function as a Court of appeal over the decision of Selection Committee and scrutinise relevant merits of the candidates who appeared before the Selection Committee.
In Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. BS Mahajan, AIR 1990 SC 438, the apex Court observed thus :-  "It is needless to emphasise that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinise the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The Court has no such expertise.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc.
It is not disputed that in the present case, the University had constituted the Committee in due compliance with the relevant statutes.
The Committee consisted of experts and it selected the candidates after going through all the relevant material before it.
In sitting in appeal, over the selection so made and in setting it aside on the ground of the so called comparative merits of the candidates as assessed by the Court, the High Court went wrong and exceeded its jurisdiction."
6.
In the light of the authoritative pronouncement of the apex court and on facts of the present case, I do not find any merit in the petition.
Resultantly, the same is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.