AL Bahri, J - Vide this order five Criminal Revision Nos. 213 to 217 of 1987 are being disposed of.
All these cases were initiated on registration of one FIR No. 155 dated 561974, under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 409/420/467/468/471/120 of the Indian Penal Code.
The case was registered at Police Station Jandiala, District Amritsar.
On the basis of the said report separate challans were presented covering different periods.
Most of the accused in all these cases are common.
Sain Dass is one of them.
2.
Sain Dass was employed as a clerk in Government Higher Secondary School, Jandiala.
The other accused were employed in the Treasury.
Sain Dass used to prepare fictious pay bills of the staff of the school under forged signatures of the Principal.
The other accused, who were employed in the treasury, used to pass the bills with the result that Sain Dass used to daraw amount of the bills from the Treasury which amount used to be mis-appropriated by all the accused.
These amounts cover the period starting from Aug 1970 to May 1974.
The present cases cover five different periods during the above period.
In each case the amount withdrawn is different.
Special Judge, Amritsar on November 6 1986 passed similar orders in these five cases discharging the accused persons as the cases were instituted more than four years from the commission of offence.
The orders were passed on the basis of decision of this Court in Kailash Nath v. State of Punjab, 1987(2) RCR(Crl.)
108 (P&H) : 1986 Chandigarh Criminal Cases 257 and Des Raj Singal v. State of Punjab, 1986(1) Recent Criminal Reports 66 decided by MM Punchhi, J  3.
Some of the accused earlier filed Crl.
Misc.
Applications in this Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the proceedings against them in all the five cases.
MM Punchhi, J on September 16, 1986 quashed the proceedings against such of the petitioners relying upon his decision in Des Raj Singla's case.
The names of those accused are Amar Singh, Agya Singh and Surinder Nath Sharma.
These opersons had retired from the service as is now stated.
Shri.
ML Merchia, Advocate, appearing on behalf of these persons to whom notices were also issued in the Criminal Revisions referred to above as they were show as accused/respondents argued athat this court cannot review the orders passed by Punchhi, J, on September 16,1986 whereby proceedings against these persons were quashed.
There is force in this contention.
Diffenent orders passed on September 16,1986 by Punchhi, J were not challenged in the Supreme Court and those orders have become final and such orders cannot be recalled in these revision petitions.
4.
Shri Bachittar Singh, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the State of Punjab, the petitioner, has argued that the decision of Punchhi, J, in Des Raj Singla's case supra needs reconsideration as the same does not lay down the correct law.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this contention cannot be accepted.
5.
In Des Raj's case relying upon Rule 22 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume 11, it was held that no criminal proceedings could be instituted in respect of an event which took place more that four years before the day on which a complaint or report of a police officer on which the Court takes cognizance was made.
Relevant portion of Rule 22(b) reads as under.
"The Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if, in a departmental or judicial proceeding, the pensioner if found guilty of grave or negligence during the period of his services rendered upon reemployment after retirement Provided that.
(1)..... (2) ..- - (3) No such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment shall be instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution.
Explanation-For the purposes of this rule  (a).... (b) a judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted -in the case of the criminal proceedings on the date on which the complaint or report of the police officer on which the Magistrate takes cognizance, is made......
The contention of Shri Bachhittar Singh, Advocate, for the petitioner is that the aforesaid rule stands immediately repealed by amendment of Criminal Procedure Code vide which Section 468 was inserted with effect from April 1, 1974 providing limitation for different offences.
Section 468 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as under :  "468.
Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation (I) Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Code, no Court shall take cognizance of an offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), after the expiry of the period of limitation.
(2) The period of limitation shall be - (a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only; (b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year; (c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding, one year but not exceeding three years.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation in relation to offences which may be tried together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is.
punishable with the more severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most severe punishment."
6.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that since for some of offences mentioned in the FIR imprisonment of more than three years has been prescribed, the State could present the challan any time The provision for limitation prescribed under rule 22. as referred to above thus stands impliedly repealed by S. 468 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Section 468 of the Code Criminal Procedure will not apply to the cases in hand except one.
The period for which the amount was withdrawn by the accused from the - Treasury in all the cases mentioned above is before April 1, 1974.
The provision of bar of limitation as provided under rule 22 as referred to above, thus would be applicable to the cases in hand as the law applicable would be such which was in force on the date of alleged commission of offence.
Secondly, reading of Section 468 of the Code of -Criminal Procedure shows that there was no specific provision made with respect to offences providing punishment exceeding three years; that it could be impliedly held to repeal the provision regarding bar of prosecution as provided under rule 22 as referred to above.
The provision of rule 22 as referred to above is a special provision governing Government servants only whereas the provision in Section 468 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is general.
The special provision would take precedence over the general provision.
While referring to rule 22 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 11, Puchhi, J, in Des Raj Singla's case, it was observed as under  "The embargo on institution of a criminal proceeding, though occurring in the Chapter meant for `Pensions', apparently reserves the right to the Government of withholding or withdrawing a pension or part of it, if the pensioner is found guilty of grave mis-conduct or negligence during the period for service or re-employment.
The learned Special Judge, when confronted with the obstacle took the view that the fetter put on the institution of criminal proceedings had a narrow purpose, for, it was only to regulate the release, withholding or withdrawing of pension and had nothing to do with the power of the Court to try offences under section 5(1)(e) read with section (5) of the Prevention of Corruption Act."
7.
Relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court in BS Tadav and others v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1961 Supreme Court 561 that the service rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution are legislative in character, it was observed as under : "  "On the touch-stone of the aforesaid authoritative pronouncement, rule 22 is a legislative measure enacted under the legislative power of the Governor.
Now in the context of the rule, it is discernible that pension is alterable to the detriment of the pensioner if he is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence in a judicial proceeding.
But a criminal judicial proceeding mandatorily is required to be instituted, in respect of an event within four years of its taking place, reckoned on the date on which the Magistrate takes cognizance on the police report or complaint, as the case may be.
Thus, the narrow point required to be determined is whether the embargo is put for the limited purpose of pension or does it enure to the benefit of the accused-pensioner, objecting to the continuance of trial, being a proceeding in violation thereof."
8.
Apart from the interpretation put on rule 22 of the rules referred to above, Punchhi, J, while quashing the proceedings based his decision on the ground of delay.
In that case, the prosecution took nearly 8-1/2 years to get the matter investigated.
The decision of the Supreme Court in State of UP v. Kapil Deo Shukla, AIR 1973 Supreme Court 494, and State of Bihar v. Uma Shankar Katriwal, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 641 were relied upon where prosecutions launched after a considerable delay, or even when launched.
Their delayed continuance were quashed by the High Courts which orders were maintained by the Supreme Court Learned counsel for the State referred to the decision of Full Bench of the Lahore High Court in Hakam Khuda Yar v. Emperor, A.I.R. 1940 Lahore 129, wherein it was observed as under :  "It is no doubt true that it is one of the canons of the interpretation of statutes that repeal by implication of an earlier enactment is not to be favoured, especially when the earlier enactment dealt with a particular subject.
But if the later statute is so worded that the repeal flows from it as a necessary consequence, it is the duty of the Courts to give effect of it."
9.
The ratio of the aforesaid decision cannot be applied to the case in hand for the reasons already discussed above.
There is no question of impliedly repealing the provisions of rule 22 by enactment of Section 468 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
There is no force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner" that rule 22 referred to above only applies for the purpose of determining pension and when any criminal case is instituted there is no question of determining such pension of a Government servant.
Rule 22 applies to departmental as well as judicial proceedings civil or criminal which is clear from the explanation attached to the rule itself.
Sub rule 3 of rule 22 is a complete bar for institution of judicial proceedings in respect of a cause of action which arose on an event which took place more than four years before such institution.
Admittedly in the present -cases challans were presented in the Court much after four years of the commission of the alleged offences.
The Court could not entertain the same.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, these Revision Petitions are dismissed while affirming the order of the Trial Court discharging the accused.