GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal against order dated 2731991 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 4550 of 1980 directing the appellant to re-determine the seniority of the writ petitioners (respondents herein) vis-a-vis other teachers in the Government schools by giving them benefit of the service rendered in the schools managed by the Cantonment Board/Amabala.
2.
The facts :-  After being selected by the Competent Authority, the respondents were appointed as teachers in different schools under the Cantonment Board, Ambala in accordance with the provisions of the Cantonment Funds Service Rules, 1937 One of them was appointed in the year 1949, some were appointed between 1952 to 1959 and the remaining were appointed between 1960 to 1974.
In 1977, the Government of India, Ministry of Defence and the Government of Haryana agreed to the excision of certain areas of Cantonment Board, Ambala to the Government of Haryana.
In furtherance of that decision, the Government of India, Ministry of Defence issued notification No. SRO 6-B dated 521977.
Simultaneously, letter No. 14(3)730 (B&C) dated 521977 was sent to the Director, Military Lands and Cantonments specifying the modalities of financial and administrative arrangements between Cantonment Board, Ambala and the Notified Area Committee set up by the Government of Haryana to administer excised area.
Clause (vii) of that letter, which has direct bearing on the decision of this appeal, is reproduced below :- "(vii) The services of employees of the Cantonment Board Schools taken over by the State Government shall stand transferred to the Government of Haryana Services.
They will be governed by terms and conditions of service as are applicable to similar staff under the Government of Haryana but it shall be ensured that their present pay on date of transfer stands protected.
The services of such employees as are not willing to serve under the Government of Haryana will be terminated by the Cantonment Board on payment of due terminal benefits under rules applicable to Cantonment Board employees.
The liability arising out of grant of such terminal benefits will also be shared between the Cantonment Board and the NAC in the ratio of 40:60."
3.
After about one month, Under Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Defence sent letter No. 14/3/73/D (B&C) dated 431977 to the Director, Military Lands and Cantonments with the list of employees of the schools of Cantonment Board, Ambala whose services were transferred to the State Government.
In pursuance of that letter, the Executive Officer, Cantonment Board sent communication dated 1931977 to all the teachers about the transfer of their services to the Government of Haryana.
For the sake of convenience, relevant extract of letter dated 1931977 sent to one of the respondents, namely, Shri Harish Kumar is reproduced below :-  "Consequent upon the excision of certain areas from Ambala Cantonment, your services under the Cantonment Board stand transferred w.e.f.
521977 under Section 7(i) of the Cantonment Act, 1924 vide the Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter No. 14(3)/73/D(O&C) dated 5th February, 1977 and 4th March, 1977 to the Government of Haryana.
Your services under the State Government will be governed by the terms and conditions of services as applicable to the employees of Education Department in the State of Haryana.
The present pay drawn by you on the date of transfer viz. 521977 will be protected.
In case you are not willing to serve under the State Government, your services with the Cantonment Board will be terminated on payment of such terminal benefits as admissible under the rules applicable to you."
4.
After about two months, the Education Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana sent memo No. 5009-Ed-II-SE-77/14396 dated 12.5.1977 to the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana conveying the sanction of the President of India to the absorption of the staff of one High School and Six Primary Schools of the Cantonment Board, Ambala by appointment by transfer in the Education Department subject to their fulfilling the conditions prescribed under the rules.
This was followed by letter No. 4/90-77-EI(4) 6959 dated 1661978 sent by the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana to the District Education Officer, Ambala conveying that terms and conditions of the staff of Cantonment Board Schools had not been finalised so far.
However, after about two years, the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana sent letter No. 12/1/77-V-I(5) dated 2751980 to the District Education Officer, Ambala conveying the Government's decision that seniority of the persons, like the respondents shall be fixed at the tail of the staff of the State Cadre.
5.
The respondents challenged the decision of the Government not to count their past service for the purpose of fixation of seniority etc. by filing writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, which was registered as C.W.P.
No. 4550 of 1980.
They claimed fixation of seniority on the basis of total length of service in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Educational Service, Class III, School Cadre, Rules, 1955 (for short, `the Rules') (as applicable to the State of Haryana), notification dated 521977 issued by the Government of India and letter dated 521977 sent to the Director, Military Lands and Cantonments.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of appellants, it was averred that the seniority of the writ petitioners had been fixed in accordance with the terms and conditions embodied in the letters of appointment issued by the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana and they were not entitled to get benefits of the past service.
7.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and held that the employees of the schools managed by the Cantonment Board, Ambala were entitled to fixation of seniority by counting the service rendered by them in the schools of the Cantonment Board.
The relevant portions of the order of the learned Single Judge are extracted below :-  "It was a case of compulsory take over of the schools by the State on the exclusion of certain areas of the Cantonment Board from its jurisdiction.
Petitioners were left with no choice but to go in for the State Service as it was provided in the take up order that the service of those employees who are not willing to serve under the State Government be terminated on payment of such terminal benefit as admissible under the rules.
The absorption of the petitioners in the State cadre was for their own benefit as well as in public interest.
Public interest which was being served was to maintain the continuity of the educational facilities which were being extended to the residents of the Cantonment Board.
Had the services of the petitioners been terminated then it would have left many persons jobless as well as the facility of education which was being extended to the children of the residents of Cantonment Board would have been discontinued.
Pay and allowances of the petitioners have been protected.
They have been given the benefit of the service rendered in the Cantonment Board for the purpose of pension, gratuity and leave encashment etc. and I do not see any reason as to why the services rendered by them in the Cantonment Board be not considered for the purpose of determining their seniority on their absorption in the State cadre.
Term "Transfer" itself indicates that it is not a new appointment and it carries with it certain benefits of past service.
It is an admitted fact that the teachers in the Cantonment Board had the same pay and qualifications which were prescribed for the Government teachers borne on the State cadre.
In the circumstances of this case to deny to the petitioners the benefit of their service which they had rendered with the Cantonment Board for the purpose of determining their seniority would amount to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution being arbitrary and unjust.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners relied upon two unreported judgments of this Court i.e. Pritam Singh v. State of Punjab and another, C.W.P.
No. 2593 of 1965, decided on 2391966 and Amar Nath Garg v. State of Punjab and others, C.W.P.
No. 2927 of 1988 decided on 341989, wherein under somewhat similar circumstances similar benefits of past service rendered by the transferred employees were accorded to them.
Supreme Court in VS Murty and others v. The Deputy Chief Accounts Officer and others, 1983(1) SLR 655 extended the same benefit to the transferred employees.
Apex Court drew a distinction where a person is transferred on administrative grounds and one at his own request from one department to another department.
It was held that if the transfer was on administrative grounds from one department to another, the seniority of the transferred Government servant shall be fixed with reference to the date of his first appointment in the former department or from where he is transferred.
If on the other hand, the transfer is at the request of the concerned Government servant, his seniority will be determined with reference to his date of appointment in the Department to which he is transferred.
Although this interpretation was given by the Supreme Court on the interpretation of rule 36(e) of the Rules which were before the Supreme Court but still a clue can be taken where a persons transferred on administrative ground in public interest and where a Government employee is transferred at his own request from one department to another.
Since in this case, the transfer was due to the exclusion of certain areas of the Cantonment Board from its jurisdiction and the compulsory taking over of the Schools by the State, in the interest of justice, benefit of the past service could not be denied for the purpose of determining their seniority in the State cadre.
In the case of taking over of a private school by the Municipal Corporation, Delhi High Court in Smt. Kamla Devi Gupta v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi and others, 1984(2) (sic) 181, held that benefit of past service rendered by the teacher in the school could not be denied on the appointment of the teacher in the Municipal Corporation by way of transfer.
It observed as under:- "After giving my careful consideration to the aforesaid resolution, it is difficult for me, to hold that any such resolution was passed and in any case was acted upon.
There is nothing to show that the teachers were apprised of this decision.
In any case clauses (ii) and (iii) are self contradictory.
According to clause (ii) the teachers are deemed to have been transferred to the Municipal Corporation with their pay and grades protected, while according to clause (iii) their seniority has to be counted from the date of take over of the school.
The word `transfer' itself indicates that it is not a new appointment and it carries with it the benefit of past service, particularly, when pay and grades are also protected.
If any such resolution had been passed and was intended to be acted upon teachers would not have got seniority in 1966 till 1975 when for the first time the case was re-opened.
Not only the teachers got seniority but some of the petitioners were even given selection grades and were promoted.
The seniority lists were also circulated.
Moreover, no such resolution finds mention in resolution No. 752 of 1971 and 245 of 1978.
If the resolution was actually in existence this would have been placed at the forefront in the later resolutions and would have formed the basis for the show cause notice also.
Taking of the case from the point of view of justice also, I do not find any reason to deny the seniority to the teachers of the schools which were functioning in aided schools and were under the direct supervision of the Corporation.
It is also an admitted fact that the teachers had the same qualifications which were prescribed for the Government teachers or for the teachers employed in Municipal Schools.
A statement was made at the bar by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that some of the teachers of take over schools have since been transferred to Government schools and are enjoying the seniority from the date of their initial appointment.
In spite of the opportunity having been given to the counsel for the Municipal Corporation, this statement was not contradicted.
In the circumstances, to deny the seniority to the petitioners from the date of their initial appointment would amount to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India."
Since it was a case of compulsory take over of the schools and the petitioners were absorbed in the Government service on appointment by way of transfer, their educational qualifications, being the same, they could not be denied the benefit of the past service which they had rendered with the Cantonment Board for determining their seniority in the State Cadre.
I am in agreement with Delhi High Court that such a view would be just and proper to be taken under the circumstances of the case."
8.
Shri Jaswant Singh argued that the direction given by the learned Single Judge to fix the seniority of the respondents by giving them benefit of the service rendered in the schools of the Cantonment Board should be declared as vitiated by an error of law and quashed because there is no provision in the Rules under which such services could be taken into consideration for the purpose of determination of seniority.
He laid emphasis on the fact that in letter dated 521977 sent by the Government of India, Ministry of Defence to the Director Military Lands and Cantonments and letter dated 1931977 sent by the Executive Officer, Cantonment Board, Ambala a specific stipulation had been incorporated for protecting the pay drawn by the respondents on the date of transfer, but no provision was made for protecting their seniority and argued that in the absence of any agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Haryana, the respondents cannot be given the benefit of service under the Cantonment Board for fixation of their seniority.
Learned counsel relied on the terms and conditions embodied in the letters of appointment issued by the Director of Public Instructions, Haryana and submitted that the respondents cannot be given the benefit of the services rendered under the schools of Cantonment Board.
9.
Shri RK Malik argued that the direction given by the learned Single Judge is consistent with the terms of the agreement entered into between the Government of India and the Government of Haryana for excision of certain areas of Cantonment Board, Ambala to the State Government and conditions incorporated in the orders issued by the subordinate authorities for absorption of the teachers of the schools of Cantonment Board in the Education Department of Government of Haryana cannot deprive the respondents of the benefit of fixation of seniority as per the total length of service.
He further argued that in view of the provisions contained in Rules 7 and 9 of the rules, the respondents are entitled to fixation of their seniority by counting the services rendered by them under the Cantonment Board.
10.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
In our opinion, the reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge for directing the appellants to refix the seniority of the respondents does not suffer from any legal infirmity warranting interference.
Rule 7(1)(b) and Rule 9(b) and (d) of the Rules, which have bearing on the decision of the points raised by the appellants, read as under :-  "7.
Method of recruitment.
- (1) Posts in the service shall be filled :- (a) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (b) by transfer of an official from other services or posts of Government in the Education Department of any Government in India, or xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 9.
Seniority of members of the service.
- The seniority inter se of members of the service holding the same class of posts and in the same or identical grades of pay shall be determined by the dates of the confirmations in such posts; provided that, if two or more member are confirmed in the same class or post and in the same or identical grades of pay on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :- (a) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (b) A member appointed by transfer from another department of any Government in India shall be senior to a member recruited by direct appointment.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (d) In the case of members who are recruited by transfer from other services or posts in Education Department of Government or any other Department of any Government in India, seniority shall be determined according to seniority in the appointments previously held in the cadre of the service.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx" If the above reproduced rules are read in conjunction with notification dated 521977, memo dated 521977 and letter dated 1931977, it becomes clear that the seniority of the respondents had to be fixed by counting their entire service including the service under Cantonment Board, Ambala because the Government of India and Government of Haryana had agreed to appoint them by transfer with a clear stipulation that they will be governed by terms and conditions applicable to similar staff under the Government of Haryana.
Rule 7(b) of the Rules provides for appointment by transfer and Clauses (b) and (d) of proviso to Rule 9 protect their seniority.
In our opinion, the cases of the respondents fall within the ambit of these rules and the learned Single Judge did not commit any legal error by giving the impugned direction.
Any other interpretation of the bipartite decision taken by the Government of India and the Government of Haryana for transfer of the services of the teachers of Cantonments Schools to the Government of Haryana would render it void because it is a settled proposition of law that the service of an employee cannot be transfered to another employer, be it the State Government, without his consent.
In this context, it is necessary to bear in mind that the respondents had been appointed in the schools of the Cantonment Board after regular selection by following the prescribed procedure and quality of services rendered by them was in no way inferior to the services rendered by the employees of the Government of Haryana.
Therefore, there could be no valid ground to deny them the benefit of total length of service for the purpose of fixation of seniority.
11.
We are not impressed by the argument of the learned Deputy Advocate General that the agreement entered into between the Government of India and the Government of Haryana was limited to the protection of pay drawn by the staff of the schools of Cantonment Board and, therefore, the respondents are not entitled to get benefit of the past service for other purpose.
A reading of memo dated 5.
21977, as a whole, leaves no room for doubt that by making a specific provision for protection of pay, the two governments did not intend to deprive the employees of the Cantonment Board Schools of other service benefits.
Rather, the same would be deemed to have been protected by treating the transferred employees at par with the staff of the Government of Haryana and there is nothing in memo dated 521977 to support negative inference sought to be drawn by Shri Jaswant Singh.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.