Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, Anil Kumar took the entrance test on 21st June, 1998 for admission to the BAMS Course, in the Sh. Krishna Govt. Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra-respondent No. 3 in the State of Haryana under the conditions laid down in the Information Brochure Annexure P-1, against one of the 16 seats for the Backward Class (A) Category.
The result of the entrance test was published in various newspapers on the 17th July, 1998 and the petitioner figured at merit position No. 27 in the category aforesaid.
He was also called and appeared for interview on 29th July, 1998 but was not successful in gaining admission at that time.
He was however, placed at serial No. 4 in the waiting list.
He received a letter dated 31st August, 1998 Annexure P-4 to the petition, on 12th September, 1998 calling him to be present in the College on 5th September, 1998 at 9 am failing which his claim for admission would not be considered.
As 5th of September, 1998 had long since expired, the petitioner visited the College and informed the Principal that the call letter had been received by him on 12th September, 1998 and as such, he had no intimation thereof.
He was, however, told that as he had not put in appearance, respondent No. 4 Amrit who was admittedly lower in merit to the petitioner, had been granted admission.
The petitioner, nevertheless, submitted a representation Annexure P-5 to the Principal, but as no response was forthcoming, despatched yet another letter by registered post seeking a decision on his case and still on finding no response, has filed the present writ petition, which, after amendment, has been listed for final hearing today.
2.
On notice of motion, replies have been put in by the respondents and it has been pointed out that the petitioner had not appeared on 5th September, 1998 as called upon to do so and three candidates i.e. Roopa, Shri Bhagwan and Bhagrawat who were senior to him in merit and Amrit-respondent No. 4 who was junior to him, had, accordingly, been granted admission on that date.
It has also been pleaded that the only obligation that lay on the University was to inform the petitioner about the date of interview by registered post and as this exercise had been carried out, the delay that had occurred in the delivery of the call letter could not be foisted on the University.
Reference in this connection has been made to various clauses of the Information Brochure Annexure P-1 and to a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Rahul Prabhakar v. Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar and others, 1997(3) SCT 526 (P&H) : 1997(3) A.I.J.
152 to contend that as the Information Brochure had the force of law, its provisions had to be rigidly followed and as the petitioner had not appeared in response to the call letter on 5th September, 1998, he had forfeited his right to claim admission notwithstanding better merit vis-a-vis respondent No. 4.
3.
Mr. Rahul Rathore, the learned counsel for the petitioner has raised two broad arguments in the course of the hearing : firstly, that the petitioner was undoubtedly not at fault in the late delivery of the call letter and as the Post Office was the agent of the sender i.e. the University and not of the addressee i.e. the petitioner, the responsibility lay at the door of the University.
He has, in this connection, relied upon a DB judgment of the Orissa High Court in Dr. Annada Prasad Patnaik v. State of Orissa and others, A.I.R. 1989 Orissa, 130.
Mr. Rathore has, in addition, argued that admission was to be made to the course in question exclusively on the basis of marks obtained in the entrance test and the petitioner was, thus, entitled to admission without undergoing the formality of an interview.
He has relied upon clause 2 of Chapter 5 of the Information Brochure dealing with the question of interview and the consequences of the failure of a selected candidate to report for admission.
4.
Mr. Balram K Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 has, however, placed reliance on clause 2 of Chapter 6, which provides that the admission forms duly filled were to be received by the University by 5 P.M. on 30th April, 1998 either through registered post or in any other manner and that the authorities did not take any responsibility for the delay or loss of forms in postal transit.
It has also been contended that as the Information Brochure itself provided that the date for interview would be conveyed by registered post and this exercise had been completed, the petitioner was bound by the Full Bench judgment in Rahul Prabhakar's Case (Supra).
5.
It would be evident from the written statement that the respondents have not denied that the petitioner had received the information with regard to his call for 5th September, 1998 belatedly for no fault on his part.
Moreover (independent of the written statement), it is clear from the various documents put on record that the late delivery had taken place on account of a mistake committed by the postal authorities inasmuch as that the registered letter was delivered to a wrong addressee at Jind and not at Safidon which was the residential town of the petitioner.
The relevant clauses of the Information Brochure relied upon by the parties would have to be examined in this background.
Chapter 5 of the Information Brochure deals with the method of selection and admission and clause 2 and Note 3 thereunder which are relevant are reproduced below :-  "2.
Interview.
Apart from the Entrance Test, which the candidate will be required to take, the candidates will also be required to appear before an Interview Board to be appointed by the Vice Chancellor and be required to produce original certificates as regards : (a) academic qualifications (b) belonging to categories for which seats have been reserved and (c) achievements in the field of Sports.
Under no circumstances, will any relaxation be given to candidates who are unable to appear before the Interview Board on the date fixed by the University.
The candidates in merit will be intimated the date, time and place of interview through registered post.
The Institution will also be allotted by the Interview Board on the basis of merit and preference exercised by the candidate at the time of interview subject to eligibility."
"Note-3.
On the failure of the selected candidates to report for admission, the vacancies caused would be filled by the candidates from the waiting list in order of merit."
6.
Chapter 6 deals with special instructions/information and clause 2 on which reference has been placed by the respondents is also reproduced below :-  "2.
Each candidate for the BAMS Entrance Examinations shall fill up the admission form in his/her own handwriting indicating the name of affiliating University on the top of application form where he intends to join and send it under registered cover superscribed ADMISSION FORM FOR THE BAMS ENTRANCE EXAMINATION to the Asstt.
Registrar (Result-III) MD University, Rohtak or submit it personally and take a receipt thereof so as to reach the University on or before 30.4.1998 up to 5.00 P.M.
The admission form duly completed in all respects should preferably be sent through registered post.
The authorities do not take any responsibility for delay or loss of form or correspondence pertaining thereto in postal transit".
7.
It will be seen that the Information Brochure does not by itself fix a date for interview and all that is postulated is that all candidates were required to appear for interview on a date, time and place to be intimated by registered post and that no relaxation would be given for that purpose.
This clause would strictly not be applicable to the petitioner's case as he had, in fact, appeared for interview on 29th July, 1998 but it nevertheless needs to be reiterated that the date for interview or the dates for admission of wait- listed candidates were not given in the Information Brochure and the wait- listed candidates were to be inducted only on the failure of the requisite number of regular candidates to report for admission.
It has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the parties that 5 seats had become available after 29th July, 1998 (and had been offered to the wait-listed candidates) on account of the fact that some candidates had not deposited their fees within time.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner was not at fault for all that had transpired and he was well within his right to claim admission on the plea that he had no information with regard to the vacant seats to be filled in on 591998.
The Full Bench judgment of this Court in Rahul Prabhakar's case (supra) cited by the learned counsel for the respondents does not come to their aid, as all that had been held was that a Prospectus had the force of law and bound the parties, the student as well as the University, to its terms.
In this case, the last date for filing of application forms had been fixed by the Information Brochure but on account of a delay occasioned by the postal authorities, the petitioner's application was not received by the University within the stipulated time.
The Court held that although it was a case of extreme hardship, yet as the Prospectus had the force of law, a deviation from its provisions, was not permissible.
It bears reiteration in the present matter that no date had been fixed in the Information Brochure for interview or for admitting the wait-listed candidates and all that was mentioned therein was that the students would be informed by registerated post about the date for interview or admission.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the date given in the call letter i.e. 5th September, 1998, was sacrosanct as having the force of law which could not be changed.
8.
Mr Rathore's argument with regard to the DB judgment of the Orissa High Court need not be taken into account in the facts and circumstances of the case.
9.
Mr. Gupta's argument based on Clause 2 of Chapter 6 is equally without substance, as this clause fixes a last date for the submission of application forms.
10.
It is the conceded position that the course in question (which is of 18 months duration) had started some time in September, 1998.
Resultantly, seven months of the course have since expired.
It would, therefore, be inappropriate to order the petitioner's admission at this late stage although he had approached this Court with promptitude on 16th October, 1998.
Likewise, respondent No. 4 who has also undergone well nigh half the course and is soon to appear in the final examination cannot be made to suffer for no fault on her part.
11.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued that the petitioner will be adjusted in the BAMS course in one of the colleges that will be notified in the ensuing academic year against a seat reserved for the BC (A) category.
There will be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.