GS Singhvi, J - In order to decide whether the criteria adopted by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (wrongly described in the petition as the Subordinate Services Selection) (for short `the Commission'), we may notice some of the facts.
2.
The petitioners, who possess Diploma in Pharmacy and are registered with the Pharmacy Council for Haryana, applied for recruitment as Pharmacists in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P-1 issued by the Commission.
Their grievance is that by applying a wholly arbitrary criteria, the Commission has deprived them of the right of consideration and, therefore, a direction be issued to it to interview the petitioners along with other eligible candidates.
3.
Learned Counsel for the petitioners argued that the decision of the Commissioner not to call the petitioners for interview should be declared as unconstitutional because the criteria adopted by it is ex facie arbitrary and capricious.
Shri Dhull submitted that the impugned criteria does not postulate award of marks in lieu of the experience gained by the applicants and in this manner all those who are having past experience are virtually scaled out of consideration at the very threshold, and, therefore, it should be declared as contrary to public interest.
4.
We have thoughtfully considered the submission of the learned Counsel but do not find any merit in it.
Appointment to the public services can be made either by direct recruitment or by promotion or by transfer.
For direct recruitment, the appointing authority or the recruiting agency, as the case may be, has the discretion to adopt either of these methods for assessing the relative merit of the candidates :-  (i) by written test; (ii) by written and interview; (iii) by interview alone.
5.
When selection is made by holding written test, the number of applicants can pose little difficulty but where the selection is made by written test followed by viva voce or by interview alone and the number of applications is very large, it is largely impractical to call every candidate who fulfils the conditions of eligibility.
Therefore, with a view to reduce the number of candidates to be called for viva voce, the employer/the recruiting agency can devise suitable mechanism.
In the absence of any statutory prohibition of the Commission has the right to devise appropriate procedure consistent with the constitutional code of equality for making selection for recruitment to public service.
In a given case the Commission may adjudge the suitability/merit of the candidates by holding a competitive test.
In another case it may hold a written test as well as viva voce test for evaluating the comparative merit of the candidates.
In a third case it may make selection only by interviewing the candidates.
Where the number of applications received in pursuance of the advertisement is very large, it is legitimate for the Commission to devise appropriate criteria to reduce the number of candidates to be called for viva voce test.
This can be done by calling only those candidates who possess qualification higher than the prescribed one or who are having particular length of service or experience.
This can also be done by holding the screening test.
The limited element of selection involved in the method of screening test is that a candidate is required to achieve a particular percentage of marks so as to be called for viva voce test.
If the Commission finds that the number of candidates passing the screening test by securing a specified percentage of marks is also very large it can fix a cut-off point and limit the number of candidates to be called for viva voce.
These methods cannot be frowned upon by the Court unless it is shown that the Commission has acted arbitrarily or that the method devised by it is unfair, irrational or unreasonable.
6.
In Dr. Lovekesh Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(1) RSJ 566, this Court analysed the decisions of High Courts and the Supreme Court in Jayant Kumar Chavhan v. Public Service Commission, MP, Indore and another, 1979(1) SLR 316; Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 454; VJ Thomas and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1985 SC 1055; SB Mathur and others v. Hon'ble the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court and others, AIR 1988 SC 2073; The Government of Andhra Pradesh v. P Dalip and another, JT 1993(2) SC 138; Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar Potdar and another, 1995(1) SCT 50 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 77 and Union of India and another v. T Sundararaman and others, 1997(2) SCT 810 (SC) : JT 1997(5) SC 48 and then laid down the following proposition :-  "A careful analysis of the above referred decisions show that for making recruitment to public services by interviewing the Public Service Commission and other recruiting agencies should interview 3 to 4 candidates against one vacancy/post and if the number of persons who apply in pursuance of the advertisement is large and it is not possible for the Commission etc. to interview all of them, a reasonable and rational method consistent with the constitutional and statutory provisions can be devised with a view to short list the number of candidates or to determine a reasonable zone of consideration."
7.
By applying the ratio of the decisions of the Supreme Court and this Court, we reject the argument of Shri Dhull that the respondent Commission did not have the jurisdiction to lay down the criteria for short-listing the candidates to be called for final selection.
8.
We also do not find any substance in his argument that the failure of the Commission to assign marks to the petitioners for their past experience has resulted in arbitrary denial of consideration to them or that injustice has been caused to them.
The petitioners have not averred that they have been working as Pharmacists in any government or semi-government organisation or an institution of repute.
The only thing which they have said is that they are running medical stores/shops.
In our opinion, the experience allegedly gained by the petitioners by running medical shops of their own or of other persons cannot be treated as sufficient to entitle them to be considered for regular selection as Pharmacists even as per the criteria framed by the respondent, they do not fall within the zone of consideration.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.