TS Doabia, J - Parties heard.
Petition admitted.
With the consent of the parties this petition is taken up for final disposal.
The petitioner in his capacity as a member of inferior service claims that he had right to continue in service upto the age of 60 years.
He submits that he was wrongly retired at the age of 55 years.
The petitioner was working as a Works Mistry.
As per him he should have been retired at the age of 60 years.
He claims to be a member of inferior service.
The respondents have filed objections.
It is pleaded that this petition is belated having been filed after delay of ten years.
So far as the legal submission is concerned, the petitioner is right in his submission that his age of retirement should have been 60 years.
Reliance has been rightly placed on a decision given by this Court in SWP No. 448 of 1988.
Vishwa Nath v. Director Rural Development and another, decided on 121990.
In the above case it was observed as under :  "Inferior service has been defined in Art. 20-C of the J&K Civil Service Regulations as service which may be specifically classified as such by an order of the competent authority.
Schedule II of these Regulations makes reference to Articles 20-C and 226(I) and according to item 7, which is referable to CD projects, NES and Local Deve.
to which deptt.
the petitioner belonged Mistries have been categoriesed as inferior service.
It appears from the above referred letter of Director, Rural Development, Jammu that the post of Work Mistry was redesignated as Work-Supervisor which shows that the petitioner continued to be Mistry which is certainly an inferior service.
There is no dispute that an employee in inferior service is required to be retired after attaining the age of sixty years.
Nothing is forthcoming on record to show that on what basis the Finance Ministry came to a different conclusion when Director Rural Development, Head of the Department, had treated the service of the petitioner as inferior service and had specifically ordered for retaining him upto that age."
The above decision is fully applicable to the facts of this case.
It appears that after the aforementioned decision was given, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
The petitioner was made to retire on attaining the age of 55 years.
This happened on 28th of February 1986.
The present petition has been filed after a period of 10 years.
Even though the petitioner is right in his submission that he should have been retired at the age of 60 years but only relief which can be given to him is that notionally he would be deemed to have retired on attaining the age of 60 years.
He would not be entitled to actual wages.
The course adopted in this case is in line with the decision given by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Nand Kishore Nayak v. State of Orissa and another, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1724, What was said in para 4 is being quoted :  "The appellant has claimed two reliefs.
One for payment of salary for the two years period and second for refixation of his pension.
So far as the first relief is concerned, even from the order of the High Court, which we have extracted above, it is obvious that salary was directed to be paid to only those who had actually served and not to others.
It is true that this observation was in respect of those who had served beyond their regular superannuation period but the concept is clearly to pay for work actually done.
Cases of the present type where the employee accepted his retirement at the age of 58 years and is now seeking the benefit of the High Court's order stand on a different footing from those whose services were wrongly terminated.
In our view such employees would not be entitled to salary for the idle period but the relief for refixation of pension by extending the date of superannuation by two years can be granted to them.
We, therefore, direct the State Government to grant the benefit of the judgment to all these employees including the appellant herein who would have otherwise retired at the age of 60 years on the interpretation placed on the relevant provisions of the Act and the Rules by the High Court.
In the present case, we, therefore, direct the State Government to extend the benefit of the judgment to the appellant, refix his date of superannuation, add two years to his qualifying service and refix his pension and grant the same from the deemed date of superannuation.
The arrears of pension should also be paid after refixing the pension within a reasonable time not exceeding three months."
The above observations do apply to this case.
The petitioner would not get back wages.
He however would be entitled to get the pensionary benefits.
This would be recalculated by treating the petitioner in service upto the age of 60 years.
Disposed of accordingly.