TS Doabia, J - This petitioner has come to be filed in this court under the following circumstances.
The post of Lecturer in Pathology was advertised.
This happened in the year 1985.
The last date for submission of application was fixed as 19th of June 1985.
The petitioner applied for the post.
The interviews were held on 23rd of July, 1986.
The petitioner was not called for interview.
She intervened in a pending writ petition bearing No. 1026 of 1985.
She submits that she was permitted to be interviewed.
She submits that she had done well in the interview, but she has not been selected.
Her grievance is that respondents No. 5 and 6 have been given appointment.
The stand taken by the official respondents is that the petitioner did not have requisite experience of one year.
As per the respondents this was a must in terms of Jammu and Kashmir Gazetted Service Rules, 1979.
To meet this challenge, the petitioner submitted that respondents No. 5 and 6 also did not possess the requisite experience of one year.
In these circumstances, she submits that the respondents have not acted in accordance with law.
It been seen that the petitioner had taken a specific stand that respondent No. 5 has teaching experience of three months and respondent No. 6 had teaching experience of six months only.
These averments were made in para 6 of the petition are not denied.
The question arises as to what relief should be granted to the petitioner.
The respondent-authorities have not followed the procedure which they were required to follow.
The stand taken by them is that on account of the situation prevailing in the State, these emergent steps were required to be taken.
The question arises as to whether this aspect of the matter can be taken note of and whether humanitarian approach can be adopted.
I am of the opinion that it is possible to grant relief to the petitioner without upsetting the action of the respondent-State in favour of the private respondents.
Guidance can be had from the observations made by the Supreme Court of India in a decision reported as HC Puttaswamy and others v. The Hon'ble Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court, Bangalore and others, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 295 : 1991(1) SCT 116.
There was failure to consult the Public Service Commission.
The appointments were not proper.
Appointees were, however, directed to be treated as regularly appointed on humanitarian grounds.
What was stated in para 16 of the judgment is being reproduced below :  "The precedents apart the circumstances of this case justify an humanitarian approach and indeed the appellants seem to deserve justice ruled by mercy.
We also take note of the fact that the writ petitioners also would be appointed in the High Court as stated by learned Advocate General of the State."
State would take notice of the above observations and thereafter grant the same relief to the petitioner as was done in case of the private respondents.
Under these circumstances, it would not be apt to disturb the position of respondents Nos. 5 and 6.
A direction is given to the State to consider the claim of the petitioner and pass appropriate orders in favour of the petitioner within four months.
The period of four months would begin from the date copy of the order passed by this court alongwith with writ petition and annexures thereof are made available to the respondents-authorities by the petitioner.
If for any practical reason it is not possible to take a decision within the above stipulated period, the respondent authorities would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
In that eventuality they would have to explain each and every day's delay.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.