TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
With the consent of the parties, the petitions are taken up for disposal.
2.
This order shall govern the disposal of the writ petitions which have been enumerated in the schedule appended to this order.
3.
In all the petitions, the appointments made by way of direct recruitment to the post of teachers, is being challenged.
This challenge is made on the same and similar grounds.
In some of the petitions, some additional points have also been urged.
These would be noticed at appropriate places.
So far as common grounds which have been urged in all the petitions and the facts on the basis of which, these common grounds have been urged are being noticed below.
These facts have been taken from SWP No. 1136/96.
4.
The petitioners submit that a notice for employment was issued by the respondent-authorities.
Copy of this notice has been placed on record as Annexure P2.
In this notice, it stands mentioned that 100 vacancies of teachers in the concerned district are to be filled up.
It is submitted that in reality, more than 100 vacancies were filled.
To be precise, the figure mentioned is 325.
It is this selection which is being challenged in this petition.
The challenge is being made inter alia on the following grounds:-  (i) That there was requisition for a particular number of posts i.e. 100.
It is accordingly submitted that only this number of vacant posts could be filled.
It is urged that filling of more vacancies than what were advertised, is contrary to law and such an action is liable to be quashed; (ii) That the points in the matter of reservations have not been kept in view.
It is submitted that one of the petitioners' namely Romesh Kumar belongs to an area described as Actual Line of Control.
To this area, as per the petitioners, no reservation has been given.
It is also submitted that two of the petitioners namely Ashok Kumar Sharma and Romesh Chander were entitled to appointment in the category of "Children of Defence Personnel".
It is submitted that the reservation quota in both the categories above, has not been given due consideration: (iii) That as per the decision of the State Government, the selection/appointments were to be made block-wise.
It is submitted that this criteria was not kept in view; (iv) That the allocation of 60 marks to a candidate who was possessing 10+2 qualification and then additional 5 marks to those candidates who were Graduates and were having Post Graduate qualification, is not a reasonable criteria.
According to the petitioners, by giving 60 marks to the candidates having 10+2 qualification, the other candidates have been placed at a disadvantage; v) That some of the candidates who have been given appointment, were not having the requisite qualification at the time of filling up of posts.
As these candidates acquired the qualification later on, therefore, the orders of appointment issued in their favour is bad.
5.
Thus, in a nutshell, the common arguments which have been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners are:-  (i) That only 100 vacancies could be filled; (ii) That filling of vacancies which are more that 100 is bad; (iii) That the selection was to be made block-wise; (iv) That the criteria of giving 60 points to a candidate who was having 10+2 qualification and then giving additional 5 points for Graduation and Post- Graduation qualification is not a reasonable criteria; (v) That some of the candidates did not fulfil the requisite qualification at the time of submission of their forms.
The acquisition of qualification at a later date would not give them a handle to seek appointment in public service.
6.
In addition to the common arguments, it has also been urged that the reservation quota for the candidates belonging to the Actual Line of Control and "Children of Defence Personel", has not been given weightage.
The candidates vis-a-vis Actual Line of Control has been indicated as Romesh Kumar.
The candidates belonging to the category of "Children of Defence Personnel" have been indicated as Ashok Kumar and Romesh Chander.
So far as the candidates who acquired qualifications later on have been indicated as Sudesh Kumar, Suresh Kumar and Renu Bala.
7.
Respondents have filed their objections.
It is stated that if the employment notice is taken into consideration, then it becomes apparent that it was mentioned therein that the number of posts could be increased or decreased.
Particular reference is being made to the last line occurring in Annexure P2.
It reads as under:-  "The number/figures of vacancies shown in Annexure A of this Notification is tentative and can be reduced or increased without any notice."
8.
On the basis of above, it is asserted that the case as projected by the petitioners regarding filling up of more vacancies than the number of vacancies advertised is not correct and cannot be accepted.
It is accordingly urged hat when in the advertisement notice, there is a stipulation that the number of vacancies can be increased or decreased, no fault can be found with the course adopted by the State.
It is also stated that the requisition which was sent by the Administrative department to the Selecting authorities, it in fact contained more vacancies.
Taking into consideration the notice of advertisement and additional vacancies for which requisition was sent, the Selection Committee made the selection.
It is specifically urged that the selection could be made for anticipatory vacancies.
9.
Vis-a-vis the reservation dealing with the "Children of Defence Personnel" is concerned, the stand taken is that the benefit of reservation was to be given in terms of SRO 126/94.
As per this, if two candidates have the same merit and one of them belongs to the category of "Children of Defence Personnel", then the children of Defence Personnel is to be given the weightage.
It is submitted that this aspect of the matter was duly taken note of.
With regard to the block-wise appointment, the argument made is that the earlier decisions taken with a view to make block-wise appointment was reviewed.
Therefore, it was not necessary for the Selecting Authority to make the appointments on block-wise basis.
10.
It be seen that the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decisions of the Supreme Court reported as 1996(4) Supreme 411 : 1996(3) SCT 563 titled, Prem Singh and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others," 1996(1) SCT 660 (Ashok Kumar v. The Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board)" , 1996(6) Supreme 674 : 1997(1) SCT 66 (Dilip Kumar Tripathy and others v. State of Orissa and others), and AIR 1998 SC 18 : 1997(4) SCT 395 : 1997(4) SCT 133(Surinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another).
11.
A perusal of the aforementioned decisions does indicate that if the appointments are made beyond the vacancies which have been notified in the advertisement notice, then the appointments which are made beyond that number, are liable to be struck down.
There is no dispute with the afore-mentioned legal position.
But in the present case, in the advertisement notice, it has been specifically mentioned that the number of posts can be increased or decreased.
If this be the situation, then what was said by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Hoshyar Singh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1993 SC 2006 : 1993(4) SCT 291, would be attracted.
12.
In the aforementioned case, it was held that if there is a stipulation in the advertisement notice that the vacancies can be increased or decreased and the appointments are made beyond the number of vacancies advertised, then no fault can be found with the selection so made by the respondent-authorities.
In the aforementioned case, only 8 posts were advertised.
19 vacancies were filled.
This course adopted by the Selection Authority was found to be valid.
In view of this, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, cannot be accepted.
13.
So far as the argument vis-a-vis the criteria adopted by the respondent- authorities is concerned, all that is required to be said is that the criteria was found to be good and valid by this court.
The two decisions of this court are reported as 1991 KLJ 161, Vijay Kumar v. State of J&K, and 1994 KLJ 110, Suresh Kumar v. State of J&K.
14.
In view of the above, no fault can be found with the criteria adopted by the respondent-authorities.
Even otherwise, the criteria which has been adopted is good.
It has rationale behind it.
The basic qualification was indicated as 10+2.
Then additional marks/points were given to those candidates who were Graduates and Post-Graduates.
The criteria fixed by the respondent- authorities is not hit by Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution of India.
This argument is, therefore, found to be without merit and is rejected.
15.
So far as the block-wise appointments are concerned, it be seen that the block-wise appointment was rescinded by the State Government.
If this be the position then no fault can be found with the course adopted by the State Government.
As a matter of fact, region-wise classification would not be good.
In Naresh Kumar Joshi v. State of Punjab, 1982 Lab.I.C.
498, following observations were made :  "According to the learned counsel, in the face of this factual position, district-wise selection is also not bad.
This submission of the learned counsel, to my mind, cannot possible be held good for the short reason that all the above-noted considerations provide no justification for the selection being made on district-wise basis.
Learned counsel is not in a position to explain as to why a candidate selected from a particular district cannot be a Patwari candidate in another district or belong to the cadre of the said district.
Still in a later Supreme Court case reported as A Periakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1971 SC 2303, a similar matter was examined again wherein too the admissions had been made to the various medical colleges of the State of Tamil Nadu on unit-wise basis.
As pointed out by their Lordships, this method was resorted to by the authorities with a view to bypass the judgment in P Rajendran (AIR 1968 SC 1012) (supra).
Here again the method of selection on unit-wise basis was held to be violative of Art 14 of the Constitution of India."
16.
In any case the respondents have on their own rescinded the decision to make selection block-wise.
As such no objection can be raised to the course adopted by the State.
17.
With regard to the reservation for the candidates who were residing in "Actual Line of Control" the objection of the State is categoric.
It is stated that this reservation has been provided and has been filled in accordance with the law.
This argument is also found without merit and rejected.
18.
Another factor which cannot be ignored may also be noticed.
19.
All the petitioners took part in the selection process.
They competed along with others; they were not high up in the merit list.
If this be the position they cannot turn around and contend that the process of selection is bad.
Where a candidate takes part in the process of selection i.e. takes a chance of favourable decision in his favour, he cannot turn around and challenge the process of selection.
(See G Sarana v. Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428), Justice MM Punchi (Now Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India) in Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983(1) SLR 109, observed that competing candidates who remain unsuccessful are estopped from challenging the process of selection.
Another Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Rajeshwar Singh v. State, 1991(1) SLR 680 reached the same conclusion.
For this reason also the petitioners must fail.
20.
The only matter which is still required to be gone into is as to whether any candidate who was not duly qualified at the time of interview was selected for the post.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that a candidate must fulfil the qualification at the time when applications are submitted.
See the following decision:  "Krishan Kumar v. State of Haryana, Agricultural Marketing Board, JT (1997)4 SC 695 : 1996(2) SCT 822."
21.
The names of the candidates who are lacking this qualification have been indicated in writ petition No. 1612 of 1996.
The respondent-authorities would take notice of this assertion of the petitioners and examine this limited issue.
If the candidates were lacking any qualification, then it would take notice of the decision referred to above.
They would pass appropriate orders.
This would be done after affording due opportunity who are likely to be affected by the decision which may be taken against them.
22.
It be seen that the name of one of the candidates appears in two districts.
The name of this candidate has been indicated as "Suhail Ahmad" at Sr. No. 48 of the Selection List dated 581996.
Respondent-authorities would take notice of the assertions made in the writ petition that some of the candidates appear in two districts.
This anamoly would be rectified by the State Government at its own level.
If any vacancy becomes available after the aforementioned exercise, then the benefit of appointment would be given to the candidate who is high up in the list.
In view of the above I am of the opinion:  (i) that the State Government was well within its rights to fill the vacancies beyond the number which was indicated in the advertisement notice.
This is because in the notice, it was mentioned that the vacancies are likely to be increased or decreased; (ii) that the petitioners having taken part in the process of selection are not within their rights to challenge the selection; (iii) that the State Government has also taken into consideration the quota meant for the residents of Actual Line of Control and has also given weightage to the candidates belonging to the category of Children of Defence Personnel; (iv) that the Selection was not required to be made block-wise; (v) that the selection criteria adopted is perfectly in order and in accordance with the law; (vi) these petitions are otherwise found without merit and are dismissed.
(vii) the petitioners can raise individual objections as to candidature of selected candidates on the ground that they lacked basic qualifications and that in some cases candidates were selected in their districts.
23.
The above limited issue at serial No. (vii) would be gone into by the respondents and decision taken after hearing the affected persons.
Let the decision be taken within a period of four months of the filing of objections if any preferred by any of the petitioners.
24.
These petitions which were admitted and taken up with the consent of the parties for final disposal are found to be without merit and are disposed of in the manner indicated above.
Petitions dismissed.