KK Srivastava, J - These two Letters Patent Appeals (Nos. 515 and 627 of 1989) are being disposed of by this judgment as they arise out of one and the same judgment dated 6.2.1989, passed by AL Bahri, J (as he then was), a learned Single Judge of this Court, delivered in Civil Writ Petition No. 977 of 1987 and involve common discussion of facts and law.
The judgment is being delivered in LPA No. 515/1989.
2.
The factual matrix of the case may briefly be narrated as under :-  Dr. KS Thind applied for appointment to Punjab Civil Medical Services Class I (hereinafter to be called "PCMS Class I") cadre post in response to an advertisement published in the Daily Tribune dated 631968.
The State of Punjab got the said advertisement published for recruitment of six posts of PCMS Class I One of the posts out of the aforesaid six posts related to the speciality of Bacteriology.
As per the requisite qualifications set out in the advertisement for the said post the candidate was to hold (i) MD Bacteriology or MD Pathology with D Bec.
(ii) Five years experience in Medical Profession, of which three years must be after post-graduation degree.
A copy of the said advertisement was annexed with the Civil Writ Petition as Annexure P2.
The petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind possessed the MS degree in Medical Microbiology, Bacteriology, Virology from Pennsylvania University (in USA) and did his PhD Apart from holding these qualifications, he published a large number of papers and has been on the teaching faculty of the University of Pennsylvania (USA) and also at PGI, Chandigarh.
He had the experience of teaching MD, MS and PhD students in America as also in India.
The petitioner established and organised the departments of Microbiology, Virology and Parasitology at PGI, Chandigarh.
These experiences and qualifications gained by the petitioner were narrated in the biodata, a copy of which was appended with the writ petition as Annexure P1.
3.
The posts in the PCMS Class-I in the year 1968 were governed by the rules called PCMS Class I (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1940 (hereinafter to be referred as "the Rules of 1940").
Rule 3, inter alia, of the Rules of 1940 provided that all appointments to the service shall be made by Government on the advice of the Commission from time to time as required.
Rule 4 thereof prescribed, "No person shall be appointed a member of the Service unless he :-  i) is a British subject as defined in Section-1 of the British Nationality and Status of Aliens Act, 1914 or has been made eligible under Section 262 of Govt. of India Act, 1935. ii) Possesses a qualification recognised by the Central Medical Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United Kingdom or by the Medical Council of India; iii) If he is not already in Govt. Service: a) has obtained from the standing Medical Board at Lahore or from such Medical authority in England as the High Commissioner for India may deem expedient, a certificate of physical and mental fitness as prescribed by regulations in Appendix A and is considered by the Medical Board or the medical authority as the case may be to be fit in all respects for active outdoor duty etc. and b) is not more than 35 years of age on the 1st day of October preceding the date of appointment.
Provided the Govt. may in special circumstances appoint a person who is more than 35 years of age."
4.
The petitioner, Dr. KS Thind, did not hold the degree of MBBS from any recognised Medical College/University/Institution in India.
He possessed the degree of B.V.Sc.
He was, however, successful at the examination for recruitment to the said posts and was offered appointment by the State of Punjab vide letter dated December 6, 1968 and in response thereto, he joined the PCMS Class I The petitioner alleged in his petition that in appreciation of his qualifications and the experience, the State of Punjab gave a starting pay of Rs. 1,150/- pm to him in the scale of Rs. 750-1,250.
The order regarding the grant of the starting pay of Rs. 1,150/- pm has been appended as Annexure P5 with the writ petition.
This order was issued by the Secretary to Government Punjab, Health and Family Planning Department on 4.2.1971 in concurrence with the Finance Department Communication vide UO No. 8560-IFB-70 dated 2.2.1971.
The said pay was granted w.e.f.
31.12.1968, i.e. the date of his appointment under Rule 410 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume I Part I  5.
It was averred that the appointment of the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 3977 of 1970 filed by one Dr. PK Narang, a member of the PCMS Class II, working at ESI Hospital, Ludhiana, seeking a writ in the nature of quo-warranto quashing the appointment of Dr. KS Thind to the public office in PCMS (I).
This writ petition came up for hearing before a learned Single Judge (KS Tiwana, J as he then was), on 3151977.
The primary contention of Dr. Narang in the said writ petition was that Dr. KS Thind/respondent No. 4 did not fulfil the requisite questions as per advertisement issued by the Punjab Public Service Commission inasmuch as he did not possess any medical degree, such as MBBS or other or the other equivalent degree recognised by the Indian Medical Council and further he did not possess five years' experience in medical profession, of which at least three years should have been after post-graduation.
The appointment was in contravention to Rules 3 and 4 of the Rules, 1940.
The State of Punjab in the said writ petition in its return admitted the averments of the writ petitioner/Dr.
Narang to the extent that respondent No. 4 (Dr. KS Thind) did not hold any degree like MBBS or its equivalent recognised degree but it was contended that he was recruited against the post of Bacteriologist, which was a PCMS Class I post.
The State set out the qualifications and experience of respondent No. 4/Dr.
KS Thind and defended the appointment of Dr. KS Thind to the said post.
It was further contended that Dr. Thind was found suitable for the post and was selected by the PPSC and that at the interview, the Director Health Services was also present.
It was further stated that it would not be fair to terminate the services of Dr. KS Thind particularly when he was selected by the PPSC on the basis of qualifications held by him.
The State Government, however, made an offer to provide a non-cadre post for Dr. KS Thind.
6.
The respondent No. 4 (Dr. KS Thind) in his reply defended his appointment to the said post as in accordance with the rules and as per qualifications set out in the advertisement.
He took a preliminary objection that Dr. Narang had no locus-standi to file a writ petition seeking the issuance of a writ of quo-warranto against him for holding the PCMS Class I post.
The learned Single Judge after dealing with the rival contentions raised before him held :-  "The only defect, which has been accepted by the Punjab State, is that since the speciality happened to be in PCMS cadre, the basic medical degree, that is, MBBS Degree in the case of respondent No. 4 is lacking.
The respondent No. 4 otherwise is fully qualified according to the Punjab State for holding charge of this speciality to which he has been appointed.
When such is the position, the occupier of the post, that is, respondent No. 4 cannot be termed as a usurper and a writ of quo-warranto is not a proper remedy.
This writ of quo-warranto, which was filed after a great delay, has been made lifeless by the position taken by the Government in the return stating that an equivalent non-cadre post will be provided for Respondent No. 4, who is qualified to hold the post against which he has been selected by the Public Service Commission and appointed by the Govt.
Although the case of the petitioner did not have any basis for a writ of quo-warranto, but this stand taken by the Government has completely made any such request ineffective.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
--"  A copy of the judgment of learned Single Judge in the aforesaid CWP (No. 3977/1970) was annexed as Annexure P6 with the writ petition.
7.
After the decision of the aforesaid writ petition and as per the stand taken by the State of Punjab in its return in the said petition, the State of Punjab issued a notice to the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind vide memo.
1/8(6)- 78/3HBI/15273 dated 27979 issued by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department, Chandigarh, indicating to Dr. KS Thind, inter alia, as under :-  "And whereas in view of the commitment given by Govt. in the Punjab and Haryana High Court for taking the post of Bacteriologist, State Public Health Laboratory out of PCMS-I and the judgment dated the 31st May, 1977 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh, the Governor of Punjab is provisionally of the opinion that the said post of Bacteriologist be taken out of the PCMS-I and you may be adjusted against the post of Bacteriologist so taken out of PCMS-I Before doing so, the Governor of Punjab desires to give you an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken.
Any representation which you make in this connection will be considered by the Governor of Punjab before taking the proposed action.
Such representation, if any, should be made in writing and submitted so as to reach the undersigned not later than 15 days from the receipt of this letter by you."
8.
A copy of this letter was forwarded to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, Chandigarh, for information and necessary action.
A copy of this notice has been filed as Annexure P7 with the writ petition and this is one of the impugned orders in the instant writ petition.
9.
Dr. KS Thind filed his reply to the said show cause notice vide letter No. SPHL/Pb./80/8393 dated 2031980, a copy of which is Annexure P8.
The petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind after setting out his case contended :-  "---Taking the position which the Government intends to take in respect of a solitary post in PCMS-I while allowing similar posts or arrangements to continue in services constituted in relation to other professions and disciplines would be highly arbitrary.
It should not affect my rights as a member of the PCMS-I service to which I had been legally recruited."
The Government of Punjab, however, passed the impugned order, a copy of which is Annexure P9 to this effect :-  " ------ ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF INDIA The following posts of Punjab Civil Medical Services Class-I are taken out of cadre of PCMS-I and declared as ex-cadre posts in the pay scale of Rs. 1,400- 2,000 with immediate effect :  i) Bacteriologist State Public Health Laboratory, Chandigarh  ii) Bacteriologist, TB Centre, Patiala  2.
This issue with the concurrence of the Finance Department conveyed vide its UO No. 3073-4 FD(I)-79, dated 25th July, 1979.
Dated: Chandigarh, Sd/- Hardial Singh  the 28th May, 1980, Secretary to Govt.,  Punjab."
10.
By the impugned order Annexure P10, the Government of Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare (Health Branch I), passed order regarding appointment of Dr. KS Thind as Bacteriologist to the State of Punjab, Public Health Laboratory, Chandigarh in the pay-scale of Rs. 1,400-2,000 against the abovesaid ex-cadre post.
The petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind filed a representation against his posting on the ex-cadre post vide letter No. SPHI/Pb-84/8 dated 3184 (copy Annexure P11) praying, inter alia :-  "That these orders should be rescinded immediately and I may be accorded justice which is being denied to me.
It is further submitted that the undersigned cannot be unilaterally thrown out of PCMS-I cadre without any valid reason as I have been selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission in PCMS-I cadre and I continue under the same terms and rules of appointment made by the Government in 1968.
The impugned order No. 1/8(6)-78-3HBI/16561 dated 23121983 may be withdrawn."
11.
Thereafter the petitioner made another representation, seeking promotion to selection-grade, which is dated 631986 and a copy of which is Annexure P11/A, seeking the withdrawal of the impugned order dated 23121983, posting him on the ex-cadre post and according to him, he was due for promotion in the selection grade.
Yet another representation dated 571984 vide letter No. SPHL/Pb/84/2242 was sent by the petitioner, a copy of which is Annexure P11/B He annexed the copies of order of promotion relating to Dr. Prithipal Singh and the order granting selection-grade to said Dr. Prithipal Singh vide Annexures P12, P13 and P14.
A Civil Writ Petition No. 977/1987 was filed by Dr. KS Thind, seeking the quashing of Annexures P7, P9 and P10 (referred to above) and for issuance of a direction to the respondent/State to treat him to be a member of the PCMS-I and consider his claim for selection grade and promotions w.e.f.
the date persons junior to him were considered and granted the selection grade/promotion.
He also prayed for consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears, salary, seniority, refixation of seniority granted to him.
12.
The State of Punjab and the Director, Health Services Punjab filed the return through Shri AC Sharma, Joint Secretary to Government, Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department, raising a preliminary objection about the writ petition being filed belatedly and suffering from laches as the impugned orders related to the years 1979, 1980 and 1983.
It was also objected by way of another preliminary objection that the officials in respect of whom the petitioner claimed seniority have not been impleaded as parties in the writ petition and as such the petition was bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
The respondents defended their action in issuing the impugned orders and contended, inter alia, that the action was taken in pursuance to the undertaking given by the State before this Court at the time of hearing of Civil Writ Petition No. 3977/1970.
They also defended their action in rejecting the various representations made by the petitioner as they lacked merit.
The respondents contended that the matter was under consideration of the Government since the date of appointment of the petitioner not to consider him as a member of the PCMS-Class I and particularly on the basis of the undertaking given by the Government in its return to writ petition No. 3977/1970, to provide an ex-cadre post for the petitioner.
The Government before taking any action in the matter gave a show cause notice to the petitioner and after considering his reply passed the impugned orders, firstly creating an ex-cadre post and then posting the petitioner on the ex-cadre post.
The petitioner was not granted the selection grade and was not promoted as Deputy Director/Joint Director by the Government because he had been taken out of the PCMS-I cadre.
The respondents have justified the grant of selection grade to Dr. Prithipal Singh, as also promoting him as Deputy Director and then as Joint Director, because he was a member of the PCMS-I cadre.
It is contended that the action taken by the State Government is not against the Rules of 1940 as the qualifications possessed by the petitioner were not covered by Rule 4(ii) of the Rules of 1940, as the same were not recognised by the Medical Council of India for the appointment to PCMS-I It is further contended that the officers named in Annexure P-11 appointed to PCMS-I possessed the requisite qualifications recognised by the Medical Council of India and as such the petitioner was not similarly situated as those officers.
13.
The petitioner filed replication to the written statement, wherein the averments taken by him in the writ petition were reiterated and the stand of respondents No. 1 and 2 was controverted.
Subsequently, during the pendency of the writ petition, Dr. Himmat Singh Aneja moved an application to be impleaded as respondent in the writ petition on the ground that he was appointed as PCMS-I and he joined as Senior Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Nawashehar on March 6, 1973 and thereafter promoted as Deputy Director, Health Services, Punjab, which post he joined on June 1, 1987.
He was discharging his duties against the said post continuously.
On the other hand, petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind holding the ex-cadre post was never promoted to any further higher post in the PCMS-I cadre.
Dr. Himmat Singh was allowed to be impleaded as respondent in the writ petition.
He filed his written statement, wherein he took up similar stand as that of the State of Punjab and Director, Health Services, Punjab, Chandigarh/respondents No. 1 and 2.
14.
The writ petition came up for hearing before AL Bahri, J a learned Single Judge of this Court (as then he was) on 6.2.1989.
The learned Single Judge held that the impugned order taking out the post of the petitioner as Bacteriologist from PCMS Class-I and his appointment on an ex-cadre post could not be held to be illegal.
However, he held that if for certain reasons, the post of the petitioner was taken out of PCMS Class-I, it could not be said that he would be deprived of similar benefits which were available to him as part of his contract of service mentioned in the appointment letter.
If some service benefits and advantages could not be given to the petitioner as the post of Bacteriologist was taken out of PCMS Class-I, he should not be deprived of similar benefits on such ex-cadre post.
He further held that ordinarily, stagnation in the Government services is not contemplated.
The learned Single Judge further held that depriving the petitioner of such service benefits as were promised to him at the time of his induction in service would amount to manifest injustice and in this manner, the members of the service would not be affected at all and due justice would be done to the petitioner.
In view of these findings, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition with costs and ordered that though maintaining orders passed by the State of Punjab taking out the post of Bacteriologist from PCMS Class-I and appointment of the petitioner to such a post, the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for all the service benefits such as grant of selection grade and promotions on this ex-cadre post on such dates when juniors to the petitioner were granted such benefits as in PCMS Class-I  15.
The State of Punjab and Director, Health Services (who were respondents No. 1 and 2 in the writ petition) felt aggrieved by issuance of the aforesaid directions of learned Single Judge and they filed LPA No. 515/1989.
The petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind also felt aggrieved by the dismissal of his writ petition insofar as it sought the quashing of the impugned orders Annexures P7, P9 and P10 and filed LPA No. 627 of 1989.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties in the two appeals and have carefully perused the impugned orders as also the record of the case.
At the outset, we deem it appropriate to refer to the order passed by the Division Bench of this Court, presided over by the Hon'ble Chief Justice, while admitting LPA No. 515 of 1989, wherein it was observed as under :-  "We have formally admitted the LPA but we are satisfied that the learned Judge has approached the matter more from justice angle and he felt that the officer deserved some special treatment and it is in those circumstances that he had given certain directions.
We do hope that pending the LPA, the Government will take into consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case and make suitable orders so that the Government order could stand as the court's order.
However, we make it clear that there is no interim stay."
16.
After carefully perusing the judgment of the learned Single Judge, we find that the directions issued to the State of Punjab emanate mainly from the human consideration rather than legal.
Once it is held categorically that the impugned orders (Annexures P7, P9 and P10) issued by the State Government were quite legal and valid and within the jurisdiction of the respondent/State, the petitioner was to be granted relief in consonance with those orders.
It is an admitted fact that the writ petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind did not hold the basic degree of MBBS or equivalent degree recognised by the Medical Council of India and despite holding higher degrees in the concerned speciality and experience at various levels and publishing various papers, the petitioner could not be said to be possessing the minimum requisite qualifications for the recruitment to the PCMS Class-I post.
Learned counsel for Dr. KS Thind could not place before us any document which could show that the Medical Council of India recognized the qualification of the petitioner to hold a degree of B.V.Sc.
as a requisite qualification to hold a PCMS Class-I post.
Rule 4(ii) of the Rules, 1940 as contained in the Government Gazette, Punjab, issued on 6121940 (Part-I) specifically lays down :-  "No person shall be appointed a member of the Service unless he - (i) ---- (ii) possesses a qualification recognised by the General Medical Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United Kingdom or by the Medical Council of India; --" If the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind lacked in holding the basic degree of MBBS or equivalent degree recognised by the Medical Council of India, his appointment to the PCMS Class-I could not validly be made and as such, the State of Punjab was right and justified in issuing the impugned orders (Annexures P7, P9 and P10).
The learned Single Judge, in our considered view, was right in holding that the impugned orders did not suffer from any infirmity in law and were not liable to be quashed.
We find no merit in the contention to the contrary of learned counsel for the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind.
17.
Learned Deputy Advocate General for the State of Punjab (appearing for appellants in LPA 515/1989) submitted that once the impugned orders passed by the State of Punjab, (i.e. Annexures P7, P9 and P10) have been held to be valid and legal, the learned Single Judge erred in law in issuing directions to the State of Punjab for granting benefits to the petitioner on similar footing as the members of the PCMS-I We find considerable force in the aforesaid contention of learned DAG.
Once the post held by the petitioner had been validly and legally taken out of the regular cadre of PCMS Class-I under the impugned orders and the petitioner had been validly and legally posted on the ex-cadre post, he could not claim parity with the members of the PCMS Class-I in order to claim the benefits of selection-grade, promotions etc.
The petitioner cannot urge that he should be considered senior to some members of the PCMS-I, such as respondent-Dr. Himmat Singh Aneja because he (Dr. Thind) held an ex-cadre post created by the State of Punjab, which obviously means a posting outside the cadre of PCMS Class-I There is, thus, no substance in the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner/Dr.
Thind that he should be considered for the purpose of seniority in the seniority- list of the officers of PCMS Class I and be given similar benefits w.e.f.
the date his junior was granted such benefits.
However, since the State of Punjab considered the case of the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind for retention in service by creating an ex-cadre post in the scale of pay mentioned in Annexure P-10, he was entitled to all the increments and benefits admissible to him in the said pay scale or any pay-scale, which might have been granted in lieu of the said scale.
But in our considered view, he is not entitled to claim selection-grade or promotion to the higher posts in the hierarchy of PCMS posts.
18.
Consequently, we accept the appeal (No. 515 of 1989) filed by the State of Punjab and another and dismiss the appeal (No. 627/1989) filed by the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind and direct the State of Punjab to grant the financial benefits to the petitioner/Dr.
KS Thind.
Keeping in view the length of service of the writ petitioner and all the dues that are found admissible to him, shall be paid within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the copy of this judgment, failing which the arrears shall carry interest @ 12% per annum.