KA Swami, CJ.
- The Writ Appeal is connected with WP No. 20678 of 1993.
The Writ Appeal arises out of an order passed in W.M.P.
No. 32360 of 1993 in WP No. 20678 of 1993.
Therefore, the writ petition itself has been directed to be heard along with the writ appeal.
We have heard the learned counsel appearing on both sides in the Writ Petition as well as in the writ appeal.
We shall first take up for consideration the writ petition.
2.
In the writ petition, the petitioner, who is the appellant in the writ appeal, has sought for quashing the order dated 15.11.1993 passed by the 2nd respondent, viz. Joint Director of Secondary Education, Madras, in appeal No. 88554/W/93 directing the school committee to reconsider the issue as to filling up of the post of Headmistress of the School, on considering the candidature of the appellant as well as the 4th respondent and other qualified and eligible teacher.
3.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned order is passed without affording an opportunity to the petitioner, therefore it is null and void, that the appellate authority has also erred in setting aside the order appointing the petitioner as the Headmistress, even though the petitioner, as per the contention, is senior to the 4th Respondent.
4.
On the contrary, it is contended by the learned counsel appearing for the 4th respondent as well as by the learned Special Government Pleader that the order of the 2nd respondent does not call for interference inasmuch as the provision of Section 43 of the Tamil Nadu Recognised Private Schools (Regulation) Act, 1973, (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and the Rules framed thereunder do not contemplate personal hearing; that the petitioner cannot be considered to be senior to the 4th respondent as a post-graduate teacher; and that at any rate the petitioner cannot also be considered to be more meritorious than the 4th respondent.
Learned counsel appearing for the 4th respondent went a step further and contended that even the appellate authority itself ought to have selected and appointed the 4th Respondent as the Headmistress of the School in question, instead of directing the School Committee to redo it.
Learned Special Government pleader specially contended that as the appellate authority has directed the school committee, which is the authority to make selection for filling up the post of Headmaster to reconsider on taking into consideration all the relevant factors, no interference is called for with impugned order.
5.
In the light of the rival contentions, the point that arises for consideration is as to whether the order passed by the 2nd respondent requires to be interfered with in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
6.
Rule 15 of the Tamil Nadu Recognised Private School (Regulation) Rules, 1974, hereinafter referred to as the Rules, prescribes the qualifications, conditions of service of teacher and other persons.
As per sub-rule (4) of Rule 15 promotions to the post of Headmaster/Headmistress have to be made on grounds of merit and ability, seniority being considered only when merit and ability are approximately equal.
As per sub-clause (ii) of sub-rule (4) of Rule 15 appointments to the various categories of teachers shall have to be made by way of promotions from among the qualified teachers in that School; and if no qualified and suitable candidate is available then to resort to appointment of other persons employed in that school, provided they are fully qualified to hold the post of teachers, appointment of teachers from any other school, or direct recruitment.
categories from which selection is to be made for filling up the post of Headmaster are specified in sub-clause (d) of clause (ii) of sub-Rule (4)(ii) of Rule 15 of the Rules, it provides that appointment to the post of Headmaster of Higher Secondary School shall be made by the method specified in clause (ii) either from the category of Headmasters of High Schools or Teachers Training Institute or from the category of Post Graduates Assistants in Academic Subjects or Post Graduate Assistants in languages provided they possess the prescribed qualification.
In the case on hand, it is not in dispute that the post of Headmistress is tried to be filled up from among the feeder category of Post Graduate Assistants in the school.
The authority to make selection is the School Committee, as per Section 18 of the Act.
Accordingly the School Committee considered the case of the petitioner as well as that of the 4th respondent and by the resolution dated 2341993 selected the petitioner for appointment as Headmistress and recommended her name to the 2nd respondent for approval.
The said resolution dated 2341993 reads thus :  ``The Committee scrutinised the list of candidates eligible to be promoted as Headmistress of the School.
It was decided to give weightage to the total service of the teacher in the School.
Consequently it was resolved to promote Smt. G Godvari MABT as Headmistress of the School in succession to Selvi, J Rajalakshmi retiring on 3151993.
She will be on probation for two years.''
7.
The 4th respondent, aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the School Committee, preferred an appeal to the 2nd respondent as per the sub-rule (4) A of rule 15 of the Rules.
Notice of the appeal was served upon the petitioner.
She also filed a representation.
The appellant authority, on considering the representation and also other records produced before it, passed the impugned order setting aside the order selecting the petitioner as Headmistress and further directing that the candidature of the petitioners as well as the 4th respondent be considered afresh.
The order passed by the 2nd respondent records that the petitioner cannot at all be considered to be senior to the 4th respondent, inasmuch as the 4th respondent has rendered 14 years of service as post-graduate teacher whereas the petitioner has rendered only 13 years of service as post-graduate teacher.
Thus neither the School Committee nor the appellate authority, viz. the 2nd respondent, has gone into the merits of each of the candidates.
The seniority becomes relevant only if both the candidates are equal on merits.
As the merits of either the petitioner or of the 4th respondent is not considered by the School Committee as well as by the appellate authority, we are of the view that it is not possible to sustain the order of the school committee and at the same time it is also not possible to interfere with the order of the 2nd respondent, which only directs the School Committee to consider the candidatures of the petitioner and the 4th respondent afresh.
8.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner tried to place reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in Lakshmipathi Naidu B v. DT Educational Officer, 1993 1 Mad.
LW 44 and contended that the 4th respondent cannot at all be considered to be senior to the petitioner.
It is relevant to notice that as already pointed out on this aspect of the matter, both the petitioner and the 4th respondent are Post-Graduate Assistants, which is one of the feeder categories for selection to the post of Headmistress in question.
Therefore, seniority has to be determined only on the basis of the service rendered by them as Post-Graduate Assistants.
The seniority becomes relevant only if both the candidates are found to possess merit and ability in an approximately equal measure.
We do not want to express any opinion on the question of seniority, because either of the authorities below has not considered the merit of any one of the candidatures and also because the question of seniority becomes relevant only if merit of both candidates is found to be approximately equal.
9.
Learned Counsel for the 4th respondent tried to place reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in Shri Sachidanand Pandey v. State of WB, AIR 1987 SC 1109 and contended that the petitioner cannot be considered to be more meritorious than that of the 4th respondent as it would be apparent from the records that have been produced before the appellate authority, therefore the appellate authority would not have taken into consideration the merits of both the candidates and the selection of the petitioner on this ground cannot be sustained.
Reliance was placed on paragraph 26 of the Judgment.
It may be pointed out here that the Supreme Court was not considering a case wherein the statutory functionaries were required to exercise power under the provisions of the Act for making a selection and that was a case wherein the administrative proceedings went on for quite long period and decisions were taken on different dates, therefore it was held that in order to find out as to whether the administrative decision was taken on a proper application of mind, the entire records were required to be looked into.
In fact the case Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner, AIR 1978 SC 851 was distinguished by the Supreme Court on the ground that it was dealing with a statutory order made by a statutory functionary, who could not, therefore, be allowed to supplement the grounds of his order by later explanations.
It was further held that the case seized by the Supreme Court was neither involving a statutory function nor a statutory functionary, but the transaction bore a commercial though of public character which could only be settled after protracted discussion.
Therefore, it is clear that the proposition laid down in the aforesaid decision with reference to the transaction of the nature concerned therein cannot be applied to the orders passed in exercise of the statutory powers.
10.
In the light of the conclusions we have reached that the School Committee has not considered the merit of each of the candidates and that the 2nd Respondent is justified in setting aside the selection of the petitioner and directing the School Committee to redo it on considering the cases of the petitioner and the 4th respondent, and other qualified and eligible teachers, we do not consider it necessary to refer to the other decision, viz. Govt. of TN v. S Duraipadian, 1990 WLR 481, Central Board of Secondary Education v. MS Vineta Mahajan, 1993 JT (SC) 165, Daya Shankar v. High Court of Allahabad, AIR 1987 SC 1469 and NR Chinnasamy Chettiar v. State, AIR 1986 Mad 168, on which reliance was placed by the learned Counsel appearing for the 4th Respondent.
11.
For the reasons stated above, we do not see any ground to interfere with the order passed by the 2nd respondent.
Accordingly, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed.
However, we make it clear that this judgment shall not be taken as expressing any opinion on the merit of the petitioner as well as the 4th respondent.
It is for the School Committee to make a fresh selection based on the relevant materials regarding the merit of each of the candidates, including the petitioner, 4th respondent and other qualified and eligible candidates, as directed by the 2nd Respondent in the impugned Order.
Consequent upon the dismissal of the Writ Petition, the writ appeal does not survive and accordingly, it is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.