G R Majithia and S K Jain, JJ.
- This judgment disposes of C.W.P.
No. 12417, 12091, 12781 and Civil Revision No. 3506 of 1993.
2.
The petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 12417 of 1993 has challenged the office order issued by the Director, Medical College, Rohtak, contained in Endst.
No. ST/I/93/6017-22, dated September 30, 1993 and has also sought a mandate to the respondents No. 1 to 3 to admit her to the MBBS course in Medical College, Rohtak, against one of the reserved seats for children of deceased or disabled Army Officers.
3.
Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (for short, the University) holds entrance examination every year for making selections of admission to MBBS/BDS course in the Medical College, Rohtak or the affiliated Colleges of the University.
The University publishes a Hand Book of Information for admission to the courses for each academic session every year.
Chapter-IV of the Prospectus for MBBS/BDS Entrance Examination 1993-94 provides for number of seats, reservation of seats and its distribution and duration of course.
Clause(B) of Chapter-IV provides for reservation of seats for various categories, who are bona fide residents/domicile of the State of Haryana and the same reads as under :-  Category No. of seats.
a) Scheduled Caste/Tribes (20%) 19. b) Socially-Educationally-Economically Weaker Sections of Society other than the SC/ST and Backward Class candidates 9 (at least 3 out of these seats will be for girl candidates).
c) Physically handicapped (1%) (Children having permanent disability of not less than 40% provided the candidates is otherwise fit for admission to MBBS) 1 (The selected candidates will have to appear before the Medical Board for assessment whether they are fit to carry out the duties despite to their being handicapped).
d) Backward Class Candidates (10%) 10. e) (i) Children of deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks (if there are no such cases,children of ex-servicemen) 4 (ii) Children of deceased or disabled Officers (if there are no such cases,children of Ex-servicemen).
2 f) Children/Grand-children (2%) of Freedom fighters including INA personnel belonging to Haryana 2.
Seats have been reserved for the children of deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks and the children of deceased or disabled Officers.
4.
The dispute in these cases only relates to the reservations provided for children of deceased or disabled JCO.
's and other ranks and children of deceased or disabled officers.
The prospectus does not say as to how the inter se merit of the children of deceased or disabled JCO's or Officers is to be determined.
The Hand Book of Information for Admission to MBBS/BDS Courses provides for guidelines to be kept in view for determining the inter se merit of the children of the deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks or Officers, at page 19 against serial No. 1(iv) guidelines have been laid down and the same read thus :-  "5% for bona fide ex-servicemen of Haryana (Army/Navy/Air Force) or their dependent sons/daughters.
Among them, preference will be given to those killed or disabled beyond 50% during action.
Dependents will be considered only if suitable ex-servicemen are not available."
Chapter VI of the Prospectus contains special instructions/informations.
Clauses 15 and 16 of this Chapter read thus :-  "15.
The rules herein are only provisional.
These may be changed or modified by the University without prior notice.
Candidates cannot make any claim on the basis of information given in the prospectus.
16.
In case of any ambiguity in the rules, interpretation of the same by the Vice-Chancellor shall be final."
The University has the powers to change or modify any of the rules contained in the Prospectus.
The candidates seeking admission to the MBBS/BDS course cannot make any claim on the basis of the information given in the Prospectus.
In case of any ambiguity in the rules contained in the Prospectus, the interpretation placed by the Vice-Chancellor of the University shall be final.
5.
The University received a complaint from Smt. Dalip Kaur wife of late Capt.
Nafe Singh Dalal, the mother of Miss Neelam Dalal, a candidate for MBBS/BDS course, who stood at serial No. 4 in the Merit List of the reserved category of the children of deceased/disabled Officers or Ex- servicemen against Miss Richa Batra (petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 12417 of 1993), whose name appeared at serial No. 1 of the Merit List as per the marks obtained in the written test of the said category prepared on the basis of the claims made by different candidates.
The complainant stated that Miss Richa Batra was placed at serial No. 1 of the Merit List in spite of the fact that she had submitted a certificate issued by Zilla Sainik Board, Faridabad, wherein it was clearly mentioned that her father's death had occurred on account of an accident, which was not attributed to Military service and as per the said certificate she could not be categorised in the deceased/disabled Officer's dependents category.
On receipt of the complaint, the University requested the Director, Medical College, Rohtak to send the application forms of first list of such candidates interviewed by the Interview Committee for admission to MBBS course 1993-94 under DDO/DDL category.
The Director, Medical College, Rohtak sent the application forms of the candidates, including those of the petitioners in these writ petitions, for consideration and final order by the University.
The parents/guardians of the following candidates of DDO/DDL/ESM, who were seeking admission to MBBS/BDS courses under the aforesaid category, were called upon to report in the University on September 23, 1993, along with the original documents pertaining to their respective service records :-  Sr. No.
Candidate's name and Roll No. Category applied for.
1.
Richa Batra, 5128 DDO/EX-SM.
2.
Tarun Chhabra, 5783 DDO.
3.
Amolendra Trehan, 2880 DDO/ESM.
4.
Neelam Dalal, 5799 DDO.
5.
Sunita Dalal, 1627 DDO.
6.
Harminder Singh, 2627 DDL.
7.
Neeral Gaur, 2378 DDL/ESM.
8.
Nishi Verma, 6168 DDL.
9.
Supriya Saharan, 1274 DDL.
10.
Ram Bhagat Singh, 1457 ESM.
11.
Krishan Malik, 4974 ESM.
12.
Rajesh Kumar, 3041 DDL (not reported).
The Vice-Chancellor and the Controller of Examinations examined the original discharge books and other documents showing particulars of service and all other related documents as produced by the parents/guardians of the candidates.
The Vice-Chancellor, after hearing the parents/guardians of each candidate and examining their service records, came to the conclusion that only the following candidates, out of the above, were eligible for admission under the Deceased/Disabled Officers category and they were offered admission in the following order :-  Sr. No. Name and Roll No. Category Remarks.
1.
Tarun Chhabra, Roll No. 5783 DDO Father killed during operation Pawan in Sri Lanka Death attributable to war casualty.
2.
Neelam Dalal DDO Father killed during Indo-Pak War of 1971 Death attributable to war casualty.
The other candidates belonging to DDO category who reported on that date were not found eligible.
The Vice-Chancellor ordered preparation of fresh merit list of candidates belonging to DDO category.
6.
The grouse of the petitioners is that the University was under an obligation to prepare a common list of candidates of DDO category and it could not resolve to give preference to the wards/children whose father was either killed or disabled in action.
Sub-clause (e) of Clause B of Chapter-IV of the Prospectus does not postulates that the children/wards of deceased or disabled officers or JCO's have to be given preference.
7.
The submission is devoid of any merit.
The reservation under the category of children/wards of deceased/disabled officers or Ex-servicemen is only permissive.
The University can take a decision that in this category preference will be given to the children/wards of DDO/ESM or of JCO's and other ranks who were either killed or disabled during war or whose death or disability is attributable to war casualty.
In the Handbook of Information, which is published by the University for each academic year, a mention is made that under the category of DDO/ESM, preference will be given to those who were killed or disabled during action.
The purpose of publishing this Handbook of Information is to inform the eligible candidates seeking admission under this category that preference is contemplated merely because it is not so stated in the Prospectus that preference will be given to the wards/children of deceased/disabled JCO's or Officers of the Army, Naval and Air Force and this will not disentitle the University to grant admission in the manner provided in the Hand Book of Information or prescribe any other method to give benefit of this reservation to the most deserving.
The University, in the instant case, has given admission under category of 'DDO' to Shri Tarun Chhabra, whose father Lt. Col. Arun Kumar Chhabra died on October 14, 1989 during Operation Pawan.
Lt. Col. Arun Kumar Chhabra was also awarded Mahavir Chakra.
The citation which was issued for awarding Mahavir Chakra reads as under :-  "Since 08 Oct 89, the militants were violating the rules of cessation of offensive military operations in the area of Vadamaradchi.
Therefore 'A' Assault Team, 10 PARA Commando was asked to carry out aggressive patrolling in Point Pedro area and apprehend/kill any militant moving with weapons.
On 14 Oct 89, 'A' Assault team was assigned a special mission to destroy militants in the general area of Mantikai North.
This area was a known stronghold of the LTTE and it was well appreciated that they would go to any lengths to maintain a high -profile presence there, even if it meant bearing arms and using them if the need arose.
Visualising a serious encounter, Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra, Second-in-Command volunteered to lead one of the troops of 'A' Assault Team.
At 0840 hours when the troops closed in to a likely militant hideout.
The leading elements came under heavy fire.
Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra immediately deployed the leading squad and took another squad to encircle the militants.
While he was executing this manoeuvre through thickly built-up area, one of the militants hiding in a house fired straight into Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra who was in the lead.
Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra sustained a bullet injury in the head; but in spite of his injury he continued directing the squads to destroy the militants and further contacted another patrol led by IC-33294L Major Bhisma Kumar Shaktawat to guide him to this area.
As a result of his aggressive spirit, the troops was inspired to kill one militant and put the rest to flight.
However, due to the nature of injury Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra breathed his last on the battlefield.
During the operations from 08 Sept 89 to 14 Sept 89 and on 14th Oct 89, Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra led his men from the front and displayed valour, bravery, and leadership of an exceptionally high order.
On 14 Oct 89, in spite of being Second-in-Command of a battalion, he, appreciating the change of an encounter with the militants, voluntarily took charge of a sub-unit of 'A' Assault Team on a special mission and fought the militants from the front with total disregard to his own safety.
By setting a personal example, he inspired his men to fight off a determined enemy and to rout them.
He made the supreme sacrifice on the battlefield in a manner befitting the honour of the Regiment and the highest traditions of the Indian Army.
For this act of gallantry in face of the enemy, Lieutenant Colonel Arun Kumar Chhabra is recommended for the award of MAHAVIR CHAKRA."
The father of Miss Neelam Dalal, Capt.
Nafe Singh Dalal was killed during Indo-Pak War of 1971.
The University was justified in granting admission to these two candidates under the DDO category as their fathers made supreme sacrifices for the country and were killed either in operation or in war.
The criteria adopted by the University is not only just and fair but appreciable also.
The University has rightly disallowed admission under the category of DDO to the petitioners.
We have not taken note of the scandalous allegations made in the rejoinders to the written statement filed on behalf of the University in CWP No. 12781 of 1993 as these allegations were introduced in the rejoinder and the University had no occasion to refute the same and are irrelevant for the purpose of deciding the question at issue.
8.
Ms. Supriya Saharan, respondent in Civil Revision No. 3506 of 1993, claimed admission to MBBS under DDL category.
She was not found eligible for admission under this category.
She challenged the action of the University in not granting admission to her in a civil suit.
Along with the suit, she filed an application under Order 39, Rule 1, Civil Procedure Code, for granting her provisional admission.
The application was declined by the Subordinate Judge.
He came to the conclusion that she was not entitled for admission under DDL category as her father was discharged only on the ground of his ill health and he did not suffer disability in any operation against the enemy or any disturbed area and that his disability was not attributable to Military Service.
The first appellate Court reversed the order of the trial Judge.
It is unfortunate that the first appellate Court did not appreciate that the University for sound reasons had come to the conclusion that the respondent was not entitled to admission under DDO/DDL category.
The Court could not supplant its view over the decision of the University arrived at on correct understanding of the legal and factual position.
The first appellate Court should not have ignored the elementary settled principle that the courts should not interfere in academic matters.
It did not prima facie come to the conclusion that the decision of the University suffered from any infirmity.
It also did not appreciate that the first appellate Court should be slow in interfering with the discretion exercised by the trial Judge.
For the reasons stated above, Civil Writ Petitions No. 12417, 12091 and 12781 of 1993 are dismissed, while Civil Revision No. 3506 of 1993 is allowed, the order of the first appellate Court is set aside and that of the trial Judge is restored.