Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 13034, 13035 and 13122 of 1989.
The seven petitioners herein are aggrieved by the orders dated October 9, 1989 by which they were ordered to be reverted to their parent departments.
The facts, as evident from the record of Civil Writ Petition No. 13034 of 1989, may be briefly noticed.
2.
The Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana issued a circular letter dated December 28, 1987 to all Heads of Departments of Haryana.
Government, Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners informing them that the Government had decided to fill up certain posts of Clerks (Typists) in the Haryana Civil Secretariat by transfer "from amongst the experienced and efficient Clerks of other offices of the Haryana State.
All such employees should have been recruited through the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana and they should possess the prescribed qualifications ...." The Heads of the Departments etc. were requested to recommend the names of such willing employees for appointment as a Clerk in the Haryana Civil Sectt.
by transfer ...." Another circular to the same effect was issued vide letter dated March 29, 1988.
In response to these circulars, the three petitioners, opted for transfer of their services as Clerks to the Haryana Civil Secretariat.
It may be noticed that petitioner No. 1 was working as Clerk in this Court since 1982 and petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 were employed as Clerks in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, since the year 1985.
The petitioners were considered and selected.
As a result they were appointed as Clerks in the Haryana Civil Secretariat on transfer basis.
A copy of the letter of appointment dated June 9, 1988 sent to the Registrar of this Court appointing petitioner No. 1 has been produced as Annexure P.1.
In this letter it was inter alia mentioned that the "inter se seniority of the officials being appointed on transfer basis will be determined on the basis of length of their continuous regular service in the parent Deptt."
In pursuance to this communication, the petitioners were relieved and they joined their respective posts of Clerks in the Civil Secretariat.
Subsequently, the State Government made a reference to the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana for approval of the appointments.
It appears that the Board refused to approve these appointments on the ground that the High Court and the Vidhan Sabha Secretariat were not the departments of the Government.
Consequently, they could not have been appointed by transfer.
On this premises, the State Government decided to revert the petitioners to their parent departments.
The orders of reversion have been impugned in these petitions.
The orders of reversion passed on October 9, 1989, annexures P.4 and P.5 have been impugned in these petitions on various grounds which stall be presently noticed.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the appointment by transfer to the posts of Clerks in the Haryana Civil Secretariat can only be made in accordance with the provisions of Rule 6 of the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Service Class III) Rules, 1952, (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The said provision permits appointment of Clerks by transfer "from among officials employed in departments of Government other than the Civil Secretariat ...." Since the petitioners were not working in the departments of Government, they were not eligible to be appointed, The mistake came to the notice of the Government only when the Board declined to accord their approval vide letter dated August 11, 1989.
As a consequence, the orders of reversion were passed.
4.
I have heard Mr. JS Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Randip Singh Surjewala for the respondents.
Mr. Malik has raised a two fold contention.
He submits that the petitioners were, in fact, working in various departments of the Government and as such they were eligible to be appointed by transfer.
He has drawn my attention to the Gradation and Distribution list issued by the State of Haryana to show that the Vidhan Sabha Secretariat and the office of the High Court were part of the departments of Election and Justice of the Government of Haryana.
In case of the Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, the Speaker Haryana Vidhan Sabha is the Head of the Department and in case of the staff of the High Court, the Registrar is the Head of the Department.
On this premises, the learned counsel contends that the action of the respondents in holding the petitioners as ineligible for appointment by transfer is untenable.
The earned counsel further submits that except petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 in C.W.P.
No. 13122 of 1989 who have a lien in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha, the remaining five petitioners did not have any lien in their parent departments.
Consequently, the orders of reversion in their cases would actually amount to termination of their services, The learned counsel submits that the petitioners were permitted to compete and were appointed after they were duly selected.
The State Government having permitted them to compete and appointed them is now estopped from questioning their eligibility as they lost their lien on acceptance of the offer of appointment made to them.
The learned counsel further submitted that it was incumbent on the State of Haryana to afford an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners before they could actually be ordered to be reverted.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, Mr. Surjewala, has submitted that the petitioners had been appointed on purely temporary basis.
They had no right to the posts.
They were not actually serving in any department of the State of Haryana and as such their reversion is justified and legal.
He further submits that the petitioners having been appointed on purely temporary basis could be reverted at any time and that there was no requirement of giving them an opportunity of hearing.
5.
A perusal of the sequence of events shows that the petitioner had opted to join the Haryana Civil Secretariat services in response to an offer received from the State Government.
They had competed and were duly selected.
On receipt of the offer of appointment, they suffered the termination of their lien in the parent departments.
At least five out of the seven petitioners, as noticed above, lost their line.
That having happened, it would be absolutely unfair and inequitable to now permit the respondents to take the view that the petitioners were not eligible for appointment.
They have served on their respective posts for more than a year and have in fact continued even after the passing of the impugned order under the interim directions given by this Court.
At this point of time they would be ineligible for recruitment to any other civil post under the State.
It was only on account of the offer made to them that they had suffered the termination of their lien.
Otherwise, they would have continued on the posts on which they were originally working.
In this situation, I am of the considered view that the respondent-State had to consider the eligibility of the candidates prior to their being allowed to compete for the posts of Clerks.
Once they were selected and actually appointed, it would not be fair to permit the State to declare the petitioners as ineligible to compete or to `Equitable Estoppel' is fully attracted and on that ground alone, the petitioners must succeed.
6.
Furthermore, even if it is assumed that the State Government was entitled to question the eligibility of the petitioners, it should have afforded them at least an opportunity to show that in fact they were eligible.
If such an opportunity had been afforded, the petitioners could have produced the Gradation List or some other relevant evidence and satisfied the authorities concerned that they fulfilled the requirement of the rules.
It deserves notice that Rule 6 itself uses two different expressions.
At certain places it provides for transfer of employees working in departments of Government other than the Civil Secretariat, "while at others it contemplates transfer" of officials already in Government service."
The expressions appear to have been used interchangeably.
In fact, in case of Junior Clerks in service the rule contemplates appointment by transfer of the officials who are already in Government service.
That being the position, the petitioners could have reasonably satisfied the authority that they were, in fact, Government officials and were working in departments of the Government.
Failure to grant an opportunity deprived the petitioners of a chance to establish, this factual position.
Action of the respondents in not giving an opportunity to the petitioners amounted to violation of the principles of natural justice.
Even on this ground the claim of the petitioners deserves to succeed.
7.
Mr. Surjewala, however, points out that so far as petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 in Civil Writ Petition No. 13122 of 1989 are concerned, the Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, is willing to accommodate them.
That may be so.
However, since I have found that the action of the respondents is violative of the principles of natural justice, the impugned order qua these two petitioners also cannot be sustained.
8.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It has been admitted before me that prior to the issue of letters of appointment, the Government had prepared a merit list.
The names of the seven petitioners in these three cases are borne on that merit list.
Persons who were originally placed below these petitioners in the said merit list are still continuing in service.
Reversion of persons I who were higher in order of merit while person below them to continue would prima facie be contrary to the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution.
It would, in any case, taint the executive action with an element of unfairness and arbitrariness.
9.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am unable to sustain the order of reversion.
The orders dated October 9, 1989 annexures P 4 and 5 which are also impugned in the other two petitions are accordingly quashed.
Since the petitioners have continued to hold their respective posts in view of the interim order passed by this Court, it is not necessary to give any other directions.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.