Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner-Bhagwan Shri Krishan College of Education (for Women) k(hereinafter referred to as the College) has filed this writ petition through its president.
2.
The petitioner College is recognized by and is affiliated with the Kurukshetra University as provided under clause (a) of section 2 of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979, as amended vide Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Amended Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The dismissal and punishment of the employees of the College is governed by the provisions of the Act and the terms of the Service of respondent No. 2 are governed by the Service Rules framed by the Kurukshetra University known as Rules of Service and Conduct for Employees in non-Government Recognised Colleges (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The petitioner-College receives aid from the State Government.
3.
In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the petitioner has sought more than one relief but at the very outset of hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner confined his prayer for the quashing of order dated 811988, copy Annexure P-7 to the writ petition, vide which the management of the college was taken over by the Government.
4.
The facts which led to the filing of the writ petition was that the services of Smt. Swatantra Jain were terminated by the Management of the college during her probation period.
Smt. Jain filed a civil suit in which no interim relief was granted.
She filed appeal before the District Judge, Sirsa, who granted here the required injunction.Tthe Management filed revision before the High Court in which counsel for Smt. Swatantra Jain made a statement that his client would not press the appeal before the learned District Judge and the same would be got dismissed as withdrawn on the date fixed and that the stay order granted may be deemed to be ineffective till then.
In view of the statement of the counsel, the revision petition was dismissed as infructuous.
5.
Thereafter, Smt. Swatantra Jain withdrew the appeal from the Court of District Judge, Sirsa, and the suit was subsequently withdrawn from the Court of Sub Judge, Dabwali.
Smt. Swatantra Jain filed appeal before the Director Higher Education, Haryana and obtained stay against the order of her termination.
The present writ was thereafter filed by the management impugning the order of stay granted by the Director Higher Education, Haryana.
This Court had stayed the operation of the order of Director subject to payment of salary to respondent No. 2.
During the pendency of the writ petition the Government issued show cause notice dated 28101987, copy Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, giving the management of the college an opportunity to show cause as to why the management of the college be not taken over by the Government.
The petitioner made a request for amendment of the writ petition which was allowed.
Before the amended writ petition could be filed, the Government passed order dated 811988, copy Annexure P-7 to the writ petition, taking over the management of the College, which is now under challenge.
6.
The writ petition was admitted and during its pendency respondent No. 2 left the services of the petitioner and took assignment with Kurukshetra University.
It was in this background that the petitioner-college confined its relief only for quashing of order Annexure P-7 vide which the management was taken over by the Government.
7.
The petitioner-college has attributed mala fide to Shri Mool Chand Jain, Deputy Chairman, Planning Board, Haryana, Chandigarh, who is father of respondent No. 2 Smt. Swatantra Jain.
It has been averred in para No. 7 of the writ petition that respondent No. 3 who is father of respondent No. 2 who was appointed Deputy Chairman, Planning Board, Haryana, with the rank of Minister, exercised great influence over the Government and its machinery in Haryana.
He is in a position to influence the officers of the Government to act according to his wishes.
It has been averred that the petitioners learnt that respondent No. 3 had put pressure on respondent No. 1 to pass some order to reinstate respondent No. 2 as Principal of the petitioner-college.
Respondent No. 1 on appeal filed by respondent No. 2, stayed the operation of the impugned order of termination of services of respondent No. 2.
8.
Further case of the petitioner is that the order Annexure P3 staying the operation of the order passed by respondent No. 1 was without jurisdiction, arbitrary and mala fide one and the same was passed at the instance of respondent No. 3.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the management of the college was taken over by the Government at the instance of respondent No. 3 due to termination of services of his daughter Smt. Swatantra Jain.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued with vehemence that once respondent No. 2 had withdrawn the suit from the civil Court she was not competent to file appeal before the Director, Higher Education, Haryana.
The Director granted the relief against the statutory provisions of the rules and regulations and the petitioner-college was not bound to comply with the illegal order passed as order had been already implemented.
As such the petitioner-college had filed writ petition in the High Court and filing of the writ petition had annoyed respondent No. 3 and the Government.
Normally action can be taken on the report from the University.
Copy of the same is to be sent to the college concerned.
Under the Act, it has also been provided that the Government can take suo motu action being the prosecutor and the Judge.
This is against the rules of natural justice and no appeal lies under the Act and Section 3 of the Act is therefore liable to be struck down being violative of Articles 26, 29 and 14 of the Constitution.
11.
After the filing of the amended writ petition, pressure was put on the petitioner to compromise with respondent No. 2 so much so that salary of the staff was not released for a period of five months, which created unrest and instability in the atmosphere of the college.
It was under these circumstances the petitioner succumbed to the pressure and passed resolution dated 15121987 to re-employ respondent No. 2 on one year's probation, even though it was not acceptable to respondent Nos. 2 and 3 as they wanted respondent No. 2 to be confirmed as Principal with high perks.
12.
The main plea raised is that there was no sufficient reason for taking over the management of the college by the Government.
13.
I have considered the submissions and pursued the paper book.
14.
It is apparent from the record that though serious allegations are levelled against respondent No. 3 yet no written statement has been filed to counter the same.
15.
Shri SK Dhawan, Advocate, appearing for respondent No. 2 had brought to the notice of this Court that respondent No. 2 has taken assignment with Kurukshetra University and as such his client is not inclined to contest the matter.
16.
The Management of college was taken over under section 3(1) of the Haryana Private Colleges (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1978.
The Management of the college can be taken over by the State on the following grounds :-  3.
Power to take over Management of colleges :  (i) Whenever the State Government, on receipt of a report from the University concerned or otherwise is satisfied that the Managing Committee or President of a College has :-  (a) neglected to perform or persistently made default in the performance of duties and functions imposed on it under the Kurukshetra University Act, 1956 or the Maharshi Dayanand University, Act 1975 or the Statutes, ordinances and regulations made thereunder; or (b) failed to carry out any order passed or directive issued by the State Government or any order passed by the Director under the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979, or (c) exceeded or abused its or his powers; and that it is expedient in the interest of college education to take over the management of such college the State Government may, after giving the Managing Committee or the President of such college, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action, and after considering the reply, if any, made by the Managing Committee or the President of such college, as the case may be, make an order for taking over the management of such college by an Administrator, for a period not exceeding three years, as it may deem fit.
The reasons for taking over the management of the college as per Annexure-7, are that the management of the college terminated the service of Mrs. Swatantra Jain, Principal during her probation period without assigning any reasons, it also failed to comply with the order of the Director, Higher Education contained in letter dated 391985 and it also failed to comply with the University Rules 16A (page 164 of Kurukshetra University Calender 1984) as they did not appoint Mrs. L Chauhan who was the senior most lecturer, acting as Vice Principal of the college after the removal of Mrs. Swatantra Jain, instead, the management appointed Miss P Sardana as acting Principal in contravention of University Rules.
17.
On the consideration of the entire matter I am of the considered view that the Management of the college at no stage had committed any irregularity.
Only allegation against the petitioner is that they had terminated the services of respondent No. 2 in an illegal manner during her probation period and for not appointing a senior person as acting Principal after the removal of respondent No. 2.
This allegation is not sufficient which would warrant the taking over of the management of the college by the Government.
Smt. Swatantra Jain filed a suit which she had withdrawn subsequently and afterwards she filed appeal before the Director, Higher Education, Haryana.
Respondent No. 1 had stayed the termination of the petitioner vide order dated 371987, though the order of termination had been implemented.
As such management of the petitioner college was not bound to implement the order of the Director Higher Education.
In view of this, it cannot be said that the petitioner-college had committed any irregularity or illegality in the matter.
18.
The other aspect of the matter is that under the provisions of section 3(i) of the Haryana Private Colleges (Taking over of the Management) Act, 1978, it was incumbent on the part of respondent No. 1 to have published the period for which the management of the college had been taken over the Government.
From the perusal of Annexure P-7 it is observed that the Government has not fixed any period/date for which the management of the college was taken over.
The management of the college cannot be taken over by for indefinite period.
Consequently, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
For the reasons aforesaid, this writ petition is allowed and order Annexure P-7 is quashed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.