RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The Additional Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Executive Officer, District Rural Development Agency, Faridabad, sent a requisition to the Employment Exchange for the posts of Assistant Project Officer and Technical Assistant and some other posts.
It may be mentioned that the posts of Assistant Project Officer and that of Technical Assistant are Class III posts.
Petitioner Ombir Singh was sponsored by the Employment Exchange for the post of Assistant Project Officer whereas Dharambir, the other petitioner, was sponsored for the post of Technical Assistant.
2.
The Deputy Commissioner of the District had constituted a Committee for interviewing the candidates for the said posts.
The Additional Deputy Commissioner was the Chairman of the said Selection Committee.
The interviews were held by the said Committee on 22nd December 1989 and the petitioners were selected for the respective posts.
In pursuance of the selection they were issued appointment letters, dated 29th December, 1989 (Copies Annexures P(1) and P2) These appointment letters were issued by the Additional Deputy Commissioner/Chief Executive Officer.
It is not disputed that the Additional Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Executive Officer is one of the appointing authorities for Class III and Class IV employees.
3.
In pursuance of the appointment orders, the petitioners joined the respective posts on 1st January, 1990.
The probation period mentioned in the appointment letters was one year.
It has been further stated in the petition that the petitioners' services were terminated only after about 1-1/2 months of their working vide order dated 19th February, 1990 (Copies Annexures P.3 and P(4) to this petition).
Interviews for the said posts were again fixed for 19th March, 1990, and the petitioners were called for interview for the same very posts for which they had been earlier selected.
4.
The petitioners have challenged their termination as also the action of the respondents calling them for interview again, by way of present writ petition.
5.
The Admitting Beach while issuing notice of motion on 15th March, 1990, had passed the following interim order :-  "The interview may be held and the petitioners should also be considered in the interview.
Merit list be prepared but the appointment should not be made.
The interview results should be placed before this Court."
No written statement has been filed by the respondents.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents states that in fact no interviews had been held for the relevant posts, though these were earlier fixed for 19th March, 1990.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the petitioners had just worked for 1-1/2 months and nothing adverse had been found against them.
Their work and conduct were rather satisfactory, and there was no reason to terminate their services just after 1-1/2 months during the period of probation.
He has further submitted that the order of termination is in complete violation of the principles of natural justice, as no opportunity of hearing or show cause notice was given to the petitioners before taking the impugned action.
In support of this contention, he has relied upon a judgment of this Court in Kamlesh Kumari v. The State of Haryana, 1990(2) RSJ.
682 : 1991(1) SCT 550 and also a judgment of the Supreme Court in Shridhar v. Nagar Palika, Jaunpur, 1990(1) RSJ.
30.
7.
In Kamlesh Kumari's case (supra), the selection of some Constables/Lady Constables was cancelled.
The petitioners in that case after selection had reported for training.
Even constabulary numbers were also allotted and appointment orders were issued.
The Superintendent of Police retired from service and his successor cancelled that selection.
The cancellation was sought to be justified on the ground that the earlier selection was not based on merit.
The impugned action was set aside by this Court as being violative of principles of natural justice.
8.
Similarly in the case of Shridhar (supra), it was observed as under :-  "The High Court committed serious error in upholding the order of the Government dated 13280 in setting aside the appellant's appointment without giving any notice or opportunity to him.
It is an elementary principle of natural justice that no person should be condemned without hearing.
The order of appointment conferred a vested right in the appellant to hold the post of Tax Inspector that right could not be taken away without affording opportunity of hearing to him.
Any order passed in violation of principles of natural justice is rendered void.
There is no dispute that the Commissioner's Order has been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the appellant therefore the order was illegal and void.
The High Court committed serious error in upholding the Commissioner's order setting aside the appellant's appointment.
In this view, orders of the High Court and the Commissioner are not sustainable in law."
9.
The above mentioned authorities do support the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
As observed above, no reasons are forthcoming as to why the petitioners' services were terminated as no written statement has been filed.
However, on the basis of the record, the learned counsel for the respondents has argued that as there were certain complaints regarding the selection and the minutes of the selection Committee had not been put up before the Deputy Commissioner the selection was cancelled.
If there was any genuine complaint regarding the selection and the competent authority had some material before it that the selection was vitiated, the same could not have been set aside without affording opportunity to the petitioners or issuing them some sort of show cause notice.
It is not disputed, as stated above, that the Additional Deputy Commissioner/Chief Executive Officer is the appointing authority of the petitioners, being the Chairman of the Selection Committee.
The observations of the Deputy Commissioner that the selection was not fair or there were some complaints regarding the selection and on that basis the selection was being set aside, would also raise a finger against the members of the Committee, including the competent authority which is Additional Deputy Commissioner.
For this additional reason, it was all the more necessary that the petitioners should have been heard before passing the impugned order.
I have not been able to find any law or rule that where the Additional Deputy Commissioner is the appointing authority, the minutes of the Selection Committee had to be placed before the Deputy Commissioner, simply because he is the one who had constituted the Selection Committee.
For the foregoing reasons, I allow the writ petition, quash the impugned orders dated 19th February, 1990 (Annexures P.3 and P.4).
The petitioners would be deemed to be in continuous service right from the day of their termination, with all consequential benefit.
The petitioners will be entitled to the back wages only on the furnishing of affidavit that they were not gainfully employed during the period after termination of their services.
If so, such emoluments would be deducted from the arrears.
There will be no order as to costs.