GR Majithia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4633, 4666 and 7046 of 1990 since common questions of law arise for determination therein.
I have alluded to the facts as arising from the pleadings in C.W.P.
No. 4633 of 1990, in which the selection of respondent No. 3 to 83 as Ayurvedic Medical Officers has been challenged.
2.
Petitioners No. 2 to 8, 10 and 11 are working as Ayurvedic Medical Officers since February, 1987 and petitioner No. 9 is working as such from September 5, 1984 on ad-hoc basis.
Petitioners No. 5 and 6 are dependents of Ex-servicemen and are working on ad hoc basis against the vacancies reserved for Ex-servicemen/dependents of Ex-servicemen.
3.
Respondent No. 1 i.e. Haryana Public Service Commission, Chandigarh, advertised 76 posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers through advertisement published in the Indian Express dated June 15, 1989.
Out of these, 22 posts were reserved for Backward Classes and 10 for Ex-servicemen.
Essential qualifications laid down in the advertisement for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer were as under :  1.
A degree in Ayurvedic System of Medicine (with at least five years regular course) from any University or institution recognised by the Government.
2.
Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
In paragraph 8 of the Information Brochure issued by the Haryana Public Service Commission to the candidates, the same essential qualifications were prescribed as mentioned in the advertisement.
Degree in BAMS is only awarded after successful completion of five years degree course and six months' Rotary Internship Training.
Mere completion of five years' course does not entitle a candidate to obtain the Degree and he is not a qualified Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery.
This fact is explicit from a perusal of the prospectus issued by Shri Krishna Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra.
After a candidate completes five years course from a College then he is sent by the College for Internship training of four months in an Ayurvedic Dispensary/Hospital and two months in a Civil Hospital for allopathic training.
It is only after the successful completion of six months' training that the candidate is awarded the degree in BAMS  4.
The petitioners were fully qualified and they applied for the posts advertised by respondent No. 2 Interviews were conducted by respondent No. 2 from January 9, 1990 to March 13, 1990 when 1980 candidates were interviewed for 76 posts.
The interviews were conducted at Delhi, Hissar and Chandigarh.
Respondent No. 2 declared a list of successful candidates on March 22, 1980.
None of the petitioners was selected.
Against the 38 general category posts, 61 candidates have been selected.
Although out of the posts advertised, 10 were for Ex-servicemen of Haryana, yet only 3 have been selected.
The total number of selected candidates is 80.
The Interviewing Committee which interviewed the candidates comprised of the Chairman of respondent No. 2, one Expert and one Member.
It is alleged in the petition that the Member who was associated with the Interview Committee kept on changing.
Some time one Member used to sit in case of some of the petitioners and some time another Member used to interview the other petitioners.
Some candidates were interviewed by Mr. Ganpat Rai, Member while others were interviewed by Mr. Chander Bhan, Member and some other candidates were interviewed by other members of respondent No. 2.
In the interviews conducted at Delhi, the Chairman of respondent No. 2 did not participate and the interview was conducted by two Members.
On February 14, 1990, the Chairman did not conduct the interview.
By virtue of Article 315 of the Constitution of India, respondent No. 2 is the Public Service Commission for the State of Haryana.
At the relevant time, when the interview was conducted, the Commission consisted of a Chairman and four Members.
Under the regulations, it should consist of a Chairman and six members.
Under Article 320 of the Constitution of India, it is the duty of the State Public Service Commission to conduct examination for appointment to the service of the State.
It is further provided in Article 320 that the State Public Service Commission shall be consulted on all matters relating to recruitment of civil services and civil posts, etc. Respondent No. 2, instead of holding interview as a Commission, allotted candidates to the Chairman and one Member of the Commission.
Selection of the candidates by the chairman and one member of the Commission cannot be termed as a selection by the Commission.
The Commission means Chairman and six members to the appointed by the Governor.
The selection is vitiated because different candidates were interviewed by different interviewing Committees in which the Member kept on changing.
In one of the interviews conducted at Delhi on February 14, 1990, the Chairman did not participate and two Members and one expert constituted the Selection Committee in place of the Chairman, Members and an Expert.
The very object of holding an interview is to assess the inter se merit of the candidates against others.
Since different members were associated in the interviews each time, it was not possible to assess the inter se merit of all the candidate vis-a-vis others, because the consideration with each Member differs from the other.
Since interviews were held at different places, it was not possible to frame a common select list.
Candidates who appeared in the interview under Roll Nos. 385, 675, 17, 728 and 92 were selected although they did not fulfill the minimum educational qualifications.
Though they had completed five years academic course, but they had not completed their training upto the last date of advertisement.
Candidates who appeared for interview before the Selection Committee under Roll Nos. 385, 675, 17, and 728 has completed their training only on March 23, 1990, March 21, 1990, March 14, 1990 respectively.
Candidate appearing under Roll No. 92 has not completed the training.
None of the candidates who have been selected fulfilled the qualifications on the last date of submission of the application forms.
In the advertisement, it was specified that eligibility of a candidate was to be determined as on July 17, 1990.
The selected candidates did not fulfill the qualifications on that date.
These candidates will not be deemed to be possessing a degree in BAMS till such time they complete their training.
The candidates called for interview were far in excess than the number of posts advertised and this was in violation of the dictum of the apex Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case reported as 1985 S.L.R.
200.
The interview was a farce as it lasted only for one or two minutes due to the fact that excessively large number of candidates were called for interview.
To illustrate, petitioner No. 3 was called for interview on March 9, 1990.
The interview commenced at 10.00 A.M. and finished at 11.00 A.M. During this period, 20 candidates were interviews.
Similarly, petitioner No. 4 was interviewed on January 16, 1990 when 20 candidates were interviewed.
The interview commenced at 9.30 A.M. and finished at 10.30 A.M.
Likewise, petitioner No. 7 was interviewed on March 6, 1990, when interview commenced at 9.30 A.M. and finished at 10.20 A.M. during which time candidates were interviewed.
Dr. DK Jain, Expert, who is the Director, Ayurvedic, Haryana was back in his office at 10.30 AM Interview lasted for about one minute during which time it is impossible to asses the merit of a candidate.
The interview was merely an eye-wash. Miss Raj Shree who appeared in the interview under Roll No. 592 and is the daughter of Shri Jai Lal Kurlwal, Member of respondent No. 2, was selected for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
The Commission had advertised only two posts for which candidate with BAMS qualifications were eligible.
One of these posts was of Ayurvedic Medical Officer and the other was of Residential Medical Officer.
Ms. Raj Shree has been selected not only for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer but also for the post of Resident Medical OFficer.
Petitioners No. 5 and 6 were dependents of Ex-servicemen, but they were not considered for the category of posts reserved for Ex-servicemen/dependents of Ex-servicemen.
All the candidates falling in the category of dependents of an Ex-servicemen were interviewed on March 13, 1990, but the petitioners were not interviewed on that date for the reason that they were working on ad hoc basis against the very same posts which were advertised.
Therefore, they were no longer dependents of Ex-servicemen.
This is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 6 of the Constitution of India.
Only three Ex-servicemen have been selected while the remaining posts have been filled up by taking persons from the General category.
Mrs. Ritu Sharma, a married daughter of Ex-servicemen, has been selected in the category of dependents Ex-servicemen.
The criteria formulated by respondent No. 2 in making the selection was arbitrary.
Marks were awarded arbitrary in lumpsum.
No benefits was given to the petitioners for ad hoc service rendered by them.
The petitioners who have long experience and good record of ad hoc working on the very same posts were ignored while fresh graduates were selected and appointed.
5.
Written statement have been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 Respondent No. 1 has admitted that petitioners No. 1 to 11 except petitioner No. 9 were appointed as Ayurvedic Medical Officers by respondent No. 1 vide letter No. 1/57/1186-4-HB-IV, dated February 16, 1987 on purely ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the recommenders of the Haryana Public Service Commission join their duties, which ever event was earlier.
Petitioner No. 9 was appointed as Ayurvedic Medical Officer on temporary basis for a period of six months or till the recommendee of the SSS Board, Haryana joined duty, whichever event was earlier, by Director of Ayurveda, Haryana vide order No. 3/20/Ay/Hr/E-1/84/313, dated August 30, 1984, as post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer was under the purview of the SSS Board, Haryana being Class III post at that time.
Petitioners No. 5 and 6 were appointed against the reserved posts meant for Ex-servicemen and/or their dependents.
It is further admitted by respondents No. 1 that the essential qualifications for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer were the one which were mentioned in the advertisement.
Respondent No. 1 had received the list of recommendee for the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officer from respondent No. 2.
The record of the selected candidates was under scrutiny and the appointment will be made according to the Rules.
6.
Respondent No. 2 admitted in the written statement that the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers were advertised with the essential qualifications as a Degree (with at least five years regular course) in Ayurvedic System of Medicine from a University or Institution recognised by the Government plus knowledge of Hindi upto matric standard.
These qualification have been laid down in rule 7 read with Appendix 'B' of the Haryana Ayurvedic Department (Group B) Service Rules, 1989 (for short, the Rules).
The rules provide that a candidates should have a Degree of Ayurvedic System of Medicine with at least five years of regular course.
There is no mention of internship training in the qualifications.
The system may vary from University to University and institution to institution.
In the sister branch of the Health Department where Medical Officers are recruited by the respondents, the essential qualifications are :-  (i) Degree of MBBS (ii) Registration with any Medical Council.
The degree of MBBS is of four years' duration and registration with Medical Council takes place only when the candidate undergoes one year's internship time.
Petitioners No. 5 and 6 were appointed against the reserved posts meant for Ex-servicemen and/or their dependents.
It is further admitted by respondent No. 1 that the essential qualifications for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer were the one which was mentioned in the advertisement.
Respondent No. 1 had received the list of recommendee for the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers from respondent No. 2.
The record of the selected candidates was under scrutiny and the appointment will be made according to the Rules.
7.
Respondent No. 2 admitted in the written statement that the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers were advertised with the essential qualifications as a degree (with at least five years essential regular course) in Ayurvedic System of Medicine from a University or Institution recognised by the Government plus knowledge of Hindi upto matric standard.
The qualifications have been laid down in rule 7 read with Appendix 'B' of the Haryana Ayurvedic Department (Group B) Service Rules, 1989 (for short, the Rules).
The rules provide that a candidate should have a Degree of Ayurvedic System of Medicine with at least five years of regular course, there is no mention of internship training in the qualifications.
The system may vary from University to University and institution to institution.
In the sister branch of the Health Department where Medical Officers are recruited by the respondents, the essential qualifications are :  (i) Degree of MBBS (ii) Registration with any Medical Council.
The degree of MBBS is of four years' duration and registration with Medical Council takes place only when the candidate undergoes one year's internship training.
It was denied that the members of the Selection Committee kept on changing.
The whole viva-voice examinations were conducted by the Committee comprising of Member and Chairman of respondent No. 2, Mr. Chander Bhan, Member of respondent No. 2, did not interview any candidate for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
The Commission has inherent jurisdiction to regulate its functioning and to devise modes and methods for the effective discharge of its functions The Commission has laid down the rules of procedure to be followed by it in order to regulate its functioning.
Clause 14(i) of the rules provides that the Commission may, from time to time, constitute committee or committees of one or more Members for all for any of the following matters, viz, consideration of applications for interview, interviews of applicants, selection of applicants to be recommended for the post or posts and their order of preference.
It is not essential that all the Members of the Commission should participate in conducting the interviews and selecting candidates for recommendation and appointment to a particular post.
In the instant case, the interview viva-voce was conducted by a Committee comprising of Chairman and Shri Ganpat Rai, Member, assisted by an expert from the Department in an advisory capacity.
A Committee comprising of even one Member assisted by an expert from the Department in an advisory capacity can be constituted by respondent No. 2 to hold viva-voce examination and the selections made by it are perfectly in order.
In the Union Public Service Commission, most of the viva-voce examinations are conducted by the single member Committee consisted by the experts.
In the instant case, the Committee comprised of two Members of the Commission, i.e. the Chairman and one member Shri Ganpat Rai and the whole vivo-voce examination was conducted by the same Committee.
On February 14, 1990, viva-voce examination was conducted at Delhi by Shri Gurmesh Parkash Bishnoi, Member Chairman and Shri Ganpat Rai, Member, assisted by the Director of Ayurveda Shri P.K.Jain.
The object of holding viva-voce examination of the candidates is to assess the suitability and merit of each individual candidate.
The object of the viva-voce examination conducted by the Commission is not to assess the inter se merit of all the candidates against others as alleged by the petitioners but the object is to assess the merit of each individual candidate which finally discloses the comparative merit.
Respondent No. 2 was not under any obligation to ascertain from the candidates if they had undergone the internship training for a period of six months.
The Selection Committee had to satisfy itself that a candidate possessed a Degree in Ayurvedic system of Medicine (with at least five years regular course) as per the qualifications prescribed for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer in the Service Rules as advertised by the Commission while inviting application for the said posts.
The recommendations of the selected candidates have been made by the Commission after satisfying itself that the candidates possessed the requisite qualifications.
Appointment to the candidates recommended by the Commissions are to be given by respondent No. 1, which is the appointing authority.
If respondent No. 1 finds that a particular candidate had misled the commission by producing false fake certificate, it can withhold appointment to such a candidate.
At the time of viva-voce examination, respondent No. 2 satisfied itself that candidates selected fulfilled the prescribed qualifications.
It is further pleaded in the written statement that the ratio of the judgment given by the Apex Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra) is applicable to the cases where selection is made on the basis of a written competitive examination to be conducted by the Commission.
According to this judgment, the candidates called for interview are to be restricted to thrice the number of vacancies and all the candidates who qualify the written examination are not required to be called for interview.
The rule of law laid down in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case is not applicable to the situation where selections are made only on the basis of viv-a-voce examination of the candidates.
The prescribed essential qualifications as advertised were the minimum and mere possession of those qualification could not entitle a candidate to be selected.
Qualification and experience of hte candidates were not only the criteria for selection.
The Commission had adopted a well settled criteria to adjudge the suitability of the candidates.
In addition to the qualifications and experience, due credit was also given to the publication work, knowledge, awareness, interest in the subject, intelligence, aptitude, analytical ability, articulation, situation handling of the candidates and poise, bearing, confidence, attitude and other relevant qualities of the candidates.
Respondent No. 2 rightly called all the candidates for viva-voce examination and the selection was made on the basis of the performance of the candidates at the time of viva-voce examination.
20 candidates were called daily for viva-voce examination, which always started at 920 A.M.
The time taken to assess the candidates is immaterial.
Some of the candidates can be assessed within a minute or two while others take 10 to 15 minutes.
The members of the Commission, by virtue of their rich experience, in conducting viva-voce test of the candidates, have gained expertise to assess the candidates within a short span of time.
It was admitted that Miss Raj Shree, daughter of Shri JL Kurlwal, member of the Commission, was selected for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer and also for the post of Resident Physician.
She was selected for two posts under two different advertisements keeping in view her merit based on her educational qualification and performance in viva-voce examination.
No favour was shown to her.
Moreover, Shri JL Kurlwal, her father, did not participate in the viva-voce examination.
Miss Raj Shree belongs to Backward class category and she competed for selection among the Backward class candidates.
The petitioners do not belong to Backward class category and the selection of Miss Raj Shree does not affect the chances of the petitioners in any way.
According to Government instruction issued by the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana vide letter No. 12/37/79-GSII, dated November 21, 1980, the candidates working on ad hoc basis against the advertised posts or somewhere else cannot be considered eligible for the posts reserved for Ex-servicemen and their dependent sons/daughters.
Respondent No. 1 has clarified in these instructions that such persons having independent source of livelihood cannot be said to be dependent on their parents.
So, petitioners No. 5 and 6, who were working on ad hoc basis against the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer were not rightly considered as dependents of Ex-servicemen because they had their independent source of livelihood.
They were rightly called for viva-voce examination as general category candidates.
Mrs. Ritu Sharma, who apeared for the viva-voce examination under Roll No. 561, was selected against the post reserved for the dependents of Ex-servicemen.
She was unemployed and had no source of livelihood at the time of her selection.
It was denied that no proper criteria was formulated and marks were awarded in lumpsum.
A well designed criteria was adopted by the Commissioner to test the candidates in the viva-voce examination.
The selection was made purely on merit.
8.
Certain allegations made in the petition, i.e. different committees conducting viva-voce examination, no criteria adopted lumpsum marks awarded, no marks awarded for experience, could only be verified from the record of respondent No. 2.
9.
At my asking learned counsel for respondent No. 2, produced before me the entire record relating to the selection of Ayurvedic Medical Officers in question.
Respondent No. 2 took a decision on December 18, 1989 that Committee consisting of the Chairman and a Member will hold interviews for the posts of District Ayurvedic Officer and Ayurvedic Medical Officers.
This order further indicates that similar types of committees were constituted for holding interviews for the posts of Lecturers in Psychology and Hatchery Manger in the Fisheries Department.
It is also in practice that the various committees are constituted by respondent No. 2 for holing interviews and making selection for various types of posts.
The Commission laid down the criteria for assessing the relative merits of the candidates called for viva-voce examination for the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
The criteria is a secret document, but I have decided to reproduce it in extenso:-  "Total marks of the viva-voce examination : 100 marks (a) Personal achievements 30 marks (I) Higher qualifications : (i) Post-graduate degree in the relevant medical field of a recognised university or institute.
10 marks (ii) Post-graduate degree in the relevant subject of a recognised university or institute.
5 marks (iii) Professional experience : 2 marks per year of standing experience in Medical & Hospital profession after acquiring the requisite qualifications subject to a maximum of 10 marks.
No marks will be given for house job.
10 marks.
(iv) Publication: Credit will be given for professional publications in journals of recognised research repute.
5 marks (b) Interview : Interview will be conducted through oral discussion and questioning.
The questions and discussion will be directed to ascertain personal qualities considered suitable for the job under reference.
Important qualities to be ascertained are knowledge, awareness, interest, intelligence, aptitude, analytical ability, articulation, poise, bearing, confidence, attitude, situation handling and other relevant qualities.
Interview marks will be further sub-divided as under :- 70 marks (i) Knowledge, awareness, interest 30 marks (ii) intelligence, aptitude, analytical ability, articulation, situation handling 20 marks (iii) poise, bearing, confidence, attitude and other relevant qualities 20 marks.
In order to make a practice assessment, the candidates will be graded in consultation with the expert advisor in the following categories for each of the three groups of qualities.
Marks will be awarded in accordance with the category in which a candidate is graded :-  (i) Knowledge, awareness, interest : (a) Good.. 21 to 30 marks (b) Average.. 11 to 14 marks (c) Poor.. 1 to 100 marks (ii) Intelligence, aptitude, analytical ability, articulation, situation handling :- (a) Good.. 15 to 20 marks (b) Average.. 7 to 14 marks (c) Poor.. 1 to 6 marks (iii) Poise, bearing, confidence, attitude and other relevant qualities :- (a) Good.. 15 to 20 marks (b) Average.. 7 to 14 marks (c) Poor.. 1 to 6 marks For qualifying the examination, candidates should obtain at least 33% marks in the interview and at least 40 % in the aggregate of viva voce test."
10.
The oral examination mark sheets were also produced before me and a specimen, the mark sheet of Roll No. 6/537 is reproduced hereunder :-  "Name of the Post(s) : AMO Date of viva voce : 14/2/90 Roll No. : 6/537 Name of the Candidate : Ravinder Kumar Singla Father's name : Arjun Dev Date of birth : 1.11.1953 Age : 35 Years 7 months 1 day Personal Achievements Interview Total marks Hr.. Qualification Exp.
Publication Knowledge Intelligence Poise etc. Nil 8 Nil 27 15 15 65 Sd/-  Member,  Sd/-  Chairman.
11.
Perusal of the criteria and the oral examination mark sheet reveals that very objection test was applied while assessing the merits of each individual candidate.
12.
After the conclusion of interviews, respondent No. 2 prepared the merit list and forwarded the same to respondent No. 1.
It is signed by all the members including the chairman of the Commission.
The letter addressed by respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 1 reads as under :-  "Commission held that the interviews for the post AMO in the Health Deptt.
Hy.
from 10190 to 1331990 candidates applied out of which 819 general category candidates who were found eligible, 9 S.,C., 61 BC and 30 ESM/DS/D of ESM were called for interview at various places in Haryana like Hissar, Rohtak, and at Delhi and at Chandigarh.
4 candidates from general category were declared NE at the time of interview.
Commission was assisted by Dr. PK Jain, Director Ayurvedic, Haryana, Chandigarh as an Expert Adviser.
Commission is recommending more names keeping in views the Haryana Govt. circular letter Nos. 2311-IGSI-72/15727 dated 26572 and 5024-IGS-72/26877 dated 8.9.72.
Commission is recommending more names in waiting list keeping in vie that in this financial year, "Government is going to open at lest 20 more dispensaries where AMOs.
will be required immediately to avoid ad hoc appointments, so the Commission is recommending more names."
13.
The record reveals that one Selection Committee consisting of the Chairman, a Member Shri Ganpat Rai, assisted by an Expert, conducted the viva-voce examination.
At a later stage, another Member also participated in the interview.
His participation in the interview will not lead to an inference that the Selection Committee applied different criteria on that date.
The selection is not affected in any manner.
Proper criteria for assessing the merit of a candidate was prescribed and strictly followed.
Marks were not awarded to the candidates in lump sum, but were divided under various heads.
Weightage was also given for experience and other personal achievements, namely, publication works etc.
Objective test was applied while assessing the individual merit of a candidate.
These allegations are patently false, but I leave the matter here.
14.
Now I deal with respective submissions made by the learned counsel for petitioners.
It is urged by him that some of the selected candidates were ineligible since they had not completed the requisite internship training which is the essential pre-requisite for the awarding of BAMS degree.
In other words, a BAMS degree cannot be awarded till a candidate completes six months rotary internship training.
Respondents No. 1 sent requisition to Respondent No. 2 to select candidates for 76 posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers.
Respondent No. 2 advertised those posts.
The essential qualification prescribed for the post was a Degree (with at least five years regular course) in Ayurvedic System of Medicine from a University or Institution recognised by the Government plus knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
These qualifications were prescribed keeping in view the provisions of rule 7 read with Appendix 'B' of the Rules.
Rule 7 of the Rules provides that no person shall be appointed to any post in the Service, unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix 'B' to these rules in the case of direct recruitment.
The essential qualification prescribed in Appendix 'B' for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer is as under :-  (i) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard, (ii) A degree in Ayurvedic System of Medicine (with at least five years regular course) from any University or institution recognised by the Government.
The qualification laid down in the advertisement was strictly in conformity with the qualifications prescribed under the Rules.
The only qualification prescribed was that a candidate should be holder be degree in Ayurvedic System of Medicine with at least five years regular course from a University or institution recongised by the Government.
It was not the requirement under the Rules that a candidate should also have completed six months rotary internship training.
The completion or six months internship training was not the necessary condition for the candidate applying for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
In certain Universities, BAMS degree can only be granted after the candidate has completed six months' internship training.
But it does not mean that BAMS degree is not granted by the other Universities without the completion of six months internship training.
Respondent No. 2 prescribed the qualification for selection keeping in view the statutory rules and it cannot be gainfully urged that since these selected candidates did not complete the six months internship training, they were not entitled to get BAMS degree and consequently they were ineligible.
The selected candidates did possess the BAMS degree as stated by respondent No. 2 in its written statement.
After satisfying itself that the selected candidates prima facie fulfilled the requisite qualifications, respondent No. 2 made the selection.
The process of selection begins with the issuance of advertisement and ends with the preparations of select list.
Indeed, it consists of various steps like inviting applications, scrutiny of applications, rejection of defective application or elimination of ineligible candidates, conducting examinations calling for interview or viva-voce and preparation of list of successful candidates for appointment.
When such are the different steps in the process of selection, a candidate on making application for a post pursuant to an advertisement does not acquire any right of selection.
But if he is eligible and otherwise qualified in accordance with the relevant rules and the terms contained in the advertisement, he does acquire a vested right for being considered for selection in accordance with the Rules as they existed on the date of advertisement.
The matter is not res integra.
In P Mahendram and others v. State of Karnataka and others, (1990) 1 Supreme Court Cases 411, their Lordships of the Apex Court held as under :-  "There is no dispute that under the Recruitment Rules as well as under the advertisement dated October 6, 1983 issued by the Public Service Commission, holders of Diploma in Mechnical Engineering were eligible for appointment to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspectors along with holders of Diploma in Automobile Engineering.
On receipt of the application from the candidates the Commission commenced the process of selection as it scrutinised the applications and issued letters for interview to the respective candidates.
In fact the Commission commenced the interviews in August, 1984 and it had almost completed the process of selection but the selection could not be completed on account of interim orders issued by the High Court at the instance of candidates seeking reservation for local candidates.
The Commission completed the interviews of all the candidates and it finalised the list of selected candidates by June 2, 1987 and the result was published in the State Gazette on July 23, 1987.
In addition to that the selected candidates were intimated by the Commission by separate letters.
In view of these facts the sole question for consideration is an to whether the amendment made in the Rules on May 14, 1987 rendered the selection illegal.
Admittedly, the amending Rules do not contain any provision enforcing the amended Rules with retrospective effect.
In the absence of any express provision contained in the amending Rules it must be held to be prospective in nature.
The Rules which are prospective in nature cannot take away or impair the right of candidates holding Diploma in Mechanical Engineering as on the date of making appointment as well as on the date of scrutiny by the Commission they were qualified for selection and appointment.
In fact the entire selection in the normal course would have been finalised much before the amendment of Rules, but for the interim orders of the High Court.
If there had been no interim order, the selected candidates would have been appointed much before the amendment of Rules.
Since the process of selection had commenced and it could not be completed on account of interim orders of the High Court, the appellants rights to selection and appointment could not be defeated by subsequent amendment of Rules."
The submission is accordingly rejected.
15.
The learned counsel further submits that no marks were awarded to the candidates who were in service and gained experience.
Perusal of the award list reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment indicates that marks were awarded for the experience.
The submission is devoid of any force.
16.
The third submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that different selection committees conducted the viva voce examination on different dates in factually incorrect.
A observed earlier, perusal of the record shows that only one Selection Committee interviewed the candidates.
It was only at a later stage when a newly appointed member of respondent No. 2 had participated in the selection along with the original Committee constituted to interview the candidates.
17.
Learned counsel then submitted that the ad hoc employees were not considered in the category of dependents of Ex-servicemen.
Respondent No. 2 sought guidance from respondent No. 1 and was informed that the person working on ad hoc basis against the posts advertised could not be treated as dependents of Ex-servicemen since they had got their independent source of livelihood.
Acting on the advice of respondent No. 1, respondent No. 2 did not treat the candidates working on ad hoc basis against the posts advertised as dependent members of Ex-servicemen.
No fault can be found with the decision taken by respondent No. 2.
The ad hoc employees working against the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers were not dependents of the Ex-servicemen since they had their independent source of livelihood.
18.
Learned counsel for the petitioners also submitted that Mrs. Ritu Sharma, after her marriage ceased to be a dependent member of the Ex-servicemen and could not selected from amongst the reserved category meant for the dependents of Ex-servicemen.
Respondent No. 2 in its affidavit has explained that she was unemployed on the date of submission of her application and on the date of interview and she had no source of income and thus she was selected against the posts reserved for the dependents of Ex-servicemen.
I do not think, on the facts of the instant case, her selection in any manner is vitiated.
19.
No other point was pressed.
20.
Thus, for the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the writ petitions.
The same are dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.