Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J - An order of punishment dated 23rd January, 1988, passed by the respondent No. 1 bank against the petitioner, whereby the petitioner was dismissed from service pursuant to a departmental proceeding held against him, is under challenge in this petition.
2.
A departmental proceeding was instituted against the petitioner by the respondents by communicating the charge-sheet dated 18th June, 1986.
The said charge-sheet contains certain charges on account of alleged irregularities/malpractices allegedly committed by the petitioner while working as Branch Manager, Azadpur and Jahangir Puri branches of the State Bank of India in Delhi.
The charges that were drawn up against the petitioner related to indiscriminate grant of overdrafts, cash credit limits and other malpractices in violation of the laid down instructions of the bank.
The aforesaid inquiry into the charges was conducted by the respondent bank in terms of Rule 50(2)(1) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules.
Upon conclusion of the inquiry, the inquiry officer submitted his report.
The inquiry officer held that the charges drawn against the petitioner are partly proved.
The Chief General Manager, New Delhi who was the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner accepted the findings rendered by the inquiry officer and opined that the penalty of dismissal from service should be imposed on the petitioner.
The Deputy Managing Director, who was the Appointing Authority, before whom the aforesaid records were placed agreed with the findings and passed the order imposing on the petitioner the penalty of dismissal from bank's service.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order the petitioner filed an appeal.
In the said appeal the petitioner submitted that the Deputy Managing Director is incompetent to pass the order of dismissal as he had no power to do so.
Another issue that was raised by the petitioner before the Appellate Authority was that the Deputy Managing Director invoked the provisions of paragraph 19(3) of the SBI (Determination of Terms and Conditions of Service) Order, 1979 for the purpose of continuation of disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner after he ceased to be in service in February, 1988.
It was submitted that any order under the said provision has to be passed by an authority not below the rank of Managing Director.
It was also submitted that the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner should be treated as closed after he ceased to be in service in February, 1988.
3.
The Appellate Authority considered all the aforesaid pleas which were raised in the appeal.
With regard to the first issue that was raised about competency of Deputy Managing Director, who passed the order of dismissal, the Appellate Authority held that in terms of the service rules, the major penalty order in this case was passed by the Deputy Managing Director who was the Appointing Authority for officers in middle management grade scale-III and, therefore, he was empowered to impose a penalty on the petitioner.
With regard to the second contention, it was held that the Deputy Managing Director had invoked the provisions of paragraph 19(3) of the State Bank of India (Determination of Terms and Conditions of Service) Order, 1979 on 20th January, 1988 for the purpose of continuing the disciplinary proceeding after the petitioner ceased to be in bank's service with effect from 1st February, 1988.
It was also held that the aforesaid approval was given in January, 1988 when the post of Managing Director of the Bank was vacant and in the absence of the Managing Director, the Deputy Managing Director was the Competent Authority to invoke the provisions of paragraph 19(3) of the State Bank of India (DTCS) Order and in terms of the instructions in force.
Both the aforesaid contentions were, accordingly rejected.
On the other contentions of the petitioner that the Disciplinary Authority as also the Appointing Authority acted on the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission in imposing the penalty of dismissal on the petitioner without independent application of mind, the Appellate Authority held that the Disciplinary Authority has furnished cogent and relevant reasons in support of his recommendation for imposing the penalty of dismissal of the petitioner and that the Appointing Authority upon independent application of mind to all the facts and evidence on record accepted the findings/views of the Disciplinary Authority and passed the order of dismissal.
It was also held that the penalty of dismissal inflicted on the petitioner was called for and was necessary in view of the fact that the petitioner committed serious irregularities in sanctioning advances and overdrafts in violation of the laid down instructions resulting in substantial financial loss to the bank and, therefore, the penalty imposed is commensurate with the offence.
The Managing Director who was the Appellate Authority in terms of the aforesaid SBI (DTCS) Order, rejected the appeal and a review filed by the petitioner was also dismissed by the reviewing authority.
Consequently, the present petition is filed challenging the aforesaid orders.
4.
Counsel appearing for the petitioner confined himself to the order of punishment imposed upon the petitioner.
He submitted that in the facts and circumstances, the penalty of dismissal from service imposed on the petitioner in the present case is too harsh.
In support of the said contention Counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the comments of the Disciplinary Authority/Chief General Manager repeatedly recommending to the vigilance head of the bank that the imposition of extreme penalty of dismissal on petitioner was not justified.
Specific reliance was placed on letter dated 22nd January, 1988 wherein it was stated that the Disciplinary Authority had advised change in the penalty as deterrent punishment of dismissal in the case would not only be too harsh but also may prove out to be counter-productive and may lead to a situation of frustration for others as well in an industry like banking which is mainly dealing with finance.
It was submitted that there are repeated recommendations of the aforesaid nature by the Disciplinary Authority which, however, was not accepted due to the advice given by the Central Vigilance Commission and, therefore, the order passed by the Appointing Authority is influenced by extraneous factors and was passed at the behest of a third party and not based on and passed on proper appreciation of the evidence on record.
5.
The aforesaid contention of the Counsel appearing for the petitioner was, however, refuted by the Counsel appearing for the respondents who has drawn our attention to the reasoning recorded by the Disciplinary Authority.
Reference was also made to the fact that under the Rules, opinion of the Central Vigilance Commission was required to be sought for.
It was submitted that same was also considered along with the other records by the Competent Authority and on consideration of all the factors the impugned order was passed.
At one stage it was submitted by the Counsel appearing for the petitioner that in fact no loss is caused to the bank which is apparent and established from the communication dated 2nd January, 1988.
The said submission is, however, refuted by the respondents by filing an affidavit on 5th September, 2005 wherein it is stated that an estimated amount of loss of Rs. 511 lacs as on July, 2005 was suffered by the bank.
Details of the estimated amount of loss is also placed on record through Annexure A Therefore, in the light of the aforesaid submissions of the Counsel appearing for the parties we may proceed to dispose of this writ petition.
6.
Rule 20B of the Service Rules of the petitioner, which is relevant for the purpose of deciding this matter, provides as follows :  "In case disciplinary proceedings under these rules have been initiated against an employee before he ceases to be in the Bank's service by the operation of, or by virtue of any of these rules, the disciplinary proceedings may, at the discretion of the Managing Director, be continued and concluded by the authority by which the proceedings were initiated in the manner provided for in these rules as if the employee continues to be in service, so, however, that he shall be deemed to be in service only for the purpose of the continuance and conclusion of such proceedings."
7.
A bare reading of the said provision would establish that a disciplinary proceeding can be continued at the discretion of the Managing Director and concluded by the authority by whom the proceedings were initiated even after the employee reaches the age of superannuation, provided the aforesaid disciplinary proceeding was initiated against the employee before he ceases to be in the bank's service.
But such continuation in service shall be deemed only for the purpose of continuation and conclusion of the said departmental proceeding.
Therefore, although the petitioner reached the age of superannuation yet an effective order was passed by the respondents continuing the departmental proceeding and an order to the effect that he shall continue to be in service for the purpose of continuation and conclusion of the said proceeding was passed.
As the said order was passed by the respondent bank in terms of the powers vested for continuation and conclusion of the departmental proceeding by the Competent Authority, the same is legal, valid and justified.
The main contention that was made before us by the Counsel appearing for the petitioner is that in view of the earlier recommendation made by the disciplinary Authority for taking a lenient view in the matter the subsequent change in the stand by the Disciplinary Authority was uncalled for and unjustified.
It is true that at different stages of the proceeding the Disciplinary Authority made such recommendations that extreme penalty may not be imposed upon the petitioner but at the same time the said authority has also held at the time of making such recommendation that there is no denial of the fact that the irregularities committed by the petitioner are of serious nature.
Taking an overall view of the matter, the Disciplinary Authority thereafter prepared a note giving his comments to the Deputy Managing Director who is the Appointing Authority of the petitioner.
In that note containing his recommendations he held the petitioner guilty of the charges as mentioned therein, both in respect of the alleged irregularities in the accounts of Azadpur Branch as also in respect of Jahangirpuri Branch.
The Chief General Manager considered the evidence and spelt out the irregularities committed in respect of the accounts in the aforesaid branches and thereafter it was observed that the petitioner paid scant attention to the bank's laid down instructions and had thrown all the norms of banking to winds with a view to accommodating various borrowers thus jeopardising the bank's interest.
The Disciplinary Authority also held that having regard to the gravity of the charges.
proved against the petitioner and upon consideration of all the aspects of the case, the petitioner be dismissed from bank's service.
The Central Vigilance Commission has also given their advice almost to the similar effect to the Deputy Managing Director, who was the Appointing Authority of the petitioner.
In his order he has stated that he has gone through the records of the proceeding and that on independent examination of the documents and evidence adduced during the inquiry proceeding he was of the opinion that the reasoning and findings of the Disciplinary Authority have to be concurred to the extent that the majority of the charges levelled against the petitioner have been successfully established.
He also held that considering the serious nature of the offences and the consequential risk of financial loss to which the bank has been exposed, the petitioner be dismissed from service of the bank.
The affidavit filed by the respondents also clearly establishes that even as of now the bank has not been able to recover the loss suffered by it due to the aforesaid irregularities committed by the petitioner.
This Court cannot reappreciate the evidence on record in order to come to a different conclusion that what is arrived at by the Disciplinary Authority, Appointing Authority as also by the Appellate Authority and the Reviewing Authority.
When the charges drawn against the petitioner are held and found to be partly proved and since it was also found that the offences which are proved are of serious nature and that there has been financial loss to the bank, the action of the respondents in dismissing the petitioner from service cannot be said to be too harsh and not commensurate with the offences alleged.
The reviewing authority which has passed the order dated 27th September, 2001 recorded the following finding :  "The proven allegations, to mention a few, speak that the petitioner had opened current accounts in favour of various persons, granted clean overdraft facilities to them on the date of the opening of such accounts without verifying their antecedents and without studying the conduct of their accounts in gross violation of RBI/Bank instructions.
Those loans had become doubtful of recovery.
He issued term deposit receipts/special term deposit receipts by debit to the accounts of the depositors although funds were not available in these accounts.
He accumulated (accommodated ?)
various account holders by granting them overdraft beyond the available drawing powers and in some cases even in excess of the face value of the securities.....
There was no plausible reason as to why he flouted the rule and regulations of the bank with a view to enable third parties to derive benefits detrimental to and at the cost of Bank's interest."
8.
In the case of Disciplinary Authority v. Nikunja, 1996(2) SCT 760 : (1996)9 SCC 69, it was held as under :  "In the case of a Bank for that matter in the case of any other organization every officer/employee is supposed to act within the limits of his authority.
If each officer/employee is allowed to act beyond his authority, the discipline of the organization/bank will disappear; the functioning of the Bank chaotic and unmanageable.
Each officer of the Bank cannot be allowed to carve out his own little empire wherein he dispenses favours, and largesse......
The very action of acting beyond authority ... is by itself a misconduct ... acting beyond one's authority is by itself a breach of Regulation 31.
It constitutes misconduct within the meaning of Regulation 24.
No further proof of loss is really necessary."
9.
In Union Bank of India v. Vishwa Mohan, 1998(2) SCT 382 : IV (1998) SLT 267 : AIR 1998 SC 2311, the Supreme Court has held as follows :  "It needs to be emphasised that in the banking business absolute devotion, diligence, integrity and non est (honesty ?)
needs to be preserved by every bank employee and in particular the bank officer.
If this is not observed the confidence of the public/depositor would be impaired."
10.
It is held thus by the Supreme Court in a recent decision in Regional Manager v. Hotilal, 2003(1) SCT 941 : 2003 II AD (SC) 483 : 11(2003) SLT I 12 : AIR 2003 SC 1462 :  "If the charged employee holds a position of trust where honesty and integrity are inbuilt requirements of functioning, it would not be proper to deal with matter leniently.
Misconduct in such cases has to be dealt with iron hands.
Where the person deals with public money or is engaged in financial transactions acts in a fiduciary capacity, the highest degree of integrity and trustworthiness is a must and unexceptionable."
11.
We may also appropriately refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Damoh Panna v. Munna Lal, 2005(1) SCT 477 : I (2005) SLT 146 : (2005)1 LLJ 730, wherein it was held thus :  "The common thread running through in all these decision is that the Court should not interfere with the administrator's decision unless it was illogical or suffers from procedural impropriety or was shocking to the conscience of the Court, in the sense that it was in defiance of logic or moral standards."
12.
In BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, 1996(1) SCT 617 : AIR 1996 SC 484, the Supreme Court opined as under :  "They are invested with the discretion to impose appropriate punishment keeping in view the magnitude or gravity of the misconduct.
The High Court/Tribunal while exercising the power of judicial review cannot normally substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some other penalty.
If the punishment imposed by the Disciplinary Authority or the Appellate Authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal.
It would appropriately mould a relief."
13.
In that view of the matter, we find no reason to interfere with the conscious and considered decision taken by the respondents as also by the appellate and reviewing authorities.
The petition is misconceived and is dismissed accordingly.
Rule is discharged.
Petition dismissed.