SK Kar, J - The petitioner, N Surjit Singh, approaches this Court for issuance of an appropriate writ invoking power of the Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India contending, briefly as follows :  2.
The petitioner was appointed as full fledged Headmaster in the Govt. High School in the year, 1980.
At that time the Headmaster and AI of Schools were enjoying the same scale and status and it was recorded in the Service Book that service of the writ petitioner should be counted notionally as Headmaster of High School w.e.f.
10.7.75 till 311090.
That the petitioner was discriminated by the authority and had to file writ petition, registered as CR No. 1375 of 1992, which was disposed of on 6.11.92 with the observation that the case of the petitioners should be considered along with others for promotion to the post of Inspector of Schools; but fact remains that the petitioner was not promoted till 1999 in spite of his outstanding performance.
However, in the year 1999 he was appointed as Zonal Education Officer (ZEO)/Joint Director of Education on look after basis vide order issued on 18199.
Petitioner started working since then as Z.E.O./Joint Director of Education discharging his duties satisfactorily.
He continued to work as such being transferred to different places either in the capacity of ZEO or Joint Director and finally the appointment to such post was regularised vide order dated 2422004 issued by the Commissioner of Education (S) Govt. of Manipur giving effect retrospectively from 4302.
3.
That, it cannot be disputed that the petitioner was working as ZEO/Joint Director of Education without any break since 18.1.89 till date of petition and this fact was evident vide letter of the Director of Education (S) Govt. of Manipur issued on 22.5.03.
But the order dated 2422004 has improperly stated that his regularisation to the aforesaid post will be effective only from 4302 instead of 1811989 without mentioning any reason or opinion given/action taken by the authority.
That the law is well settled as per Hon'ble Apex Court that if the initial appointment is made by following the procedure laid down by Rules and appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly, till regularisation of his service in accordance with rules, the period of officiating service will have to the counted.
That the petitioner has only 5 years service before he retires and the act of not counting his previous service is going to deprive him of scope of promotion to the next higher post which is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
That he has been superseded by the some of the juniors.
That the case of the petitioner may be treated as covered case in view of the order passed by this Court in several other writ petitions where petitioners were similarly situated along with the present writ petitioner.
4.
The respondents in their counter affidavit contended that the writ petitioner was serving as ZEO/Joint Director on in-charge basis on payment of duty allowance because of exigency of service in various capacities prior to regular appointment as Joint Director/ZEO on the basis of order dated 22404 giving retrospective effect from 4302 and that he was so working on look after/in-charge basis and such service rendered by the petitioner were purely stop-gap arrangement and the period of such service cannot be counted/converted into period of regular service.
That, in-charge or look after charges does not confer any right for regularisation and accordingly there is no merit in this writ petition.
5.
I have heard both sides.
6.
Relying upon the decisions rendered in 1996(4) Supreme 696 (State of Haryana v. Balwant Singh) and the decision of the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in AIR 1990 SC 1607, the learned counsel for the writ petitioner submitted that seniority of the candidates has to be counted from the date on which they joined service and started discharging duties of the post to which they came to be appointed.
That if initial appointment is not made by following the procedures laid down by the Rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service' in accordance with the Rules, the period of officiating service will be counted for the purpose of seniority.
7.
The learned Government Advocate has referred to AIR 2001 SC 1792 wherein it was held as follows :  "It is too well settled, that the seniority of an employee in a cadre has to be determined in accordance with the Rules if such Rules provided for the same.
But, if such Rules do not make any provision or do not fix the criteria for determination of seniority of the employees in a cadre then the same could be determined on the principles enunciated by the Constitution Bench decision in the Direct Recruits Engineering Officers' case.
(AIR 1990 SC 1607) " Therefore, I find that both sides relied on the same principles of law.
The only question to be decided is whether the petitioner rendered uninterrupted service from the date of his initial appointment on in-charge basis.
In his rejoinder, the petitioner has enclosed a letter by the Director of Education(s), Govt. of Manipur addressed to the Dy.
Secretary Education(S) on the subject matter of period of service rendered by the petitioner as ZEO/Joint Director of Education (S) stating that he rendered the service without any break since January, 1999 till date of the letter issued on 2252003.
Therefore, there is no factual dispute that the service of the petitioner continued in the same post where he started working on in-charge basis since 1811989 till his confirmation/regularisation (Annexure P/5).
Nothing has been placed before this Court to say that the decision of the Apex Court rendered in AIR 1990 SC 1607 has undergone any change in the meaning.
The law was rendered by the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court, I quote.
(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to Rule his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above Rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to Rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiating in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the Rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularistion of his service in accordance with the Rules, the period of officiating service will be counted."
Therefore, I find that the case of the petitioner is covered by the aforesaid finding of the Hon'ble Apex Court and accordingly the petition succeeds.
It is hereby directed that the respondents will regularise the ad hoc/in-charge/look after basis service of the petitioner as ZEO/Joint Director on and from the date of his initial appointment, i.e. 1811999 and the order passed by the Govt. on 2422004 (Annexure-A/6) will stand accordingly modified.
Petition allowed.