MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity, `the Code') is directed against the order dated 7.6.1991 passed by Sub Judge Ist Class, Rewari.
The matter was entrusted to the Civil Judge in pursuance of order dated 10.9.1990 passed by a Single Bench of this Court wherein application under Order 21 Rule 12 of the Code was filed for execution of the order dated 26111997.
The parties were directed to appear before the Civil Judge on 24.9.1990.
The Civil Judge was to execute the order dated 26.11.1987 as directed by this Court which reads as under :-  "Counsel for the management states that the management has no objection to make the payment for the period April, 1983 onwards provided the State Government makes payment of its share of 95%.
In the written statement it is admitted that the petitioners were adjusted at the direction of the State Government.
In these circumstances, there is no reasonable explanation as to why the petitioners were not entitled to the pay for the period April, 1983, onwards.
The State Government is, therefore, directed to make the payment of its share of 95% within three months.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly."
(emphasis added) 2.
It is pertinent to mention that for compliance of the aforementioned order of the Division Bench, the petitioners have filed C.O.C.P.
No. 176 of 1988 which came up for consideration before this Court on 2381988 and the same was dismissed with the following observations :-  "It is further to be noted that in order passed by the Division Bench on November 26, 1987, produced above, what was directed was that there was no objection to the payment being made for the period April, 1983 onwards.
Till when was the payment to be made was not indicated.
It stands to reason that once there is disaffiliation of the College, implying stoppage of grant- in- aid, there is no reason for the State to incur any liability to pay salary to the staff of the disaffiliated College."
3.
The Civil Judge relying upon the observations made by the Contempt Bench has concluded that no case is made out for grant of arrears of salary after 151984 to 6101986 to petitioner No. 1 and upto November, 1987 to petitioner No. 2 because the College was disaffiliated after 151984 and no grant-in-aid of 95% had been given.
The order passed by the learned Civil Judge reads as under :-  "It is not in dispute that the 95% of the salary, from 141983 to 3041984, till the period this college remained affiliated, has been paid and acknowledged by the petitioners.
Their grouse is that they are entitled to get the salary till the period they were not absorbed, that is up to 1986/87, as per the orders of the Division Bench dtd 26.11.1987.
Perhaps this approach of the petitioners is not correct and legal.
They (?
sic) lordship Mr. AP Chaudhary observed in very clear words that "Till when was the payment to be made was not indicated.
It stands to reason once there is disaffiliation of the College implying stoppage of grant-in-aid, there is no reason for the State to incur any liability to pay salary to the Staff to the dis-affiliated College."
(page 5 of the judgment of 23 August, 1988).
It was further observed that the respondent No. 1 will pay 95% of the amount due to the petitioners for the period they were on duty i.e. from 1483 to 3131984, when the college was disaffiliated.
This view of their lordship appears quite justify and plausible.
If the College did not remain affiliated with the University and no grant was given to it, then their appears to logic as to why the State should be burdened to pay the salary to the petitioners, after this period and till their absorption (?
sic).
However, if the petitioners are aggrieved, then they are at liberty, to move in the Hon'ble High Court to get the necessary clarification of this order, which in my opinion does not suffer from any ambiguity."
4.
Mr. OP Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners had argued that the executing Court has committed a grave error in law because the Division Bench had directed that the petitioners were entitled to pay for the period from April, 1983 onwards.
This direction was issued on the statement made by the learned counsel for the management who expressed no objection for the payment of salary from April, 1983 onwards provided the State Government makes payment of its share of 95%.
As the State Government was bound, according to the learned counsel, the whole salary of both the petitioners upto 6101986 and November, 1987 respectively was required to be paid to the petitioner.
5.
Mr. NK Joshi, learned State counsel has argued that once the College is disaffiliated there was no question of giving grant-in-aid to the extent of 95% as there is specific bar under the rules concerning grant-in-aid to disaffiliated colleges.
Therefore, the expression `onwards' has to be construed to mean that payment of salary was to be made till the affiliation and the grant-in-aid was made available.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel and perusing the record, I am of the considered opinion that the view taken by the learned Civil Judge is consistent with the well known principles applicable to the execution of decrees.
The terms of the decree make it absolutely clear that the counsel for the management had made a statement before the Division Bench that the management would have no objection to make the payment for the period April, 1993 onwards.
It was tampered with the condition that the State Government must make payment of its share of 95%.
The State Government has made available the grant-in-aid from April, 1983 to 151984 because thereafter the college was disaffiliated and no grant-in-aid was made available.
This Court in contempt petition also took the view that once there is disaffiliation of the College, then there would be no liability on the State to pay salary to the staff of disaffiliated college.
Therefore, I do not find any violation of the principles for execution of the decree and the Civil Judge has rightly observed that if any further clarification is required, the petitioners could move the High Court.
Therefore, there is no merit in this revision petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Revision dismissed.