MY Eqbal, J - The petitioner, an association of engineers working in the Jharkhand State Electricity Board, has prayed for issuance of writ of Mandamus restraining the Respondents from appointing the retired persons and also taking the services of engineers from other organisations on deputation and posting them in the higher post without considering legitimate claim of the engineers serving in the Board and further for quashing the order taking Respondent No. 4 on deputation from CMPDI  2.
The Respondent-Jharkhand State Electricity Board came into existence in March, 2001 and started functioning within the territorial jurisdiction of the State of Jharkhand.
All the members of the Petitioner Association are posted in different posts in the Respondent-Board within the State of Jharkhand, although all were employees of undivided Bihar State Electricity Board.
3.
It appears that the Respondents have taken decision for appointment of retired persons on contractual basis in different categories and for that purpose a general advertisement was published in the Newspaper "Hindustan" on 24-7-2001.
Immediately after knowing the decision of the Board, Petitioner filed representation and sent delegates to the authorities of the Board.
It is stated that officers of the Petitioner-Association have been waiting for their promotion to higher post since long and most of the Electrical Executive Engineers of the Petitioner-Association deserve promotion on the post of Electrical Superintending Engineer.
It is stated that 18 posts of Electrical Superintending Engineers are lying vacant in only GTO Cadre of the Board.
Despite serious objection and representation made by members of the Petitioner-Association, Respondent Jharkhand State Electricity Board appointed one Shri PK Singh, Superintending Engineer (Civil) CMPDI Ltd. on deputation in the Board without considering the fact that so many Executive Engineers (Civil) have been working on the same post since 1989 and they deserve the post of Superintending Engineer (Civil).
Respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3, namely, Jharkhand State Electricity Board, Head Quarter, the Secretary and the Chairman of the Jharkhand State Electricity Board filed Counter-Affidavit justifying the action by stating that the Board is empowered u/S 15 of the Electricity Supply Act to appoint officers and employees to enable the Board to carry out its function.
It is further stated that as the division of cadre of employees have not been finalised between Bihar State Electricity Board and Jharkhand State Electricity Board, therefore, Jharkhand State Electricity Board has not framed its own regulation rather following the regulation framed by the Bihar State Electricity Board.
It is stated that as a temporary measure and meet the exigencies the Board has decided to give contractual employment to the retired employees on deputation from other undertakings.
The Respondent Board also justified deputation of Respondent No. 4, Shri PK Singh, an employee of CMPDI, Ranchi.
4.
The writ application was for the first time placed for admission on 20-8-2001 and notices were issued to the Respondents including Respondent No. 4 when the matter was again taken up on 23-1-2002 this Court passed following order :-  "Heard in part.
One of the question asked to Mr. V Shivnath, the Counsel for the Respondent No. 4 Shri PK Singh, S.E.
(Civil) as to how the Board could come to know of the name of Respondent No. 4 in absence of any advertisement or in absence of any letter given to CMPDI prior to 28th May, 2001.
Mr. Shivnath, the Counsel submitted that the Respondent No. 4, Shri PK Singh asked the CMPDI authorities to give him permission to go on deputation in the Jharkhand State Electricity Board.
However, he has failed to show any document to suggest that any letter was issued prior to 28th May, 2001 by the Board to the CMPDI calling for names of any employee/officer for appointment, on deputation.
Mr. VP Singh, Learned Counsel for the Board is also not in a position for the present to state as to how the Board could come to know the name of Respondent No. 4, Shri PK Singh for his appointment, on deputation.
When Mr. Shivnath, Learned Counsel for the Respondent No. 4 was confronted with the query as to how the Board could come to know of his name for appointment on deputation, he merely referred to Paragraph Nos. 7 and 8 to his counter affidavit.
However, he opposes the Writ Petition on one of the grounds that the Petitioner is not a Registered Association and as such the application is not maintainable at the instance of the Petitioner.
In this connection he also placed reliance on the decision of the Patna High Court, reported in 1995(1) All PLR 51.
It is further stated that certain retired persons were also appointed in the Board prior to filing of the Writ Petition, but they have not been impleaded as party Respondents.
When the Court asked as to which is the deputation order of Respondent No. 4 the counsel referred the letter, contained in Ref : 2049 dated 30th July, 2001 (Annexure-5) and office order No. 160/EB dated 23rd August, 2001 (Annexure-9) Having heard the parties, the Court desires to look into the original records relating to deputation of Respondent No. 4 and others, if any made.
The Counsel for the J.S.E.B is directed to make available the original records relating to deputation of Respondent No. 4 and others, on the next date.
Place the case, under the heading "For Orders" on 29th January, 2002."
5.
Mrs. Ritu Kumar, Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner firstly draw my attention to the relevant provisions of Bihar State Electricity Service Regulation, 1976 and Bihar State Electrical Engineers (General) Cadre Rules, 1976 and submitted that under the Regulation the Board can re-employ the officers after superannuation in exceptional circumstances and that too for maximum period of two years.
Learned Counsel submitted that the Board has advertised for re-employment on the post of Assistant Engineer, Chief Engineer which are cadre post and deputation on such post is not permissible without considering the case of the officers who deserve promotion to the higher post.
Learned Counsel further submitted that Respondent No. 4 has been appointed on deputation only because he is near and dear person of the Minister which is evident from the fact that neither there was any occasion to see the efficiency of Respondent No. 4 nor the Board ever advertised for such appointment on deputation.
6.
Mr. VP Singh, Learned Counsel for the Respondent-Board tried to justify the action of the Board by submitting that electricity is an essential service and because of shortage of staff in the Board a decision was taken to give contractual employment to the retired employees.
However, neither in the counter-affidavit Respondent-Board has justified the deputation of Respondent No. 4 nor Mr. Singh has urged any point to justify the action of the Board.
7.
As noticed above, this Court by order dated 23-1-2002 directed the Board to produce the original record relating to deputation of Respondent No. 4 in the post of S.E.
(Civil).
Pursuant to that order Respondent Board has produced before this Court the original record.
8.
First of all, I will take up the case of Respondent No. 4 to find out whether because of urgency of the situation and to meet exigencies, the Board has taken the services of Respondent No. 4 on deputation.
From perusal of record it appears that the matter of deputation of Respondent No. 4 in the service of the Board was originated only because of the letter dated 24-4-2001 written by Sri Lal Chand Mahto, Energy Minister, Govt. of Jharkhand.
The letter reads as under :  (Vernacular matter omitted....Ed.) 9.
It transpires from the record that before the aforesaid letter there was no proposal at all for taking the services of Respondent No. 4 on deputation in the Board.
On the basis of the aforesaid letter, a note was put to the Chairman who in his turn enquired about the sanctioned post of Superintending Engineer in the Board.
It was then pointed out that the sanctioned post of Superintending Engineer in BSE Board was 11 besides a post of Chief Engineer (Civil) and Additional Chief Engineer (Civil) in the Board Headquarter.
When the proposal was placed before the member of the Board, he put the following notes in the file on 2-5-2001 after discussing with the Secretary, JSE Board.
"Discussed.
I think we should wait for the transfer of officer from BSED, Patna and also this post of S.E.
(Civil) will be filled up accordingly thereafter".
Sd/- 2-5-2001 10.
In spite of the aforesaid note of the member and after discussion with the Secretary, JSE Board, one Mr. KN Choudhary, OSD of Chairman put a note that since JSE Board (Headquarter) does not have any Superintending Engineer (Civil) and lot of Civil Works are required to be done therefore services of Respondent No. 4, Shri PK Singh on deputation may be taken.
The file was again placed before the Secretary, JSE Board and the member of the Board and again he gave the following notes in the file :  "We have already decided to take retired officers of BSEB/JSEB as such let us wait for the applicants."
= Sd/- 24-7-2001 11.
Curiously enough, although the issue regarding taking of service of Shri PK Singh was under consideration and the member of the Board was of the view that it should wait for some time but it was only because of the letter of the Minister, the Officer started making correspondence with CMPDI Ltd for taking service of Respondent No. 4 on deputation.
Accordingly by letter dated 30-7-2001 Respondent-Board informed the General Manager, CMPDI that services of Respondent No. 4 has been taken on deputation on the post of Superintending Engineer (Civil).
It is worth to mention here that before the aforesaid letter was issued, member of the Petitioner-Association submitted protest petition and representation against the decision of the Board to appoint retired officers and also taking services of Shri PK Singh on deputation.
More interesting part is that on 28-7-2001 member of the Board again put a note to the Secretary which reads as under :  "I have already written in the margin simply for perusal of Chairman.
This may be shown before any order is issued as per instruction of Chairman assure.
Sd/- 28-7-2001 12.
The member of the Board put a note in the margin regarding representation filed by the Civil Engineers of the JSE Board and request was made to the Secretary to place the file for perusal to the Chairman.
13.
As noticed above, the Respondent-Board issued memo No. 2046 dated 30-7- 2001 taking the services of Shri PK Singh on deputation on the post of S.E.
(Civil).
However, when the Chairman and the Secretary of the Respondent-Board subsequently realised their difficulties in posting Shri PK Singh on the post of S.E.
(Civil) because of the representation of the Engineers of the Board, a modified letter was issued on the same day vide memo No. 2049 dated 30-7-2001 taking his services on deputation on the post of OSD.
(Civil).
The letter reads as under :-  "To  The General Manager (P & A)  AMPDI (Hqr)  Kanke Road, Ranchi Sub.
: Deputation of Shri PK Singh, SE (Civil), Environment Dept., CMPDI in JSEB.
Ref : This Office letter No. 2046 dt. 30-7-2001.
Sir, In partial modification to this office letter under reference this is to inform you that Shri PK Singh, S.E.
(Civil) will work as OSD.
(Civil) in Jharkhand State Electricity Board on deputation from CMPDI as per terms and conditions stated in letter under reference.
Thanking you, Yours faithfully, Sd/-  (RC Prasad) Secretary - 30-7-2001.
Copy forwarded to PS to Chairman/Member T/F/OSD to Chairman/DDA JSEB Ranchi for information.
Sd/- (R.C. Prasad) Secretary-30-7-2001.
14.
The members of the Petitioner-Association having no alternative filed the instant writ application challenging the advertisement issued by the Board for appointment of retired Engineers and also for taking the services of Shri PK Singh on deputation.
On 29-8-2001 this Court allowed time to the Counsel appearing for the Board to file Counter-Affidavit and it was ordered that any appointment made shall be subject to the decision of the case.
It appears that although matter was subjudice the Board issued another office order dated 23-8-2001 under the signature of Joint Secretary whereby Respondent No. 4 Shri PK Singh was made incharge of all the works pertaining to Civil Engineering, JSE Board (headquarter) and all the works of proposed Board's Headquarter building.
15.
As discussed above, the Respondent JSE Board simply stated in the Counter-Affidavit that there is shortage of staff in the JSE Board because of superannuation of some of the employees and new appointments and division of cadre will take long time and, therefore, as temporary measure decision has been taken in the High Level Meeting to give temporary contractual employment to the retired employees.
Nothing has been stated by the Board in the Counter-Affidavit justifying the decision of the Board for taking services of Respondent No. 4 on deputation.
It is, therefore, clear that it was because of the wish of the Minister to take services of Respondent No. 4 in the JSE Board on deputation the file was moved and despite notes of disagreement by the members of the Board, the Chairman in order to fulfil the wish and the desire of the Minister, issued letter taking the service of Respondent No. 4 on deputation.
16.
The aforesaid conclusion arrived at by me has further got strength from the fact that Respondent No. 4 by filing a very detailed Counter-Affidavit vehemently opposed the writ application and claimed that he should continue on deputation as Civil Engineer incharge of the work of JSE Board.
Mr. V Shivnath, Learned Counsel appearing for Respondent No. 4 also argued the case of his client, and tried to impress the Court that Respondent No. 4 is only competent and suitable person to continue as overall incharge of the Civil Wing of the Board and no one in the service of the Board is competent for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer.
17.
It is well settled that the Constitutional Court exercise their power of judicial review with constraint to ensure the authorities on whom the power is entrusted under the Rule of law to discharge their power truly, objectively, expeditiously within the four corners of the Rules and Regulations.
It has not been disputed by the Board that many officers of the Board have been posted on the same post for the last so many years and they deserve promotion to the next higher post but when certain posts became vacant due to retirement of some of the officers Respondents instead of filling up the posts in accordance with the Rules and Regulations, took a decision to make appointment of retired persons on the vacant posts.
The Act and the Regulation does not empower the Board to appoint persons on deputation from other departments against the regular posts even on contractual basis and that too by depriving the competent Officers of the Board from getting those posts.
18.
Taking into consideration the entire facts of the case and discussion made herein above, I am of the definite view that the deputation of Respondent No. 4 in the service of the Board is wholly illegal, arbitrary, mala fide and on extraneous consideration.
Such deputation cannot be sustained in law and further held that action of the Board to appoint retired persons of the Board on contractual basis without first considering the case of the Officers presently working in the Board for those posts is also bad in law.
19.
For the reasons aforesaid, this Writ Application is allowed and the appointment of Respondent No. 4 on deputation and other retired Officers of the Board on contractual basis are quashed.
However, taking into consideration that the electricity is an essential service and the work of the Board may not suffer because of discontinuation of these officers, I direct that Respondent No. 4 and other retired officers so appointed on contractual basis shall continue for three months and they shall cease to be in service either on contractual basis or on deputation by the end of 30th June, 2002.
In the meantime, Respondent-Board is directed to re-start the process for filling up the vacant posts of Superintending Engineer and other posts by promotion and/or by appointment in accordance with the Rules and Regulations and complete the process within three months and latest by 30th June, 2002.
Application allowed.