RL Anand, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and with his assistance have gone through the records.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  Jai Ram has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus may be issued quashing the order dated 822002 vide which the claim of the petitioner for regularisation of his services on the post to tractor driver has been rejected.
The petitioner has further made a prayer that a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise his services on the post of tractor driver as per the government instructions dated 1151994 with effect from 31.3.1993 with all consequential benefits such as seniority, arrears of pay etc. 3.
The case set up by the petitioner, in short, is that he worked as tractor driver for several years; though he did not have the requisite qualification for the post of a tractor driver but on account of his experience for the said post he was entitled to be regularised as a tractor driver.
In support of this contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon the order of the Labour court passed in an application filed under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Gujarat Agricultural University v. Rathod Labhu Bechar and others, 2001(2) SCT 394 (SC) : (2001) 3 Supreme Court Cases 574 and our attention has been invited to para No. 27 of the judgment, which is reproduced as under :-  "In the light of the aforesaid decisions we now proceed to examine the proposed scheme.
Under clause 1 it is proposed that all daily-wage workers, whether skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled who have completed 10 years or more of continuous service with a minimum of 240 days in each calendar year as on 31.12.1999 are to be regularised and be put in the time- scale of pay applicable to the corresponding lowest grade in the University.
However, the said regularisation is subject to some conditions.
Under clause 1 (a) such employees are eligible only if they possess the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of their appointment.
A strong objection has been raised to this, eligibility clause.
The submission is, those working for a period 10 or more years without any complaint is by itself a sufficient requisite qualification and any other rider on the facts of this case would prejudice these workers.
We find merit in this submission.
We have perused the qualifications referred in the aforesaid recruitment rules according to which, qualification for a peon is that he should study up to 8th standard, for operator-cum-mechanic, he should have diploma in Mechanic having sufficient knowledge of vehicle repairing, experience in automobiles or tractor dealers' workshop for two years, for chowkidar, he must be literate and have good physique.
Literate is not defined.
For Plumber, to have ITI Certificate."
We have considered the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner was not in a position to answer the query that at any point of time the petitioner was promoted or appointed on the post of tractor driver.
On the contrary, the answer to the query was that the petitioner was actually working as Coolie, which is a Class IV post.
In these circumstances, when the petitioner was never promoted or appointed on the post of tractor driver nor he has requisite qualification, in such a situation, he cannot be regularized on the post of tractor driver.
In the impugned order, the Deputy Commissioner, Ambala while rejecting the case of the petitioner has made the following observations :-  "Hence, keeping in view of the direction dated 392001, passed by the Hon'ble High Court, the case of the petitioner in the light of Govt. instruction dated 31392 and 11594, Hon'ble Labour Court award and representation filed by the petitioner and record of the office of the Municipal Committee, Ambala Sadar were considered fully but the same was unfortunately found not fill for regularisation for the post of Tractor Driver, because the petitioner was never appointed as Collie (Class IV) on daily wages and at present working as unskilled worker (Class IV) in Public Health Department.
The petitioner does not fulfil the educational qualification for the post of Driver.
Not only this, the petitioner also filed a false claim before this office as well as before the Hon'ble High Court for regularization of Tractor Driver.
The financial position of the Municipal Council Ambala Sadar is also very poor.
Hence, keeping in view of the circumstances mentioned above I ordered to file the case, representation of the petitioner for regularization of the Tractor Driver.
However, the Executive Officer, Municipal Council, Ambala Sadar is also directed to peruse the case of the petitioner in the light of the Govt. instruction for regularization for the post of Coolie (Class IV) if applied by the petitioner and found eligible."
4.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was never appointed or promoted on the post of tractor driver, he cannot claim the benefit of regularisation on the said post.
Moreover, in the proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the petitioner even did not produce any appointment letter for his appointment to the post of tractor driver.
The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is distinguishable on facts.
Every case has to be viewed differently keeping in view the duties to be performed by a person.
This Court cannot came to the rescue of person, who did not even possess the requisite qualification for the post of tractor driver.
The duties of a Coolie are totally different from that of a tractor driver.
There is no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.