JS Narang, J - The petitioner joined as Assistant Architect in Haryana Urban Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the HUDA) on 1721989 and thereafter continued in the said service.
The HUDA framed Draft Service Regulations on 17111987 under Section 54 of the HUDA Act 1977 The said draft regulations received approval of the Government on 1781989 but the said regulations were never passed.
As per the petitioner the said regulations were in fact never made applicable.
It is contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the services of the petitioner were therefore governed by the rules known as Haryana Service of Architect Class-I Rules, 1978 (hereafter referred to as the 1978 Rules).
As per rule 7 of 1978 Rules the Assistant Architect is entitled to be promoted to the rank of Architect.
The method of recruitment is that the post of Architect shall be filled in by promotion from amongst the members of Class-II services and it is also provided in the said rule that if no suitable member is available under sub-rule (a) of the Rules, the said post can be filled in by direct recruitment.
For reference the said rule i.e. Rule 7 is reproduced as under :-  "Method or recruitment 7.
Recruitment of the service shall be made :- (a) by promotion from among the members of Classs-II Service; (b) if no suitable member is available under sub-clause (a) above, it shall be made by direct recruitment."
The argument is that if a person is available in the Class-II Service the post shall be filled in by way of promoting the person from the said service.
It is only in the eventuality that if suitable person is not available the method of direct recruitment shall be followed.
It is admitted that as per the above said rule it has been provided that all the posts of Architect shall be filled in by way of promotion and in case no suitable person is available then by direct recruitment.
During the course of arguments this Court had posed 4 queries to the learned Counsel for the respondents and by way of answer, an affidavit of Shri SK Sharma, HCS, presently working as Secretary HUDA Sector 6, Panchkula (Haryana) has been placed on record.
The queries which have been raised are as under :-  "(i) How many posts of Architects are lying vacant since June 28, 1989, to October 13, 1977 ?
(1997 ?).
It may be indicated as to how many posts were vacant in the promotee quota and how many posts were lying in the direct quota ?
(ii) Since when the posts had been segregated in the ratio of 50 : 50 and how many posts in what manner were divided at that time ?
(iii) When was the promotion effected upon the post of Architect inclusive of both i.e. direct recruit and promotee quota ?
(iv) What was the reason for not making any promotion to the post of Architect right from 1989 to 1997 as is contended by the petitioner ?
The answer to the queries read as under :  "(i) In response to the first query posed by the Hon'ble High Court, it is submitted that there were in total four posts of Architects in Haryana Urban Development Authority and out of the said four posts, two had already been filled by way of promotion of the employees and only two posts were lying vacant during the period from 28th of June, 1989 to 13th of October, 1997.
It is pertinent to mention that as per HUDA Service Rules, which were duly approved by the competent authority on 17th of August, 1989, thereby 50% posts of Architects were to be filled up by way of direct recruitment and 50% by way of promotion.
Since two posts had already been filled up by way of promotion under the promotee quota, therefore, the rest of the 50% i.e. 2 posts which were lying vacant fell in the category of direct recruitment quota for all intents and purposes.
It was in this background that the petitioner was pressing hard for bringing the situation back to earlier arrangement of 100% promotion, he had written several letters to Haryana Urban Development Authority dated 9th of May, 1995, 30th May, 1995 and 13th of June 1995, whereby he clearly stated that the old arrangement of 100% promotion be restored and he be promoted.
Copies of the said representations sent by the petitioner in this regard are being annexed herewith as Annexures R1, R2 and R3 respectively.
Thus, the answer to the first query is very clear that the two posts which were lying vacant from 28th of June, 1989 till the 13th October 1997 fell in the category of direct recruit quota.
(ii) That in reply to query No. (ii) posed by Hon'ble High Court, it is stated that in all, four posts were sanctioned by the competent authority.
The first post was created/sanctioned way back in 1977 and three posts were sanctioned in 1980.
These posts for all intents and purposes were treated to have been segregated in the ratio of 50 : 50 w.e.f.
17th of August 1989, when the service regulations framed by HUDA were duly approved by the State Government.
Thus, it is again reiterated for the sake of repetition, that out of total posts, two fell in the quota of direct recruits and two had already been filled up under the promotee quota, by way of promotion.
(iii) That the answer to the third query posted by the Hon'ble High Court is to be effect that since promotee quota had already been filled up, therefore, no promotion/appointment was made qua the other two posts, which fell in the category of direct recruit quota and since the petitioner was pressing hard for resorting to the old arrangement, thus, the matter was under consideration to get the necessary amendment effected in the service Regulations.
It is also stated that under the Rules, five years' experience was required and the said requisite was fulfilled by the petitioner only in 1994, but he could not be promoted since the two posts, which were lying vacant at the said relevant time, fell in the category of direct recruit quota.
Since the matter was under consideration, the Legal Remembrancer, HUDA had opined on 19th of February 1997 that the two posts, which were lying vacant could be segregated in the ratio of 50 : 50 and one post could be given to the promotee quota till the necessary process of resorting to 100% promotion was completed.
It was only after the Legal Remembrancer had given his opinion for the first time on 19th of February 1997 that the senior-most Assistant Architect was considered for promotion in view of the opinion given by the Legal Remembrancer.
Consequently, the promotion of the petitioner being senior-most Assistant Architect in HUDA was made to the post of Architect on 13th of October 1997.
(iv) That the answer to the fourth query raised by the Hon'ble High Court is to the effect that two posts which were lying vacant, clearly fell in the quota of direct recruits, but since the Legal Remembrancer had given the opinion on 19th of February 1997 that one post could be given to the promotee quota, thus, the promotion of petitioner being the senior-most Assistant Architect, was made.
It is also clearly stated that after 1989, it was for the first time that in 1997 the post was filled by way of promotion of the petitioner.
It is also pertinent to mention here that there being an amendment in the Service rules in the year 1999 and the old system has been restored to i.e. 100% posts of Architects are to be filled up under the promotee quota.
Therefore, the petitioner was immediately promoted, when the process of having 100% promotion, was on and after the Legal Remembrancer had given his opinion.
It is abundantly clear that there is no fault, as far as HUDA is concerned, inasmuch as no promotion was made, either in direct recruit quota or promotee quota, right from 17th of August 1989 till 13th of October 1997.
The authorities had only acted upon the information given by the Legal Remembrancer and that too, at the time when the process of resorting to the old procedure of having 100% promotee quota was on."
3.
A perusal of the answers given to the queries has made the matter crystal clear.
Admittedly the petitioner was promoted as Architect on 13101997.
In view of the information received by the respondents from the Legal Remembrancer to the effect that the posts that are available from the date of approval of the said draft rules, would now be divided in the ratio of 50 : 50 and as a result thereof one post again become available for the promotees and it is against this post the petitioner had been promoted to the rank of Architect.
The grievance of the petitioner is that he had become eligible as on 2121994 and the post was available on that date and the petitioner had made the representation that he should be considered against the said post as the draft rules were not applicable and the post was to be filled in from in from amongst the suitable promotees.
4.
The stand of the respondents has been that both these posts belong to the direct recruitees as per the draft rules but in view of the information rendered by the Legal Remembrancer one post became available for promotees.
It is admitted by the respondents that the petitioner has been promoted agasint the said post.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the petitioner has been rightly promoted to the rank of Architect with effect form 13101997 and he is not entitled to be promoted with effect from the date when he was eligible.
5.
I am afraid argument of learned Counsel for the respondents is devoid of any merit.
It has never been the case of the respondents that the petitioner was ever considered and was not found fit or it has ever been the case of the respondents that they did not want to fill up the vacancies for one reason or the other.
However, the plea of the respondents has been that the post of Architects be restricted to the quota of direct recruitees thus no post was availed for the promotees.
In view of the admission on the part of the respondents, I am not required to decide the controversy as to whether both the posts fell to the promotee quota or not.
Suffice it to say that one post fell to the lot of promotee quota against which petitioner has been promoted on 13101997.
6.
In view of the above I am of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to be promoted with effect from the date when he became eligible to be considered for promotion to the post for the first time i.e. 2121994.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential reliefs flowing therefrom except that he shall not be entitled to any arrears of pay with effect from 21121994 upto 13101997.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.