THB Chalapathi, J - This appeal is directed against the decree and judgment of the learned Additional District Judge, Ludhiana in Civil appeal No. 2 of 1994 dated 1061996.
2.
The defendants are the appellants.
The plaintiff respondent filed a suit for declaration that the order of his removal from the post of patwari is illegal and null and void.
According to the plaintiff he has been working as Patwari in the Revenue Department and confirmed as such.
While the plaintiff was posted at village Bhatian, he was involved in a murder case and he was convicted on 18.1.1979 and was sentenced to life imprisonment.
His conviction was upheld by the High Court and by the Supreme Court and he was released from jail on 121990.
Thereafter he applied for issuing of posting order.
Since no posting order was communicated to him, he made a representation on 1861990, whereupon he was informed by a letter dated 361991 that he was removed from service on 761979.
According to the plaintiff, the said order dated 761979 removing him from service is illegal, wrong and null and void.
Therefore, he filed the suit.
3.
The defendants namely the State of Punjab and District Collector, Ludhiana contested the suit contending inter alia that the order of dismissal dated 761979 was communicated to the plaintiff immediately and again on 371980 and the arrears of salary from 111978 to 6.6.1979 have been remitted to the plaintiff and he received the same under his signatures.
The suit is also barred by time and no notice under Section 80 CPC was issued prior to the filing of the suit.
Further when the plaintiff was involved in a murder case and sentenced to life imprisonment, the State is within its power to dismiss him from service on the basis of his conduct that led to his conviction and therefore there was no necessity to issue any chargesheet and to hold departmental inquiry.
4.
On the basis of the pleadings, the learned trial Judge framed appropriate issues and on a consideration of evidence on record, decreed the suit.
The State filed an appeal which was dismissed.
Hence this second appeal.
5.
The facts in this case are not disputed.
The plaintiff while working as Patwari was convicted for an offence under Section 302 Indian Penal Code and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment.
The said conviction and sentence were confirmed by this Court and also by the Apex Court.
After serving the sentence the plaintiff was released from jail on 121990.
But the case of the defendants is that the plaintiff was removed from service by an order dated 761979 on the basis of his conduct that led to his conviction and he has been paid arrears of salary upto the date of his dismissal from service i.e. 6.6.1979 and he received the same under his signatures.
The order of removal of the plaintiff from service was communicated to him twice.
The evidence on record clearly shows that the plaintiff has been paid arrears of salary upto the date of his dismissal from service in the month of July, 1980 and the plaintiff signed the register in taken of the receipt which is marked as Exhibit D-2.
DW-2 clearly deposed that the arrears of salary upto the date of dismissal of the plaintiff have been paid to the plaintiff in July 1980 under the receipt Exhibit D-2.
The dismissal of the plaintiff from service was a result of his conduct which led to his conviction on a charge under Section 302 IPC  6.
It is to be noted that the dismissal from service is not on the basis of the conviction alone.
It is on the basis of the conduct that led to his conviction under Section 302 IPC In these circumstances no inquiry was necessary to be held.
Therefore, the plaintiff cannot contend that no inquiry has been held.
The proviso to clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution squarely applies to this case, which reads as follows :-  "Provided that this clause shall not apply where a person has been dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge."
When the plaintiff was involved in a murder case and has been convicted and has been convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment and when his conviction has been upheld not only by the High Court but also by the Apex Court, it cannot be said that an inquiry has to be held.
7.
It is also not possible to believe that the plaintiff had no knowledge of the order of dismissal.
The plaintiff has been paid his salary upto the date of his dismissal on 371980.
Though the plaintiff was convicted on 18.1.1979, he was paid his salary upto 6.6.1979.
When he received the arrears of salary without any protest, it must be presumed that he had the knowledge of the order of dismissal even in the year 1979.
The record also shows that the order of dismissal has been communicated in 1979 itself and also when he was paid the arrears of salary in 1980.
Though he was undergoing life imprisonment, he did not make any representation to the State that the order of dismissal from service is bad in law nor did he take any step to have the order of dismissal set aside.
I am, therefore, of the view that both the Courts below erred in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
In my view, the order of dismissal has been passed on valid grounds and it requires no interference by the Courts.
Both the Courts erred in applying the principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway and another v. TR Challappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216 and Union of India another v. Tulsi Ram Patel, AIR 1985 S.C. 1416.
It has been held in Divisional Personnel Officer's case (supra) that the conviction of delinquent employee will not result in automatic dismissal or removal form service.
In the case on hand, an order of removal from service has been passed by the authority competent to dismiss the plaintiff on the basis of the conduct that led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
It is not a case of automatic dismissal from service simply because he has been convicted.
It is further held by the Supreme Court in the decisions referred to above that the disciplinary authority has to take into account the entire conduct of the delinquent employee, the gravity of the misconduct committed by him, the impact which his misconduct is likely to have on the administration and other extenuating circumstances if any present in the case and so on.
8.
It is not a case of trivial offence.
The plaintiff was charged with grievous and grave offence of committing murder which has been upheld by the Supreme Court.
Taking into account the gravity of misconduct committed by the plaintiff, the disciplinary authority imposed the punishment of dismissal from service.
In fact, the order has been passed on 761979 though the plaintiff- respondent has been convicted in January, 1979.
The record shows that the disciplinary authority has taken into account all the circumstances and the conduct of the plaintiff and the gravity of the offence committed by the plaintiff that led to his conviction.
9.
On a consideration of facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that both the Courts below erred in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
The appeal, therefore, deserves to be allowed.
10.
The result is, the appeal succeeds and is, accordingly, allowed.
Judgments of the Courts below are hereby set aside and the suit is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs throughout.
Appeal allowed.