NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing the order dated 29111996 passed by the Government of Punjab, whereby Tarlochan Singh, respondent No. 3, was granted extension in service on the post of Chief Engineer (Drainage) for a period of one year after reaching the age of superannuation (58 years).
2.
The petitioner, Yogesh Kumar, a resident of Chandigarh, has claimed to have filed the present writ petition in public interest so as to challenge the order of the Government on the ground that the said order had been passed on extraneous considerations and against the policy decision of the Government.
The petitioner's case is that respondent No. 3 was working as Chief Engineer (Drainage) in the Public Works Department (Irrigation) in the Government of Punjab.
He served as Chief Engineer for more than 5 years and was due to retire on 30111996 on attaining the age of 58 years.
Orders were issued by the Government of Punjab on 27111996, retiring the aforesaid respondent and four other officers with effect from 30111996 (afternoon).
However, respondent No. 3 approached the then Chief Minister of Punjab and obtained an order on the same day (27111996) in the form of a `Note' (Annexure P-2) for extension of service for one year.
The said order is said to have been issued in contravention of the Government circulars and instructions issued from time to time in connection with re-employment or an extension of service to a Government servant.
As per those instructions and the circulars, a retiring Government employee was not to be re-employed or continued in service except on public ground and in a purely temporary capacity with the sanction of the competent authority.
It was necessary to see that there were overriding grounds of public interest and also that other employees in service were not capable enough to take up the appointment in question.
Re-employment was not to be considered as a reward for outstanding merit.
Extension in service was to be granted by the Administrative Department concerned in consultation with the Department of Personnel and the Finance Department.
A case of extension was required to be referred by the Administrative Department at least two months before the date of superannuation of the employee concerned.
3.
Respondent No. 3, Tarlochan Singh, was granted extension, following the note of the Chief Minister of Punjab, vide order dated 27111996 for a period of one year on the post of Chief Engineer (Drainage).
4.
The petitioner has referred to the circular letter dated 411985, wherein requisite conditions have been laid down for granting extension to a Government employee.
Another circular letter dated 23111990 again made clear the circumstances in which re-employment or extension in service could be allowed to a Government employee.
5.
Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules also lays down the conditions and the requirements which are to be fulfilled while granting re-employment or extension of service to an employee.
The petitioner's case is that extension in service was granted to respondent No. 3 in violation of the policy decision of the Government contained in the circular letters dated 411985 and 23111990 as well as against the provisions of sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause (c) of Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
6.
Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 (the State of Punjab and the Chief Minister of Punjab) have, in their joint reply, challenged the locus standi of the petitioner with the plea that the petitioner had no right to file a writ petition like the present one, claiming it to be a petition in public interest.
The extension of service granted to respondent No. 3 has been defended with the plea that the services of the respondent were urgently required in the interest of the State inasmuch as the respondent was dealing with the sensitive matters relating to the Inter-State River Water Dispute.
7.
Respondent No. 3 has also filed a separate reply, defending the extension in service by one year on the ground that the State Government had the powers and authority to grant an extension in service to an employee in public interest.
8.
From a perusal of the rival pleadings, it appears that extension in service was granted to respondent No. 3 on the ground that the State of Punjab was facing a litigation in the Supreme Court on a complaint filed by the State of Haryana in November, 1995, seeking a direction to complete the construction of Sutlej-Yamuna Link (SYL) Canal in the State of Punjab.
The State of Punjab was required to be properly defended before the Supreme Court and, since respondent No. 3 was looking after the subject of Inter-State River Water Dispute for a long time, it was found appropriate to utilize his services.
A suitable reply was required to be drafted and the matter was required to be pursued vigorously and sincerely in the proceedings before the Supreme Court.
Respondent No. 3 had been promoted as Chief Engineer and was posted as the Managing Director of Punjab State Tubewell Corporation.
He was thereafter transferred in December, 1990, as Chief Engineer (Canals) but, at the same time, he was given the charge of the subject of ``Inter-State River Water Dispute'' also.
He continued on that post up to 3101993.
Respondent No. 3 was posted as Chief Engineer (Vigilance) from 22121993 to 18.4.1995 but again the subject of ``Inter-State River Water Dispute'' was retained by him under Government orders dated 22121993.
Respondent No. 3 was posted as Chief Engineer (Drainage and Planning) on 18.4.1995 and again the subject of ``Inter-State River Water Dispute'' was allotted to him.
It was for these reasons that the Government of Punjab found it expedient to grant extension of service inasmuch as respondent No. 3 was fully conversant with the ``Inter- State River Water Dispute''.
9.
The petitioner's locus standi has been challenged by the respondents with the plea that the petitioner has no interest in the subject nor has he been adversely affected by the order granting extension of service to respondent No. 3.
Shri Inderjit Malhotra, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that, in a case of violation of the statutory rules, a citizen could challenge the order of the Government in respect of illegal appointment to a high office.
Reliance has been placed on a judgment of this Court rendered by a learned Single Judge in Shri MS Mahadeokar, General Foreman, Government Press, Chandigarh (U.T.)
v. The Chief Commissioner, Union Territory, Chandigarh and others, 1973(1) Services Law Reporter 1042.
The question of locus standi was also examined by the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in Dhronamraju Satyanarayana v. NT Rama Rao and others, A.I.R. 1988 Andhra Pradesh 144.
It was observed that, where certain allegations pointing out statutory breaches and constitutional violations with considerable specificity had been placed by the petitioner, it must be seen if the petitioner merely made wild allegations and washed off hands.
It was observed in paragraph 23 as under :-  ``For the purpose of locus standi, what really is relevant is the substance of the breaches of the Constitution complained of, not the antecedents or the status of the person who conveys the information to the Court.
While protecting its jurisdiction, authority and time from abuse of process, this Court at the same time should not abdicate its role as the sentinel qui vive of the rights and liberties of the citizens, as rightly pointed out by the learned Attorney General.
The accountability of the executive to the people through the judiciary cannot be set at naught by any self-induced doubts regarding the jurisdiction of the Court or the propriety of the Court to entertain matters raising genuine question of annihilation of constitutional values by the executive.
When large scale violations or abuse of power by the first respondent and in-action of the Government machinery are alleged by the petitioner with sufficient material particulars, we cannot throw out the writ petition on the untenable ground of locus.''
10.
In the present case, the petitioner has sought to challenge the extension order dated 29111996 on the basis of the Government's circular letters and the statutory rules.
It is, therefore, not a vague or wild allegation, on the basis of which the extension in service, granted to respondent No. 3, has been challenged.
In this light, the locus standi of the petitioner cannot be negated.
The objection raised by the respondents is, therefore, rejected.
11.
The Government of Punjab had issued circular letter dated 1721967, laying down the conditions for re-employment as well as extension of service to an employee.
While dealing with the re-employment, certain conditions were laid down, which were required to be fulfilled.
It was made clear therein that no employee shall be offered re-employment beyond the date of super- annuation except when it was clearly on overriding grounds of public interest and where it was evident that other employees in the service were not ripe enough to take up the appointment.
While dealing with the subject of extension in service, it was laid down in the said circular letter that no employee shall be considered for extension unless his case satisfied all the conditions mentioned in paragraph 3 (relating to re-employment) and, in addition, the employment after the age of super-annuation is to be on a post borne on the cadre on which the employee is borne.
Extension in service may not be granted for more than one year at a time.
Another Government circular letter dated 411985 reiterated the conditions which were to be fulfilled before granting re-employment or extension in service.
Copy of the said circular letter has been placed by the petitioner by way of Annexure P-3.
The relevant part of the aforesaid circular letter reads as under :-  ``Although, as a matter of policy, a complete ban has been imposed on re-employment/extension in service beyond the age of superannuation, except certain categories of employees covered cases, proposals have been made in disregard of the above policy instructions and employees were not relieved on the dates they superannuated.
The Government have taken a serious view of such lapses on the part of the cadre-controlling authorities.
Steps should be taken to ensure compliance of standing policy instructions by all concerned so that an officer/official who attains his normal age of superannuation is not allowed to be retained in service either by way of extension in service or re-employment after the due date of retirement.''
Another Government circular letter dated 23111990, issued in continuation of the earlier circular letter dated 411985, is only a clarificatory one enjoining upon the Administrative Secretaries to comply with the conditions while granting re-employment or extension in service.
The relevant portion of circular letter dated 23111990 (copy of which has been placed by the petitioner as Annexure P-5) reads as under :-  ``I am directed to say that with immediate effect, no extension/re-employment is to be given to any officer/official in any Department of the State Government who has attained the age of superannuation, except Police Personnel and that too, on the merits of each case with particular reference to the officer's/official's proven integrity and efficiency in the discharge of his functions.
Exception in the case of Police personnel is being allowed because of the special Law and Order conditions prevalent in the State, in the over-riding public interest for re-employment after superannuation, in which cases the Administrative Department will make out a case and refer each case to the Department of Personnel for clearance.''
A perusal of the aforesaid circular letters makes it evident that extension in service is to be granted in exceptional cases and in public interest.
It is also clear that prior approval from the Department of Personnel as well as the Department of Finance has to be obtained.
In the present case, no such prior approval was obtained either from the Department of Personnel or from the Department of Finance.
It has been explained by the respondents that ex post facto sanction has been accorded by the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms by relaxing the Government instructions dated 23111990 with the condition that approval from the Finance Department and from the Council of Ministers be obtained.
It has been clarified by the respondents that approval of the Council of Ministers is ``under action''.
12.
Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services relates to the subject of retirement.
Clause (c) of the said rule specifically relates to the extension of service to the PWD officers.
Clause (c) reads as under :-  ``(c) The following are special rules applicable to P.W.D.
Officers :-  (1) Except as otherwise provided in this clause, Government employees in the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I (B&R and IB) must retire on reaching the age of 58 years (for premature retirement, see Premature Retirement Rules, 1975) and may be required by the competent authority to retire on reaching the age of 50 years if they have not attained the rank of Superintending Engineer.
(2) Subject to the requirements of this clause as to re-appointment, the competent authority may, in special circumstances, which should be recorded in writing, grant an extension of service, not exceeding three months to a Chief Engineer.
(3) No Chief Engineer shall, without re-appointment, hold the post for more than five years, but reappointments to the posts may be made as often, and in each case for such period not exceeding five years as the competent authority may decide: Provided that the term of re-appointment shall not extend more than three months beyond the age on which the Government employee attains the age of 58.
(For premature retirement, see Premature Retirement Rules, 1975).
(d) * * * * * * * *.''
A perusal of sub-clauses (2) and (3) makes it clear that no extension is to be given to a Chief Engineer for a period of more than three months.
The said period of three months has been specified twice, once in sub-clause (2) and again in sub-clause (3).
Both the sub-clauses are distinctly and specifically applicable to the extension in service to a Chief Engineer.
In a case where a Chief Engineer has been working on the post for 5 years, he may be re- appointed for another period of 5 years but, as soon as he attains the age of superannuation, the extension cannot exceed a period of three months from the date of superannuation.
13.
In the present case, extension of service was granted by one year without referring to any rule of the Service Rules.
Even if the services of respondent No. 3 were required to be utilized in public interest, the limitation and the embargo contained in Rule 326 could not be ignored unless it was made clear in the order that the Government found it appropriate to relax the said rule.
It is correct that, in Government circular letter dated 1721967, extension of service could be granted for one year but that was applicable to all the categories of Government employees.
Rule 326, however, deals with the specific and distinct subject of the grant of extension in service to a Chief Engineer.
Therefore, Government circular letter dated 1721967 cannot be permitted to by-pass or override the specific statutory Rules, i.e., Punjab Civil Services Rules.
14.
In this light, the order of extension dated 29111996 cannot be sustained inasmuch as it is in contravention of the conditions laid down in sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause (c) of Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
The Government circular letters dated 1721967, 411985 and 23111990 laid down general guidelines and the conditions for the purposes of re-employment as well as extension in service.
On the other hand, Rule 326 laid down the period for which extension in service could be granted to a Chief Engineer.
When the Government circular letters and the aforesaid rule are read together, no contradiction is found between them.
If read harmoniously, it has to be inferred that extension in service may be granted to an employee in exceptional circumstances and in public interest but subject to the limitation of the period laid down in sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause (c) of Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
15.
The respondents have not been able to explain as to how the specific limitation regarding the period of extension contained in Rule 326 was ignored while granting extension to respondent No. 3 for one year from 30111996.
No reasons have been mentioned in the order of extension nor any reasons have been specified in the replies filed by the respondents.
Even if the services of respondent No. 3 were required in public interest, the specific embargo laid down in Rule 326 could not be contravened.
As stated earlier, the order of extension does not make a mention of Rule 326 at all.
If the State Government thought it appropriate to grant extension by one year in relaxation of Rule 326, sufficient reasons should have been specified in the order.
The extension order does not make any mention of any relaxation of the Rule.
In these circumstances, the extension order cannot be sustained inasmuch as it is in contravention of sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clauses (c) of Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
In the result, the writ petition succeeds and the order dated 29111996 (Annexure P-4) is set aside to the extent that extension of service was granted beyond the period of three months from 30111996.
The official respondents are, therefore, directed to relieve Tarlochan Singh, private respondent No. 3, forthwith from the post of Chief Engineer.
No order as to costs.