GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing the charge-sheet Annexure P-1 and the order Annexure P-2 relating to appointment of Inquiry Officer for holding inquiry against the petitioner under the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 read with Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II Part-I Prayer has also been made for striking down Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II Part-I  2.
The petitioner has questioned the charge-sheet Annexure P-1 and the order of appointment of Inquiry Officer solely on the ground of delay.
According to him, the charge-sheet relates to his working as Superintending Engineer at Bathinda during the year 1972-73 and there is no justification for issue of a charge-sheet after such a long period calculated with reference to the year of incident.
The petitioner's further plea is that just three days before his retirement on 3091985 from the post of Chief Engineer, the respondent- Government has ordered appointment of an Inquiry Officer vide order Annexure P-2 without even considering this reply.
The petitioner has attacked Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II Part-I on the ground that it is unreasonable and discriminatory.
According to the petitioner, Rule 22(b), particularly proviso (1) and (2)(ii) makes arbitratory qualification between Government servants who had not retired and against whom inquiry has been initiated and those who stand retired and in whose cases the inquiry cannot be initiated except in respect of an event which took place within four years of the initiation.
The petitioner has also placed reliance on the administrative instructions issued by the Government in support of his plea that the proceedings initiated against him cannot be held by the Government.
3.
In reply the respondents have pleaded that inquiry was initiated against the petitioner because prima facie it was found that by his acts and omissions the petitioner had caused serious loss to the public revenues.
The respondents have denied allegation of inordinate delay in the initiation of inquiry.
According to them, a thorough investigation was made before the initiation of inquiry and due to the so-called delay in the initiation of inquiry the petitioner has got advantage of promotion to the next higher posts and, in fact, some of the allegations have been dropped.
According to the respondents, Vigilance Inquiry was instituted against the petitioner on 29.11.1973 in respect of 12 allegations.
Two of these allegations involved one Shri DK Sehgal, the then Chief Engineer, apart from the petitioner and due to the impending retirement of Shri DK Sehgal and, therefore, inquiry was first held in respect of them.
The remaining allegations were enquired into subsequently.
The inquiry report was received by the Government on 2321978.
This long time was consumed because the matter had to be examined by technical experts and the investigating officers had to visit sites and make inquiries from different sources.
After receipt of the report dated 2321978 the Government asked the Director, Vigilance Bureau to supply additional record.
Such record could be obtained in the month of March 1980 and thereafter it was examined at different levels and finally the draft charge-sheet was prepared on 861981.
The charge-sheet was ultimately served on the petitioner on 1281981.
His reply was received on 2891981 and after the matter was again examined, the Government took a decision to appoint the Inquiry Officer after giving personal hearing to the petitioner on 11101984 and 13.3.1985.
The respondents have defended Rule 22 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II Part-I by pleading that it is quite reasonable to make distinction between the existing Government servants and the retired Government servants in the matter of initiation of inquiry.
4.
The case had been taken up for hearing on 19.9.1995 but none appeared on behalf of the parties.
On 20101995 also nobody appeared on behalf of the parties to argue the case.
Today also none has appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
I have heard Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General.
5.
On the issue of delay in the initiation of inquiry and the prayer of the petitioner to quash the charge-sheet and the order of appointment of Inquiry Officer it is very significant to mention that the petitionr has not come forward with a plea that he has been put to any prejudice due to the pendency of preliminary inquiry/vigilance inquiry between 1973 to 1981.
It is not the case of the petitioner that his promotion has been withheld due to the delay in the initiation of the inquiry.
Rather from the record it is revealed that the so-called delay in the initiation of inquiry has come as a boon to the petitioner because he got promotion as Chief Engineer in the year 1979.
If the charge-sheet had been served on the petitioner before May, 1979, the Government might have withheld his promotion.
6.
While keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has not suffered any prejudice due to the delay in the initiation of inquiry, I shall now deal with the contention of the petitioner that delay of about nine years from the date of the incident should alone be a ground for quashing of the inquiry.
Law on this subject is getting crystallised.
In different judgments of the Supreme Court and the High Courts view has been taken that delay in the initiation of inquiry may be a ground for quashing the proceedings.
In this connection reference may be made to the decisions of the Supreme Court and this Court in State of M.P. v. Bani Singh and another, 1990(2) SLR 798; Union of India v. Wing Commander RR Hingorani (Retd.
), 1987(1) SLR 479; State of Punjab and others v. Kailash Nath, 1989(1) SLR 12 and JK Dhir, Chief Engineer Lining/Planning P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch), Chandigarh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1987(4) SLR 72.
However, none of these decisions contains a strait-jacket formula indicating the period beyond which initiation of inquiry would be quashed by the Court on the ground of delay.
In my opinion, delay in the initiation of inquiry without any tangible explanation may in the ordinary circumstances give rise to an inference that the employee would be prejudiced by delayed initiation of inquiry.
The Court may in a given circumstance quash the proceedings due to unusual and unexplained delay but that cannot be treated as an absolute proposition of law.
No period of limitation has been prescribed in the rules for initiation of proceedings and in cases where the charges are of grave nature and, particularly, one involving financial irregularities, the Courts would be extremely reluctant to quash the proceedings only on the ground that there is delay in the initiation of inquiry.
In matters involving financial irregularities where a person is charged with an allegation of having caused loss to the public funds, it would be extremely injurious to the public interest if the proceedings are quashed merely because of delay on the part of the Government in the initiation of inquiry.
In such like matters larger public interest demands that the employee who has committed misdeed is brought to book and is adequately punished.
Security of service to the employees and protection of their legitimate rights is one thing and every individual employee has a right to enjoy a degree of certainty in his conditions of service and he cannot be subjected to harassment by way of inquiry after a lapse of long period but it is equally important that public servants remain honest and they do not commit acts prejudicial to the larger public interest.
An efficient and honest public service is sine qua non for good administration.
Therefore, larger public interest demands that the employee who commits acts of embezzlement, fraud, cheating, breach of trust or any other act which causes loss to the public funds, must be punished so that the public confidence in the system of administration is not eroded.
The injury or the so-called harassment suffered by an employee due to the delay in initiation of inquiry is insignificant in comparison to the loss of public confidence in the system of administration and injury to the public interest if an employee guilty of misappropriation etc. goes unpunished or the proceedings are quashed on the intervention of the Courts merely on the ground of delayed initiation.
7.
In taking the aforesaid view I am fortified by the judgment of the Full Bench in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1994(3) RSJ 543 : 1994(1) SCT 563 (P&H).
In that case the Full Bench has held :-  "Delay by itself is no ground to quash the proceedings.
Speedy trial is no doubt a part of the right to be treated reasonably, fairly and justly, but at the same time mere delay by itself does not entitle the delinquent officer to escape his trial.
There is no period provided for initiating proceedings before retirement.
Though a period of four years from the date of incident for initiating proceedings after retirement has been statutorily provided for.
Again the terminus a quo for commencement of four years would vary according to the facts and circumstances of each case.
Nothing substantial has been put forth to read into the rules either impliedly or expressly providing a statutory period for initiating proceedings before retirement as provided for cases after the retirement".
The same view has been expressed by a Division Bench in Ajit Singh v. Food Corporation of India, 1995(3) RSJ 889 : 1995(3) SCT 244 (P&H)(DB).
This also is the view taken by another Full Bench of the High Court in Jagir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) SLR 1 : 1993(2) SCT 128 (P&H).
8.
In the light of the above stated legal position, if the allegations levelled against the petitioner are glanced through, there remains little doubt that the present one is not at all a fit case for Court's interference with the inquiry proceedings.
The petitioner has been charged with a serious allegation of having shown extraordinary interest in the tender submitted by M/s Maghi Ram and Co. whose only active member Inderjit had been blacklisted and who was given an advantage of Rs. 4 lakhs by the action of the petitioner.
The charge levelled against the petitioner is certainly of a serious nature.
In the matter like the present one it is the petitioner who has gained due to the delay in the initiation of action by the Government and, therefore, I do not find any ground to interfere with the inquiry proceedings, more so when the explanation given by the Government in paragraph 10 of the reply cannot be termed as unsatisfactory.
The vigilance inquiry was conducted in respect of 12 allegations.
Opinion of technical experts was obtained and vigilance record was gone through by the vigilance authorities before they submitted the report on 2231978 and thereafter the Government sought additional record and ultimately charge-sheeted the petitioner in August 1981.
After receipt of his reply, the matter was examined and final decision was taken to get the regular inquiry done into the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
This cannot under any circumstances be termed as a case of inordinate and unexplained delay.
9.
Challenge of the petitioner to Rule 22(b) is clearly misconceived.
In the absence of a rule empowering the Government to initiate action against a retired employee, the employee guilty with the allegations of serious misconduct may go unpunished and, therefore, in order to protect public interest the rule making authority has enacted a rule empowering the Government to initiate inquiry even against retired employees.
At the same time the rule postulates continuance of inquiry already initiated against an existing employee even though after the initiation of inquiry the employee may have retired.
The rule making authority has thought it proper to put a limitation on the initiation of inquiry against the retired Government servants.
This limitation is intended to avoid unnecessary harassment to the pensioner.
An employee like the petitioner in whose case inquiry was initiated well before his retirement cannot compare himself with a retired Government servant.
In fact, the two constitute separate classes.
Therefore, the claim of the petitioner that Rule 22(b) is discriminatory or arbitrary deserves to be rejected.
I find merit in the contention of Mrs. Tuli that in case of limitation for initiation of inquiry against a retired Government servant is reasonable and absence of such limitation in the case of existing servant does not render the provision arbitrary or unconstitutional.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed.
The stay order passed in favour of the petitioner automatically stands vacated.
Keeping in view the fact that the matter has remained pending before this Court for one decade and the inquiry also remained stayed during this period, I direct the Government to complete the inquiry within one year of the receipt of the copy of this order.
The Registry of this Court is directed to send a copy of this order to the Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab, as well as the Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Public Works Department, for appropriate action.