VK Bali, J - (Oral) - Devindra Kashyap, a lecturer in the Department of Hindi, Panjab University, Chandigarh, through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise him as lecturer in the Department of Hindi where he claims to be working on ad hoc/part time basis since August, 1986.
He further prays that a direction be issued to the respondent to grant him all increments due to him from 1986-87 including all arrears of his salary due to him on that account as also other benefits.
Brief facts, on which the reliefs spelled out above, are made to rest, reveal that after doing his matriculation, the petitioner was appointed in Class 'C' service of the respondent-University in the year 1972.
While working in the office, he obtained degree in Bachelor of Arts in the year 1980 by securing 533% marks, whereafter he did his Master's degree in Hindi in the year 1982.
He improved his position in the examination in 1990 when he secured first division obtaining 60% marks.
He also did his post-graduate diploma in Translation in the year 1984 by securing 66% marks.
He then completed his Ph.
D. degree in the year 1986.
In the month of August, 1980, he was appointed as Clerk on regular basis in the respondent-University.
Thereafter he successfully completed his Ph.
D. in the month of August, 1986 and was appointed as part-time Lecturer in Hindi in the Evening College where he worked upto year 1989.
He was appointed as Lecturer in Hindi on ad hoc basis in 1989 for the Session 1989-90, in the Department of Hindi.
It is positive case of the petitioner that he was appointed by the Selection Committee comprising the nominee of Vice Chancellor, Chairman of the Hindi Department and three other senior faculty members.
He joined the Department of Hindi as lecturer on November 11, 1989.
The minimum qualifications for the post of Lecturer are BA in second division and MA with 55% marks and Ph.
D. As mentioned above, petitioner did pass his BA in second division and has secured 60% marks in MA and has also done his PhD He was again appointed as Lecturer in Hindi for the Session 1991-92 again after going through the process of selection and in pursuance of an advertisement by the Selection Committee.
In the month of July, 1992 some posts of Lecturer in Hindi were advertised by the respondent-University on ad hoc basis, in response to which the petitioner applied.
From amongst a large number of candidates, who appeared for interview for appointment as Lecturer on ad hoc basis, he was selected.
At this time also the petitioner appeared before the Department Selection Committee.
For the session 1993-94, the Vice Chancellor, in exercise of his emergency powers in terms of Regulation 5, appointed the petitioner as Lecturer in Hindi w.e.f.
July 28, 1993.
Similarly, for the session 1994-95 the Vice Chancellor approved the appointment of petitioner as Lecturer in Hindi in exercise of his emergency powers.
The petitioner was continuing on the post upto the date when he filed the petition.
However, during the pendency of the writ petition, his services were dispensed with.
2.
From the array of facts, as have been given above, Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, vehemently contends that not only that the petitioner adequately answers the academic qualifications required for the post of Lecturer in Hindi, he has been working in the department since 1986 till such time he filed the writ petition in the year 1994.
From 1989-90 onwards, but for a brief gap in between, he had been appointed continuously.
He was appointed on different dates as depicted above after an advertisement was issued and number of candidates had appeared for interview before the Selection Committee.
Unfortunately, however, his services were dispensed with every time before summer vacation and immediately thereafter, another advertisement was issued and fresh selection made.
This, as per the contention of the learned counsel, is nothing but an unfair practice adopted by the University, simply with a view to deny the petitioner the pay scale meant for the post of Lecturer in Hindi.
3.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed through Shri SP Dhawan, Registrar of the University, the basic facts with regard to appointment of petitioner on various dates either as part-time Lecturer or on ad hoc basis, have not been disputed.
The relief asked for by the petitioner has, however, been sought to be contested on the ground that the University has framed its regulations and as per Regulation 5 of the University Calendar, Vol.
I, 1994, the Vice Chancellor has power to make an emergent temporary appointment for a period not exceeding one year.
Once the appointment of petitioner was made in pursuance of the powers conferred upon the Vice Chancellor under Regulation 5, no exception can be had to temporary appointment of the petitioner.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through records of the case.
The Supreme Court in Karnataka State Private College Stop-gap Lecturers Association v. State of Karnataka & Ors., 1992(1) SCT 599 (SC) : 1992(2) SCC 29, issued directions for appointment of teachers on regular basis in almost identical facts as are available in the present case.
The petitioners, in the case aforesaid, were appointed temporarily for three months or less by privately managed degree colleges receiving cent per cent grants-in-aid, controlled administratively and financially by the Education Department of the State of Karnataka.
They sought regularisation of their services by pleading that they have been in continuous services for years with a break of one or two days after every three months.
The following directions were issued :-  "(1) Services of such temporary teachers who have worked as such for three years, including the breaks till today, shall not be terminated.
They shall be absorbed as and when regular vacancies arise.
(2) If regular selections have been made, the government shall create additional posts to accommodate such selected candidates.
(3) The teachers who have undergone the process of selection under the directions of the High Court and have not been appointed because of the reservation policy of the government be regularly appointed by creating additional seats.
(4) From the date of judgment every temporary teacher shall be paid salary as is admissible to teachers appointed against permanent post.
(5) Such teachers shall be continued in service even during vacations."
In Rabinarayan Mohapatra v. State of Orissa & Ors., 1991(2) SCT 82 (SC) : 1991(2) SCC 599 the Apex Court, once again, with regard to school teachers appointed in 1982 initially for 89 days but continued for four years with approval of the authorities, regularised their services.
The Supreme Court, while granting the relief, held that "The validation Act has been enacted with the object of granting relief to those members of teaching community who are being exploited for years together by keeping them in short spell appointments like 89 days appointments as herewith one day break and in the process denying them their rightful dues and other service benefit.
In spite of repeated deprecations by Supreme Court the practice continues to be followed by various State Governments in the country.
Insecurity is writ large on the face of the teaching community because of nebulous and unsatisfactory condition of service.
In order to make the existing educational set-up effective it is necessarly to do away with ad hocism in teaching appointments.
An appointment on 89 days basis with one-day break which deprives a teacher of his salary for the period of summer vacation and other service benefits, is wholly arbitrary and suffers from the vice of discrimination."
A single Judge of Rajasthan High Court in Lecturers Association v. State of Rajasthan, 1994(4) SCT 307 (Raj.
)(DB) : 1994(4) SLR 262, after taking into consideration number of judgments dealing with the regularisation of services of Lecturers held that "the policy adopted by the Government in the matter of temporary lecturers is a clear negation of the concept of fairness which must inform very State action."
While granting the relief, ultimately Government was directed to frame a scheme to regularise the services of all the lecturers.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondent University however, cites J&K Public Commission & Ors. v. Dr. Narinder Mohan & Ors., 1994(2) SCC 630, wherein it was held that "regularisation of the persons appointed on ad hoc basis in violation of statutory rules is not correct."
6.
In considered view of this Court, the petitioner deserves the relief asked for by him.
The Syndicate of the University in the proceedings held by it on May 26, 1993, resolved as under :-  "(a) The services of ad hoc/temporary teachers working in the Departments maintained by the University for the last three academic sessions or more be regularised in accordance with the legal judgments of the Hon'ble Courts of law and earlier decisions taken by the Senate/Syndicate of the University.
(b) The ad hoc teachers working for the last three academic sessions or more be not relieved from their duties at the end of the current session to avoid legal complications."
The resolution aforesaid was passed in the following words :-  "Resolved that the above resolution proposed by Sarvshri MM Sharma and Deepak Manmohan Singh be forwarded to the Senate with the remarks that the principle of regularising those ad hoc/temporary Lecturers, who have served the University in various departments for a minimum of three consecutive years be accepted.
Resolved further that a Committee be constituted to work out modalities for implementing this decision .
However, if there was a notional break of one/two years in between two academic sessions, the same should be allowed to be condoned."
In the written statement it has been mentioned that in its meeting held on December 21, 1993 the Sanate agreed to the stand of the Vice Chancellor to the effect that the question of regularisation should be considered sympathetically and those appointments should be made against regular vacancies of Lecturers where those exist by duly constituted Selection Committees which would include experts so that there was no technical flaw.
Each case is to be considered on merit keeping in view the qualifications prescribed as advertised for the vacancy available, length of service by the regularly constituted Committee.
Apart from resolution of the Senate, which stood approved by the competent authority, the case of the petitioner seems to be well made out from the judicial pronouncements, referred to above.
In fact, the Court is of the view that the action of the respondent-University in issuing advertisement every time after summer vacation and appointing the petitioner on ad hoc basis for a limited period and then again issuing advertisement after yet another summer vacation is totally arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The University, being an autonomous body, is concededly amenable to writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It has to protect the rights of citizens and it cannot determine the matters at its whims completely ignoring the dictates enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The idea behind relieving the petitioner and reappointing him time and again appears to deny him the regular pay scale admissible to a lecturer in Hindi and that is what precisely seems to have been done in this case.
7.
The fact that petitioner continued to be employed from 1986 clearly suggests that requirement of Lecturer in Hindi is there.
The plea of the University that there is no need of Lecturer in Hindi appear to be a made up affair only with a view to deny the desired relief to the petitioner.
8.
For the reasons stated above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner and to pay him the regular pay scale admissible to a Lecturer in Hindi from the date he was employed on the said post.
Inasmuch as during the pendency of the petition, petitioner has been relieved of his duties, he shall be taken back in service and inasmuch as he is deemed to have been in service from 1989, he shall be paid the salary for the period during which he remained out of service as well.
The arrears shall, however, be restricted to three years and two months.
Petitioner shall also entitled to all consequential benefits that might accrue to him on account of directions mentioned above.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.