TS Doabia, J - The petitioner has raised his voice against "the pirates in the high sea of education".
Education is enlightenment.
It is this factor which lends dignity to a man.
To quote PB Gajendragadkar, J, (as His Lordship then was) 'education seek to built up the personality of the people by assisting his physical, intellectual, moral and emotional development' University of Delhi v. Ram Nath, AIR 1963 SC 1873.
Article 26(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights States "everyone has the right to education.
Technical and Professional Education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally assessable to all on the basis of merit".
If educational institutions are not business houses then the question would arise as to whether they can fix the norms of fee with profit motive.
2.
In Kerala State Electricity Board v. SN Govinda Prabhu, AIR 1986 SC 1999, it was held that a public utility monopoly undertaking should not be driven by pure profit motive but service should inform its actions.
It was observed that the function of the Board is not to manage its affairs in a manner as to earn maximum profits.
This was a case which dealt with tariffs which were to be charged by the Electricity Board.
At page 2009 it was observed :  "The Board may not allow its character as a public utility undertaking to change into that of profit motivated private trading.... when that happens the court may strike down the revision of tariffs as plainly arbitrary".
Similar concern was shown by the Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Association of Natural Gas Consumer Industries of Gujarat, 1991 AIR SCW 1900.
To the same extent would be found observations made in the case of Hindustan Zinc Ltd v. AP Electricity Board, 1991 AIR SCW 1329.
In St Steefan College v. University of Delhi, 1992 AIR SCW 1972 the Supreme Court observed :-  "The educational institutions are not business houses.
They do not generate wealth.
They cannot survive without public funds or private aid".
What was sought to be stressed was that limited as the sources the educational institutional cannot be forced to run their schools without State Aid.
3.
Right to education is not a fundamental right.
However, one cannot overlook that in a welfare State it is obligation of the State to ensure the creation and the sustaining of the conditions congenial to good health.
Provision for education may be one of these.
Providing public schools was considered to be an apex function of the State in Wisconsin v. Yorder, 1972 (32) Law Ed. 2 Ed 15.
In Brown v. Board of Education, 1953 (98) Law Ed. 873 Earl Warran, CJ speaking for the US Supreme Court emphasised the importance of education in the following words :-  "Today education is perhaps the most important function of the State and local government ......it is required in the performance of our most basic responsibilities even service in the armed forces.
It is very foundation of good citizenship.
Today it is the principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment.
In these days it is doubtful any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of education".
4.
In the interest of maintaining standard and for several other valid reasons the commercialisation of technical and professional education shall have to be curbed.
An alternate system shall have to be devised to involve private and voluntary efforts in this sector of education in conformity with accepted norms and goals.
Such was the Central Government's policy on education formulated in the year 1986.
This was modified in 1992.
The above is extract from paragraph 620.
Again in paragraph 109 it was said non- government and non-voluntary efforts including social activists' groups will be encouraged subject to provision for proper management and financial assistance.
At the same time steps shall have to be taken to prevent the establishment of institutions set up to commercialise education.
Thus the policy is to see that private sector does take part in imparting education but those who venture only with a motive of financial adventurism without morals and scruples are not to be encouraged.
The institutions whose only aim is to make money driving a hard bargain exploiting the eagerness to acquire knowledge were termed as 'pirates in the high sea of education' in Unikrishnan JP.
v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993(2) SCT 511 : AIR 1993 SC.
2178.
It was in this judgment the Supreme Court emphasised the need to take regulatory measures so that these ensure that private educational institutions adhere to some norms.
The commercialisation of education must be prevented and it is for the State to see that steps are taken in this regard.
5.
While dealing with the right of the private educational institutions getting State aid the Supreme Court in Unikrishnan's case (supra) observed as under :-  "Private educational institutions may be aided as well as un-aided.
Aid given by the government may be cent per cent or partial.
So far as aided institutions are concerned, it is evident, they have to abide by all the rules and regulations as may be framed by the Government and/or recognising affiliating authorities in the matter of recruitment of teachers and staff, their conditions of service, syllabus, standard of teaching and so on.
In particular in the matter admission of students, they have to follow the rule of merit and merit alone - subject to any reservations made under Article 15.
They shall not be entitled to charge any fee higher than what is charged in Governmental institutions for similar courses.
These are and shall be understood to be the conditions of grant of aid.
6.
While dealing with un-aided institutions it was observed :-  "So far as un-aided institutions are concerned, it is obvious that they cannot be compelled to charge the same fee as is charged in Governmental institutions.
If they do so voluntarily, it is perfectly welcome but they cannot be compelled to do so, for the simple reason that they have to meet the cost of imparting education from their own donations, charities, if any, can only be the fees collected from the students.
It is here that the concepts of self-financing educational institutions and cost-based educational institutions come in.
This situation presents several difficult problems.
How does one determine the cost of education and how and by whom can it be regulated ?
The cost of education may vary, even within the same faculty, from institution to institution.
The facilities provided, equipment, infrastructure, standard and quality of education obtaining may vary from institution to institution.
The court cannot certainly do this.
It must be done by Government or University or such other authority as may be designated in that behalf.
Even so, some questions do arise...." 7.
It was further observed :-  "The question is how to encourage private educational institutions without allowing them to commercialise the education.
This is the troublesome question facing the society, the Government and the courts today".
8.
In Appejay School and another v. NK Singal, 1(1993), Consumer Protection Judgments 9, a clause in the prospectus that in case a student leaves the school within a month his or her admission fee will be refunded to the extent of 1/2 of the annual dues was found to be unreasonable.
The observations made by the District Forum that the practice of forfeiting huge dues without rendering any service is grossly unfair and against the interest of the public was expunged by the Delhi State Commission on the ground that sufficient foundation was not laid in the complaint for recording finding in the manner it was done.
The Commission, however, took note of the fact that imparting of education is a service and in case the service is deficient then interference can be made under the Consumer Protection Act.
9.
In the case of PR Abilash v. Dr. P.J Alexander, III (1993), Consumer Protection Judgments, 1297, the complainant had paid Rs. 30,000/- as capitation fee.
The tuition fee was fixed at Rs. 6,400/-.
The college in question was not affiliated to the University.
The School Management was directed to pay compensation to the extent of Rs. 2 lacs.
Nath, AIR 1986 SC 1971, took note of the fact that law is not to be permitted to go stagnant.
It must be kept fresh by enthusing new concepts.
In para 28, it was observed as under :-  "The law exists to serve the needs of the society which is governed by it.
If the law is to play its allotted role of serving the needs of the society, it must reflect the ideas and ideologies of that society.
It must keep time with the heart beats of the society and with the needs and aspirations of the people.
As the society changes, the law cannot remain immutable, the early nineteenth century essayist and wit, Sydney Smit, said, "When I hear any man talk of an unalterable law, I am convinced that he is unalterable fool".
The law must, therefore, in a changing society march in tune with the changed ideas and ideologies.
Legislatures are, however, not best fitted for the role of adopting the law to the necessities of the time, for the legislative process is too slow and the legislatures often divided by politics, slowed down by periodic elections and overburdened with myriad other legislative activities.
A constitutional document is even less suited to this task, for the philosophy and the ideologies underlying it must of necessity be expressed in broad and general terms and the process of amending a Constitution is too cumbersome and consuming to meet the immediate needs.
This task must, therefore, of necessity fall upon the courts because the Courts can by the process of judicial interpretation adapt the law to suit the needs of the society".
This aspect of the matter has to be taken note of, while deciding disputes of the nature raised in the present petition.
It would again be useful to revert back to what was said by the Supreme Court in Unikrishanan's case (supra).
In para 180 while dealing with the concept of fee two guidelines were indicated it would be useful to notice them.
"1.
The citizens of this county have a fundamental right to education.
The said right flows from Article 21.
This right is, however, not an absolute right.
Its content and parameters have to be determined in the light of Articles 45 and 41.
In other words every child/citizen of this country has a right to free education until he completes the age of fourteen years.
Thereafter his right to education is subject to the limits of economic capacity and development of the State.
2.
The obligations created by Articles 41, 45 and 46 of the Constitution can be discharged by the State either by establishing institutions of its own or by aiding, recognising and/or granting affiliation to private educational institutions.
Where aid is not granted to private educational institutions and merely recognition or affiliation is granted it may not be insisted that the private education institution shall charge only that fee as is charged for similar courses in governmental institutions.
The private educational institutions have to and are entitled to charge a higher fee, not exceeding the ceiling fixed in that behalf".
Thus the State Government would take notice of grievance of the petitioner and take remedial measures.
No doubt this petition was preferred at a time when the son of the petitioner was to get admission, the son by now has completed his education.
This was a letter petition.
As such the petitioner or his son may not be entitled to any personal relief.
Nevertheless the State of Madhya Pradesh would take notice of the law laid down by the Supreme Court of India in Unikrishanan JP.
's case (supra).
In case there is necessity to frame a law in this regard the desirability of framing such a law be considered.
In case existing statutes requires some amendments, amendments may be made and steps be taken to rationalise the concept of charging of fees by private educational Institution.
Copy of this order be sent to the Chief Secretary, State of Madhya Pradesh as also the Secretary in the Education Department.
Beyond this no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.