GS Singhvi, J(Oral) - The main issue which requires determination by this Court relates to the claim of the petitioner to be assigned seniority in the cadre of Assistant Public Relations Officers with effect from 28th November, 1979.
An ancillary issue which will also requires adjudication is as to whether the Director Public Relations was having the jurisdiction to change the date of regularisation of the service of the petitioner from 28th November, 1979 to 20th November, 1980.
2.
Facts of the case show that the petitioner had joined government service as a teacher on 12th July, 1956.
On 19th September, 1979, the petitioner made an application to the then Chief Minister of Haryana for his appointment as Assistant Public Relations Officer in the Public Relations Department of the Government of Haryana.
Though the petitioner claims that after considering his eligibility, the government appointed him as Assistant Public Relations Officer on deputation on 23rd November, 1979 (Annexured P1), a careful reading of that order shows that the said appointment was given to the petitioner only on the basis of his application dated 19th September, 1979 addressed to the then Chief Minister.
Petitioner's appointment was on temporary basis for a period of one year.
Case of the petitioner for regularisation of service was referred to the Subordinate Service Selection Board Haryana and on the basis of the recommendation made by the said Board, Director Public Relations, Haryana issued order dated 3rd November, 1981 regularising the services of the petitioner with effect from 28th November, 1979.
In the seniority list (Annexure P3), the petitioner was placed at serial No. 10 and the respondents 3 to 5 who had been appointed as Assistant Public Relations Officers by promotion on 9th April, 1980 and 10th April, 1980 respectively were placed below him.
After about six years of the issue of order Annexure P2, the Director Public Relations issued an order Annexure P4 dated 24th January, 1987 and changed the effective date of regularisation of the service of the petitioner from 28th November, 1979 to 20th November, 1980.
The petitioner challenged this action of the Director vide his representation (Annexure P5) and having failed to persuade the Director to withdraw order (Annexure P4), the petitioner filed an appeal before the Secretary to the Government, Public Relations Department, Haryana.
The petitioner felt convinced that he will not get any relief at the hands of the administrative authorities because respondent Nos. 3 and 6 came to be promoted as District Public Relations Officer on temporary basis vide order (Annexure P8) dated 27th October, 1989.
Therefore, he has filed this petition.
3.
In the writ petition, petitioner has claimed that respondent No. 2 has acted without jurisdiction in changing the date of regularisation of his service and in any case respondent No. 2 has without any justification brought about a change in the date of regularisation of his service as Assistant Public Relations Officer.
Order Annexure P4 has been assailed on the ground of violation of the basic principles of natural justice and arbitrariness.
Petitioner has pleaded that after a long lapse of over 5 years and six months of the issue of order Annexure P2, respondent No. 2 has changed his service conditions to his disadvantage without any notice and without hearing him.
4.
In reply, respondents have pleaded that initial appointment of the petitioner on the post of Assistant Public Relations Officer was irregular because that appointment was given to the petitioner without considering the cases of other eligible persons.
It has also been pleaded by the respondents that the Subordinate Selection Board had not mentioned any particular date of regularisation of the service of the petitioner.
Further case of the respondents is that the irregular appointment accorded to the petitioner vide order (Annexure P1) was regularised by sending requisition to various departments, in response to which 11 candidates including the petitioner had submitted applications and their candidature were considered by the Subordinate Selection Board in the month of November 1980.
On the basis of the averments made in para 8 of the reply, the respondents have pleaded that regularisation of the service of the petitioner could not relate back because his initial appointment was contrary to the provisions of the Constitution.
They have also stated that official approval was accorded by the Subordinate Selection Board on 25th September, 1981, therefore, the petitioner has no legal right to claim benefit of regularisation of his services with effect from 28th November, 1979.
5.
In support of the writ petition, Shri Verma learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that in terms of Rule 9(c) of the Haryana Public Relations (State Service Class II) Rules, 1975, the petitioner has a right to be assigned seniority in the cadre of Assistant Public Relations Officers on the basis of total length of service.
Shri Verma argued that the post of Public Relations Officer which is encadred in the Rules of 1975 includes the post of Assistant Public Relations Officer.
Learned counsel argued that change in the date of regularisation of the service of the petitioner could not have been effected without giving a notice and an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and as this procedure was not followed, order Annexure P4 and consequential actions taken by respondent No. 2 should be declared as void.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana argued that 1975 Rules are not applicable to the post of Assistant Public Relations Officer and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to have his seniority determined in terms of Rule 11 of the those Rules.
She further argued that regular appointment could be given to the petitioner only after consideration of the claims of similarly situated persons and in the case of the petitioner, selection for regular appointment was made on November 19, 1980 and on the basis of regular appointment made in the year 1980, the petitioner cannot make a claim that his seniority has been changed without any reason.
6.
A look at the provisions of 1975 Rules shows that as per rule 2(b) expression, "direct recruitment" means an appointment made otherwise than by promotion from within the services or by transfer of any official already in the service of the Government of India or any Stat Government.
Rule 9(c) provides for method of recruitment to the post of Public Relations Officers.
This post can be filled by promotion, by transfer or by the deputation as well as by direct recruitments.
Rule 10 of 1975 Rules requires that persons appointed to any post in the Service shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if appointed by direct recruitment and one year, if appointed otherwise.
Rule 11 speaks of seniority of the members of service.
Appendix "A" to the Rules enumerates various posts and their pay scales.
The post of Public Relations Officers finds mention at item No. 3 of Appendix `A' and the pay scales of this post is Rs. 350-900.
7.
There is nothing in the Rules of 1975 to show that the post of Assistant Public Relations Officer is encadred in that service and is governed by Rules of 1975.
This inference is fortified by the fact that pay scale of the post of Public Relations Officer is Rs. 350-900 whereas appointment of the petitioner was in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600.
Learner Counsel for the petitioner has not been able to explain as to under what circumstances the petitioner had been appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 if he was to be treated as a member of the service under 1975 Rules.
Contention of the learned counsel that appointment of the petitioner should be treated as one made in accordance with Rule 9(c) of the 1975 Rules, does not stand scrutiny even for a moment.
An appointment made otherwise than by way of transfer or deputation or promotion can only be treated as an appointment by direct recruitment.
Such an appointment has to be made in accordance with provisions of the Rules.
In the absence of any provision in the Rules of 1975 prescribing the procedure for direct recruitment, the minimum which was required to be done by the Competent Authority was to have advertised the post giving opportunity to all the eligible persons to be considered for the selection and appointment as Assistant Public Relations Officer.
Right of equal opportunity for employment is guaranteed under Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
This right of the citizens has to be respected by all public authorities.
Therefore, any appointment made without following the procedure prescribed in the Rules and in the absence of rules without advertising the posts will have to be treated as unconstitutional.
Appointment of the petitioner was made without following the provisions of 1975 Rules.
This inference is strengthened by the fact that order Annexure P1 does not speak of an appointment made on probation as envisaged by Rule 10.
Therefore, argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner's appointment can owe its existence to the Rules 1975 has to be rejected.
8.
No doubt service of the petitioner was subsequently regularised but that regularisation could validate/legalise the appointment of the petitioner with effect from the date of issue of order on the recommendations of the selecting agency.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board circulated the post in various departments and candidature of 11 applicants was considered.
All these candidates were interviewed by the Board in the month of November, 1980.
The Board accorded its approval to the regularisation of the services of the petitioner vide letter dated 25th September, 1981.
On the basis of this approval the Director was required to pass an appropriate order.
He issued order Annexure P2 under an erroneous impression that service of the petitioner is to be regularised with effect from the date of first appointment.
What the Director has done subsequently is nothing more than rectification of a patent illegality.
The petitioner had no right to be treated as a substantive appointee with effect from 28th November, 1979.
Therefore, his contention that the Director has acted without jurisdiction or has committed any illegality cannot be accepted.
The fact that the Board approved regularisation of service of the petitioner vide letter dated 25th September, 1981 could entitle the petitioner to the benefit of regularisation of service only from that date.
Therefore, it can be said that even while issuing order Annexure P4, the Director has been quite generous to the petitioner.
9.
In view of the above, the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the action taken by the Director in issuing order (Annexure P4) is in contravention of the principles of natural justice, does not merit acceptance.
True it is, that ordinarily Public Authority is required to give an opportunity of hearing to a person whose civil rights are going to be adversely affected, but it is one of the well recognised principles of law that while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court cannot issue a writ of mandamus which would directly or indirectly result in restoration of a patently illegal order.
Writs can be issued by the High Courts when legal and constitutional rights of the individuals are encroached upon.
It can be issued to nullify the arbitrary action of the executive authority but this power cannot be exercised for restoring an order which was originally passed in violation of the constitutional provisions or the provisions of the statute.
In the case of the petitioner, I have already found that the order Annexure P-2 was itself contrary to Article 16.
Therefore, there is no justification for giving any relief to the petitioner on the specious plea of violation of principle of natural justice.
10.
Grievance of the petitioner in relation to his seniority vis-a-vis respondents No. 3 to 6 is also untenable.
As per his own showing the petitioner was appointed as Assistant Public Relations Officer only on the basis of application submitted by him to then Chief Minister.
It has not been shown by the petitioner as to under rule he could be appointed in aforesaid manner.
Therefore, it is logical to hold that the petitioner's appointment as Assistant Public Relations Officer was a backdoor entry.
His appointment on that post could be treated as a regular appointment with effect from 28th November, 1980.
As against this the respondents Nos. 3 to 6 got regular promotion in April, 1980.
Consequently the private respondents had to be treated as senior to the petitioner.
Placement of the petitioner over and above private respondents would have resulted in serious injustice to them.
Thus, it is held that order dated 27th October, 1989 does not suffer from any constitutional or other illegality.
11.
The petitioner is not entitled to seniority in terms of Rule 11 of 1975 Rules because he is not a member of service under these rules.
Only a person appointed against a post encadred in the rules could become a member of service and petitioner has not been appointed against such a post.
12.
There are two additional reasons for not giving relief to the petitioner.
Firstly the petitioner has tried to mislead the Court by mis-quoting the provisions of 1975 Rules for claiming seniority in the cadre of Assistant Public Relations Officers on the basis of Rules 11.
Secondly, and more importantly, the petitioner has thought it convenient not to make a mention of the fact that he was interviewed by the Subordinate Services Selection Board in the month of November 1980 alongwith 10 other candidates.
If that fact would have been mentioned in the petition, regularisation of the services of the petitioner could not have been treated as effective earlier than the date on which he was interviewed alongwith other candidates.
By concealing this material fact, the petitioner has been able to persuade this Court in admitting his petition.
Though the petitioner has ultimately not been able to persuade this Court to grant relief to him, the very conduct of the petitioner in concealing the facts from the Court and securing order of notice of motion or an order of admission of the petition is sufficient to disentitle him to any relief.
It is the pious duty of every person to place all the facts before the Court and leave it to the discretion of the Court to give him relief.
13.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
I would have imposed costs in such like case, but taking into consideration the statement made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has since retired, I have refrained from awarding costs.
Petition dismissed.