Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioner has two-fold grievance.
Firstly, he impugns the order dated June 23, 1993 by which his services were terminated by respondent No. 3.
Secondly, the petitioner complains that respondent No. 2 has not considered the petitioner's claim for absorption in any Govt. aided college in spite of the instructions embodied in the letter dated January 29, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner served as a Lecturer in English at the National Jubilee College, Rewari, from September 7, 1974 to March 31, 1981.
The petitioner alleges that his services were terminated on account of the decision of the management to close the college.
On January 29, 1988, the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, issued instructions to the Principal, Jat College, Rohtak regarding absorption of one Mr. Mahabir Parsad, a Lecturer in Political Science.
In this letter it was inter alia observed that "due to closure of this College, it has been decided that the staff which has become surplus is to be absorbed in other private Colleges".
Claiming that he was similarly situated, the petitioner submitted a representation dated April 29, 1988 to the Department for his absorption.
In spite of repeated representations, no action was taken.
Consequently, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition, with a prayer that the respondents be directed to consider his claim for absorption.
The Motion Bench directed the issue of notice of motion.
In spite of the opportunity having have granted, no written statement was filed.
Ultimately, on August 31, 1989, the Division Bench passed the following order :-  "Despite two adjournments granted to the State, no reply is forthcoming and now more time is sought to file one.
It was observed by us on August 10, 1989 that the matter was urgent and could not brook delay.
In this situation, while granting an adjournment to the State for 3111989, we make an interim direction that the vacancy referred to in paragraph 7 of the petition in the Nirankari College, Sohana be given to the petitioner and he be posted there forthwith but subject to the result of the writ petition.
August 31, 1989 Sd/- MM Punchhi, J Sd/- AL Bahri, J On October 4, 1989, the Director, Higher Education informed the Principal of the Nirankari Baba Gurbachan Singh Memorial College, Sohana (Gurgaon) that the petitioner "should be absorbed against a vacant post of English Lecturer."
Accordingly, vide order dated October 24, 1989, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition, the petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in English.
This appointment was made on ad hoc basis and was subject to the approval of the MD University, Rohtak.
The petitioner continued to work till June 23, 1993 (AN) when he was informed that his services "are no longer required in this College".
Accordingly, he was relieved of his duties with effect from the said date.
It appears that he represented to the Director, Higher Education.
Vide letter dated July 15, 1993, the Director observed that the termination of petitioner's services without prior permission of the Department was not proper.
Consequently, he ordered the college to "withdraw the termination orders forthwith....", and to allow the petitioner to continue in service.
This direction having not been carried out by the respondent-collegee, the petitioner amended the writ petition so as to implead the college and to even challenge the order of termination.
The petitioner alleges that the order of termination is wholly illegal, arbitrary, mala-fide and violative of the principles of natural justice.
3.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the written statement filed by the college, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had been appointed purely on ad hoc basis on the directions of the Director, Higher Education, Haryana.
The college was not a party in the writ petition as originally filed by the petitioner.
The order passed by the Management is not in contravention of the interim directions given by this Court and that a Contempt Petition No. 547 of 1993 filed by the petitioner has been dismissed by this Court vide its order dated July 23, 1993.
Regarding the termination of the petitioner's services, it has been pointed out that the College has discontinued the +1 class in pursuance to the directions given by the Director, Higher Education vide letter dated July 5, 1989.
As a result, no admission was made to the said class in the year 1993- 94.
Accordingly, the petitioner had become surplus.
He was the junior-most person and was working on purely ad hoc basis.
Consequently, his services were terminated.
The petitioner's claim that he had been selected for regular appointment has been controverted.
It has been inter alia averred that the post was advertised on November 20, 1988.
Mrs. Deepti Dharmani was selected for appointment as Lecturer in English.
The petitioner was placed at No. 2.
As Mrs. Deepti Dharmani did not join the post, the college had decided to readvertise it in June, 1989.
It is also claimed that the order was legal, just and fair and had been passed in conformity with the petitioner's terms of appointment.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, besides averring that the petitioner has an effective alternative remedy under the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Services) Act, 1979, and the Rules framed thereunder, it has been stated that the Governing Body of the college is competent to make appointments in accordance with the rules.
Since the petitioner was not working in the National Jubilee College, Rewari at the time of its disaffiliation and his services were terminated by the Management on March 31, 1981, the instructions contained in the letter at Annexure P-1 are not applicable in the petitioner's case.
It has been further submitted that the Haryana Govt. has not decided to absorb the surplus staff in other privately-managed colleges.
It is claimed that they are under no obligation to absorb the petitioner in any other private affiliated college.
Issuance of the letter dated July 15, 1993, by which the college was informed that the termination of petitioner's services was not legal has not been denied.
5.
The petitioner has filed separate replications reiterating the claim as made in the writ petition.
A rejoinder to the replication has also been filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
6.
Mr. RK Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the order of termination is without jurisdiction, violative of the order of the High Court and mala fide.
It is also contended that it is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Learned counsel has further submitted that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Director, Higher Education, the petitioner has a right to be considered for absorption in an affiliated college.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
The sequence of events as delineated above shows that the petitioner had been appointed, in pursuance to the interim directions given by this Court, on purely ad hoc basis.
He had, thus, no right to the post.
In the year 1993, the Management had taken a decision to stop admission to the +1 classes.
Accordingly, the petitioner was rendered surplus.
As a result, the order dated June 23, 1993 was passed.
Mr. Gupta submits that the General Secretary of the Managing Committee who passed this order had no jurisdiction to terminate his services.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that vide letter dated July 5, 1989, the Director of Higher Education had informed the Principals of all the Govt. and Private Colleges that it has been decided to shift 10 plus 2 classes, to the schools in a phased manner within a period of five years.
As a result, the college had not made any admission to the +1 class for the year 1993-94.
At that time, a meeting of the management of the college was held on June 10, 1993.
In this meeting, it was unanimously decided to discontinue the 10+2 classes (Arts and Commerce) and the President was authorised and empowered "to take necessary action/decision(s) in any matter in the light of the above decision on behalf of the House".
Thereafter, the matter was considered on June 22, 1993 by the President, General Secretary and the Principal of the College.
At that time, it was decided that the petitioner being the junior-most Lecturer in English.
may be relieved from duty with effect from June 23, 1993 (AN).
Proceedings of this meeting have been produced as Annexure R-9 with the written statement.
Pursuant to this decision, the petitioner's services were terminated.
It thus appears that the Managing Committee had resolved to delegate the powers for consequential action in pursuance to the decision to stop admission to the classes to the President.
The impugned order was issued after this decision.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the impugned order was without jurisdiction.
8.
Equally untenable is the plea that the action was contrary to the interim directions given by the High Court.
In this connection, it deserves notice that the petitioner has averred that he had been duly selected for the post of Lecturer in pursuance to an advertisement.
In spite of the selection, he was not being appointed.
He had consequently prayed for the issue of a direction for his appointment.
In response to notice of motion, the Govt. had not filed the reply.
The Management was not a party.
At that stage, the Court had issued an interim direction for appointing the petitioner.
This was, however, subject to the final decision of the case.
The directions as noticed above were totally of an interlocutory nature and did not confer a right on the petitioner to continue in service for all time to come.
These had been given at a stage when the Management was not a party.
In view of the factual position as now disclosed, it cannot be said that the action of the Management in terminating the petitioner's services was in any way violative of the interim directions given by this Court.
9.
As for the charge of the mala fides, it may be noticed that the petitioner has not impleaded any individual as a party to the writ petition.
It has not been suggested that either the President or the Secretary had any personal animosity with the petitioner.
No definite allegations have been made against any individual.
Vague averments cannot be made the basis of the charge of mala fides.
Even at the hearing, the only suggestion made by the learned counsel is that the respondents had wrongly abolished 10+1 classes.
This plea is obviously untenable.
As already noticed, the Department of Education had vide its order dated July 4, 1989 directed the colleges to discontinue the 10+2 classes in a phased manner.
It was in pursuance to this direction that the college had decided to discontinue the 10+1 classes for the year 1993-94 session.
Since this decision was based on the directions of the Govt. and had in fact been taken after the lapse of four years, it cannot be said that the action suffered from the vice of mala fides.
10.
Mr. Gupta then submitted that it was incumbent on the respondent-college to obtain the approval of Director, Higher Education and to give the petitioner an opportunity to show cause against the impugned action.
In spite of being asked, the learned counsel has not been able to refer to any rule under which the college may be required to obtain the approval of the Director, Higher Education.
Equally, it has not been shown that the petitioner had any right to the post or that he was entitled to be heard before his services were terminated on account of reduction in staff.
In any case, in the circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that the principles of natural justice were at all attracted.
Accordingly, even this plea cannot be accepted.
11.
Lastly, it has been contended that the petitioner had a right to be considered for absorption like the other employees whose cases were forwarded by the Director, Higher Education to different colleges.
Reference in this behalf has been made to the letter dated January 29, 1988.
On a perusal of this letter, it undoubtedly appears that the Director, Higher Education had recommended that Mr. Mahabir Parshad Verma be absorbed against a vacant post.
In spite of this, the respondents contest the petitioner's claim primarily on the ground that there is no evidence on record to show that he was retrenched from the college.
Particular emphasis has been laid on the averment in the written statement of respondent No. 3 that the petitioner was "absent from Rewari College without any intimation/notice before March 31, 1981.
He was not at all on the strength of the Rewari College w.e.f.
the Sessions 1984-85, when that College was wound up".
Even in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been averred that the Rashtriya Jubilee College was disaffiliated by the University from the year 1984-85 and the petitioner was not working in the College at that time as his services were terminated on March 31, 1981.
There is no averment to show that the petitioner had even challenged the order of termination passed by the Management of the National Jubilee College, Rewari.
It has also not been shown by the petitioner that he was similarly placed with Mr. Mahabir Parshad Verma whose case was forwarded by the Director, Higher Education to the Principal of the Jat College, Rohtak.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner has been treated in a discriminatory manner or that the respondents have acted arbitrarily.
Furthermore, it has not been shown that the State Govt. had taken a decision that the surplus staff of one aided College had to be absorbed in another College or that the Director was competent to take a general policy decision which may be binding on all Colleges.
The Rules prescribe the method of recruitment.
Action of the respondents is not shown to be in violation of the Rules.
12.
Mr. RK Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that the petitioner has had a consistently good record of service and that he had shown excellent results during the course of working with respondent No. 3.
He submits that even earlier his work and conduct were to the satisfaction of the Management of the National Jubilee College, Rewari.
In this situation, he prays that the respondents should be directed to consider his claim for absorption against the available posts in different affiliated colleges.
13.
Mr. Bhandari on behalf of the respondent does not dispute the fact that the petitioner's performance has been good.
He, however, submits that his services had to be terminated only on account of the non-availability of a vacancy.
In such a situation, and on the available material, it is not possible to give any definite directions to the respondents to consider his claim for absorption against any post.
However, if the petitioner has any legitimate grievance in this behalf, he may submit a representation to respondent No. 2 who would consider it and in case it is found that vacancy is available, and the petitioner is qualified therefor, his claim for appointment to such a vacancy shall be considered in accordance with law.
14.
Subject to the above, I find no infirmity with the action of the respondents which may call for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.