Satyabrata Sinha, J- The writ application and the contempt matter are taken up together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
The petitioner has filed the writ application, inter alia, praying for issuance of a writ of or in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to issue letter of interview as per list sent by the Employment Exchange in terms of memo dated 51093 and for further direction upon the respondents not to change and/or cancel the list sent by the Employment Exchange.
3.
The petitioner is said to be an MA in English.
Pursuant to an advertisement issued for filling up a vacancy for the post of Assistant Teacher in Dumurtore Bagbadini High School, Bankura (hereinafter referred to as School), the name of the petitioner who got his name registered in the Employment Exchange, was sponsored in terms of the aforementioned memo.
According to the petitioner, the School Authorities despite the same have not called him for an interview.
Affidavit-in-opposition has been filed on behalf of the Secretary of the said School, being respondent No. 4.
In the said affidavit it has been stated that the prescribed qualification for appointment was BA (Hon.)
MA in English preferably BT/BEd/PGBT The Employment Officer-in-Charge, District Employment Exchange sent the names of several persons wherein the name of the petitioner appears at serial No. 18 with the qualification B.Sc., MA, in English and B.Ed.
The petitioner was the only candidate having a Post-Graduate degree.
It has been contended that according to the new recruitment rules the name of a post-graduate candidate can be sponsored only by the National Employment Exchange and in this view of the matter as the petitioner was not eligible for appointment no interview letter was sent to him.
4.
Mr. Chakraborty, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, inter alia, submitted that keeping in view of the fact that the petitioner was eligible and his name has been sponsored by the Local Employment Exchange, the same could not have been cancelled or withdrawn nor the School Authorities can refuse to allow the petitioner to appear at the interview.
The learned Counsel further submitted that in any event the School Authorities were bound to comply with the interim order passed by this Court whereby and whereunder the petitioner was allowed to appear at the interview and non-compliance thereof amounts to gross contempt of this Court.
5.
Mr. Benerjee appearing on behalf of the respondents on the other hand, submitted that in terms of the Recruitment Rules framed by the Government of West Bengal which has come into force with effect from 20th May, 1993 as the petitioner was not qualified to appear at the interview, no prejudice has been caused to him.
6.
The question which falls for consideration in the writ application, therefore, is as to whether the petitioner was entitled to appear at the interview.
7.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner is a holder of post-graduate degree whereas the qualification required for the purpose of appointment of Assistant Teacher was Graduate or Honours Graduate.
The Director of School Education framed appointment rules in exercise of the power conferred upon him by clauses (i) and (ii) of Sub Rule (1) and by clause (1)of Sub Rule (4) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969 Education Department's notification No. 1598-Edn.
(S) dated 15769 as amended from time to time.
The said order cancels all other previous orders of the directorate in respect of procedures for recruitment of teaching and non-teaching staff of non-Government Secondary Schools.
8.
Rule 4(a) and Rule 6(k) read as follows :  "Rule 4(a).
On receipt of the prior permission, the school authorities shall approach the local Employment Exchange for sponsoring the names of the candidates up to Honours Graduate level and National Employment Exchange for Post - Graduate candidates, according to prior permission within 7 days.
Rule 6(k).
The candidates should be selected from the list sent by the Employment Exchange and no second list should be obtained.
If two or more candidates for the post of teacher secure equal marks, preference shall be given to the academically better one.
For non-teaching posts seniority in age shall be counted for giving preference."
A bare perusal of Rule 4(a) aforementioned leaves no room for doubt that the School Authorities are to approach the Local Employment Exchange for sponsoring the names of candidates upto Honours Graduate level whereas National Employment Exchange is to be approached for Post-Graduate candidates.
The local Employment Exchange, therefore, could not have sponsored the name of the petitioner.
Sponsoring of the petitioner's name was, therefore, by way of a mistake which could be rectified by the competent authority of the Local Employment Exchange.
9.
In terms of Rule 6 (k) candidates are to be selected only from the list sent by the Employment Exchange.
The validity of the aforementioned Rules is not in question.
The aforementioned Rules have presumably been framed by the Directorate keeping in view the fact that the post of Assistant Teacher should not normally be filled up by person having higher qualification.
Had the Managing Committee of the School been of the opinion that for filling up some posts candidates having Post-Graduate qualification were required to be interviewed, they could have called for the names of the candidates only from the National Employment Exchange.
They having not done so, Local Employment Exchange could have sent the names of only such candidates who are having degrees up to Honours level and not beyond the same.
10.
It is now a well settled principle of law that Statute has to be read as a whole.
It is further well known that a Statute has to be interpreted keeping in view its object and purpose.
It is further well known that the Statutory Authorities must act within the four corners of the Statute.
It is also well settled that when a procedure is laid down by Statutory Authority to do a thing in a particular manner, the same may be done in the manner prescribed or not at all.
In the case of the SR Tewari v. District Board, Agra, reported in AIR 1964 SC 1680 it has been held that the powers of a statutory body are always subject to the Statute which has constituted it and must be exercised consistently with the Statute and Courts in appropriate cases have power to declare an action of the body illegal or ultra vires, even if the action relates to determination of employment of a servant.
Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in the case of M Pentiah & Ors. v. Moddala Veeramallappa & Ors., reported in AIR 1961 SC 1107 in the following terms:-  In Mr. Pentiah v. Veeramallappa, reported in AIR 1961 SC 1107, the Appeal Court wherein it has been held as follows :-  "17.
In this context learned counsel for the appellants invoked the doctrine of law that an action of a statutory corporation may be ultra vires its powers without being illegal and also the principle that when a statute confers an express power, a power inconsistent with that expressly given cannot be implied.
It is not necessary to consider all the decisions cited, as learned counsel for the respondents does not canvass the correctness of the said principles.
It would, therefore, be sufficient to notice two of the decisions cited at the Bar.
The decision in Wenlock (Baroness) v. River Dee Co, (1885) 10 AC 354 is relied upon in support of the proposition that when a corporation is authorised to do an act subject to certain conditions, it must be deemed to have been prohibited to do the said act except in accordance with the provisions of that Act which confers the authority on it.
Where by Act 14 and 15 Vict, a company was empowered to borrow at interest for the purposes of the concerned Acts, subject to certain conditions, it was held that the company was prohibited by the said Act from borrowing except in accordance with the provisions of that Act.
Strong reliance is placed on the decision in Attorney General v. Fulham Corporation, (1921) 1 Ch D 440.
There, in exercise of the powers conferred under the Baths and Wash-houses Acts, the Metropolitan Borough of Fulham propounded a scheme in substitution of an earlier one whereunder it installed a wash house to which persons resorted for washing their clothes bringing their own wash materials and utilised the facilities offered by the Municipality on payment of the prescribed charges.
Sarjant, J, held that the object of the legislation was to provide for persons who became customers facilities for doing their own washing, but the scheme provided for washing by the Municipality itself and that, therefore, it was ultra vires the statute.
In coming to that conclusion the learned Judge, after considering an earlier decision on the subject applied the following principle to the facts of the case before him : "That recognises that in every case it is for a corporation of this kind to show that it has affirmatively an authority to do particular act; but that in applying that principle, the rule is not to be applied too narrowly, and the corporation is entitled to do not only that which is expressly authorised but that which is reasonable incidental to or consequential upon that which is in terms authorised."
This Court also in the case of Scotts (P) Ltd. & Ors. v. The Corporation of Calcutta & Ors., reported in 79 CWN 883 this Court held :  12.
In the case of Maniuddin Bepari v. The Chairman of the Municipal Commissioners, Dacca, 40 CWN 17, RC Mitter, J observed at p. 18-19 as follows :  "It is a fundamental principle of law that a natural person has the capacity to do all lawful things unless his capacity has been curtailed by some rule of law.
It is equally a fundamental principle that in the case of a statutory corporation it is just the other way.
The Corporation has not power to do anything unless those powers are conferred on it by the statute which creates it."
11.
A School recognised by the States discharges Public Function.
So does the Employment Exchange.
Both the authorities are bound by the statutory rules and they are statutorily obliged to act strictly in terms thereof.
12.
In this view of the matter there cannot be any doubt that the Managing Committee of the School could not have asked the Employment Exchange to sponsor candidates having higher qualifications.
13.
Rule 6 (k) upon which strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Chakraborty cannot be read in isolation.
It has to be read with the other provisions of the said Rules excluding Rule 4 (a).
14.
In the case of Indian Administrative Service (S.C.S.)
Association, UP & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors., reported in 1993 Supp (1) SCC 730 : 1993(2) SCT 400 (SC) the Supreme Court has held that in case of ambiguity Court can endeavour to iron out the creases and adopt a just, reasonable and sensible construction in consonance with the legislative intention.
It has further been held that in a given case if the provision is found to be defective, wrong, ultra vires or violative of fundamental rights, Court can strike it down but it cannot substitute its own words and phrases to supply casus omissus.
In the case of State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh, reported in 1994(1) RCR(Crl.)
736 (SC) : 1994(3) SCC 299 it has been held as follows :-  "As discussed above, in considering whether a provision in a statute is mandatory and the effect of non-compliance of the same, the Courts should keep in mind the real intention of the legislature keeping in view the whole scope of the Act and particular provisions to be construed in the context.
Keeping these principles in view, we shall proceed to consider the nature of some of these relevant provisions".
15.
For the reasons aforementioned, it must be held that the petitioner is not entitled to appear at the interview as the Employment Exchange could not have sent his name.
In view of my findings aforementioned, there is no merit in this application which is accordingly dismissed.
16.
In this view of the matter, in my opinion it is not necessary to proceed with the contempt matter any further.
Both the applications are disposed of accordingly.
All parties are to act on a signed xerox copy of this judgment on the usual undertaking.
Ordered accordingly.