Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in this group of 23 petitions have retired as member of different Education Services in the State of Punjab, Some of the petitioners were teaching in Govt.
Colleges while others were working in schools.
They claim that they are entitled to encash the "half-pay leave" which was due to them at the time of their retirement.
They pray for the issue of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents to make the payment to them along with interest.
With the consent of the learned counsel for the parties, we have taken up these cases for final disposal at the stage of preliminary hearing.
2.
It deserves notice at the outset that the claim for encashment of "half- pay leave" by an employee in a vacation department on his retirement from service has already been negatived by a Full Bench of this Court in Surjit Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) PLR 428 : 1992(3) SCT 485 (P&H) (FB).
It has been categorically held by the Full Bench that "in no case" a permanent employee "in vacation department shall become entitled to leave encashment on his retirement in lieu of half pay leave then remaining due to his credit".
We are further informed that this view of the Full Bench has the imprimature of their Lordships of the Supreme Court inasmuch as a petition for special leave against this judgment has already been dismissed.
Consequently, the scope of the controversy and the arguments in this case has been considerably narrowed down.
3.
Faced with the judgments of the Full Bench, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioners who opened the arguments on behalf of the petitioners, primarily contended that 'half pay leave' is 'leave' as defined in Rule 8113 and every Govt. employee retiring on superannuation is "entitled to cash payment in lieu of the unutilised leave due as leave preparatory to retirement---" in accordance with the provisions of Rule 821 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I (hereinafter to be referred to as the Rules).
He has further submitted that members of the Education Services were liable to transfer to the office of the Director of Public Instructions and such amongst them as were actually transferred and had retired to leave encashment.
The counsel submitted that the action of the respondents in declining this relief to the petitioners was thus arbitrary and discriminatory.
The arguments raised by the learned counsel were supplemented by M/s. J S Khehar, J S Toor and P C Chatrath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in different petitions.
On the other hand, Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the respondents has contended that the claim of the petitioners was wholly untenable under the rules.
4.
In Rule 8113, leave has been defined to include "earned leave, half pay leave, commuted leave, leave not due and extraordinary leave."
It has been further provided that "earned leave means leave earned in respect of periods spent on duty."
(emphasis supplied).
The 'half pay leave' has been defined to mean "leave earned in respect of completed years of service."
(emphasis supplied).
Rule 821 on which primary reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners inter-alia contemplates the encashment of leave.
The relevant portion of this rule provides as under :-  "821(a) Leave at the credit of a Government employee in his leave account shall lapse on the date of his retirement :  Provided that the Government employee retiring on superannuation on or after the 30th day of September, 1977, shall, subject to the provisions of Sub-rule (c), be entitled to cash payment in lieu of the unutilised leave due as leave preparatory to retirement as under :-  (i) the cash payment shall be equivalent to leave salary limited to a maximum of 180 days' earned leave;  (ii) the cash payment shall become payable on retirement on superannuation in lumpsum as a one-time settlement;  (iii) xx xx xx  (iv) xx xx xx  (v) xx xx xx  (c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub-rule (a), on or after the 11th day of March, 1981, the cash payment for the un- utilised leave preparatory to retirement admissible under the aforesaid sub- rule (a) shall be calculated as under :  Pay admissible on the date of retirement plus dearness allowance admissible on that date X Number of days of unutilised earned leave at credit on the date of retirement subject to a maximum of 180 days.
30 (d) xx xx xx"  The learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the above provisions having not been noticed by the Full Bench, the claim made by the petitioners cannot be negatived in view of the decision in Surjit Kumar Sharma's case (supra).
He further submitted that in view of the aforesaid provisions, the writ petition deserved to be allowed.
Is it so?
5.
Rule 821 primarily provides that leave at the credit of a Govt. employee lapses on the date of his retirement.
The proviso to clause (a) carves out an exception.
It provides that employees retiring on superannuation on or after the 30th day of September, 1977 shall "subject to the provisions of sub-rule (c) be entitled to cash payment in lieu of the unutilised leave due as leave preparatory to retirement."
Sub-rule(c) lays down that "notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub-rule(a)" the amount of cash payment for the unutilised leave preparatory to retirement to which an employee is entitled after the 11th day of March, 1981 shall be calculated as under :-  "Pay admissible on the date of retirement plus dearness allowance admissible on that date X Number of days of unutilised earned leave at credit on the date of retirement subject to a maximum of 180 days" 30 In our view, the crucial words are - "number of days of unutilised earned leave----".
It is, thus, apparent that whatever be the unutilised leave due as leave preparatory to retirement, it is only 'unutilised earned leave' at his credit that can be encashed.
The provision in sub-rule (a) is 'subject to' that in sub-rule (c).
The non-obstante clause in sub-rule (c) makes it obvious that after March 11, 1981, it is only 'unutilised earned leave' that can be taken into consideration for encashment of leave.
On a reading of the Rules we find that while an employee is entitled to different kinds of leave during the course of his service, viz. earned leave, half pay leave or extraordinary leave, rule 821 contemplates the encashment of only 'earned leave'.
This conclusion is obvious on a harmonious reading of sub-rules (a) and (c).
While the cash payment has to be equal "to leave salary limited to a maximum of 180 days' earned leave, " sub-rule (c) clearly contemplates that "days of unutilised earned leave at credit on the date of retirement subject to a maximum of 180 days" only can be encashed.
It does not provide for the encashment of half-pay leave.
Had it been the intention of the rule-making authority to permit encashment of all kinds of leave, it could have so provided.
It has not done so.
In such a situation, the Court cannot add words to the rule.
It cannot grant a benefit not contemplated under the rules.
It is a well-known canon of interpretation that if the words of a provision are clear and unambiguous, then the Court cannot add thereto.
This is the precise position in the present case.
On a consideration of the provisions of rule 821 it is clear to us that encashment of leave is admissible only in respect of the unutilised earned leave at the credit of an employee on the date of retirement.
6.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, however, contended that according to sub-rule(a)(i) itself, the cash payment has to be equivalent to "leave salary limited to a maximum of 180 days' earned leave," According to the learned counsel leave includes earned leave and half pay leave."
Accordingly, the learned counsel submits that an employee may have half-pay leave for 400 days to his credit.
It would be equal to 200 days of earned leave.
On this basis, the counsel contended that such an employee shall be entitled to the payment of cash equivalent to "leave salary limited to a maximum of 180 days of earned leave."
7.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The provisions of rules have to be harmoniously construed.
Sub-rule(c) leaves no manner of doubt that it is the number of days of unutilised earned leave which determine the employee's entitlement to the payment of money.
The provisions of sub-rules (a) and (c) when read harmoniously lead to only one conclusion viz. the employee is entitled to "cash payment in lieu of unutilised" earned leave.
We consequently reject the contention raised by the learned counsel.
8.
Even otherwise, it appears to us that the rules create a classification between the vacation departments and the other departments.
Rule 8.117 categorically provides that "earned leave is not admissible to a Government employee serving in a vacation department in respect of duty performed in any year in which he avails himself of the full vacation.
"The rule also lays down the method of determination of the earned leave admissible to such Government employee," in respect of any year in which he is prevented from availing himself of the full vacation...." The classification is prima facie reasonable.
It has not been challenged.
The petitioners prior to their retirement from service were working in the Education Department where the facility of vacation is admittedly available.
As such, they were not entitled to earned leave except when they were unable to avail of the full vacation.
Having not got any earned leave to their credit, they cannot claim the benefit of encashment under the provisions of Rule 821.
For the purpose of encashment, only earned leave is to be taken into consideration.
Consequently, no benefit can be granted to the petitioners.
9.
It is also worthy of notice that under Rule 8119, half pay leave can be granted to an employee only on "medical certificate or on private affairs."
The rule also contemplates that "commuted leave not exceeding half the amount of half pay leave due may be granted to a Govt. employee on medical certificate subject to" the prescribed conditions.
Even commuted leave can be granted only when the competent authority "has reason to believe that the Govt. employee will return to duty on its expiry......"consequently, it is apparent that the half pay leave is granted only for limited purposes.
As such, there is a clear distinction between the earned leave and half pay leave.
While earned leave can be availed of for any purpose half pay leave can be granted only in case of illness or on account of private affirs.
In such a situation, there appears to be a clear rationale behind Rule 821 when it permits encashment of only earned leave.
Even though all kinds of leave lapses on retirement, Rule 821 carves out an exception and provides for the encashment of only earned leave and not the half pay leave.
The provision is reasonable and the action of the respondents is in complete conformity therewith.
In this context it is worthy of notice that initially Rule 821 inter alia provided as under :-  "821(a) Leave at the credit of a Government employee in his leave account shall lapse on the date of retirement.
Provided that if in sufficient time which shall not be less than 120 days plus the period of leave, the Government employee intends to avail, before that date.
He has-  (i) formally applied for leave due as preparatory to retirement and leave has been refused in whole or in part, or  (ii) ascertained in writing from the sanctioning authority that such leave if applied for would not be granted, in either case, the ground of refusal being the requirements of public service, then the Government employee may be granted, after the date of retirement, the amount of earned leave so refused, increased by the amount of earned leave earned by him during the period between the date on which leave preparatory to retirement was to commence and the date of retirement and decreased by such leave, if any availed of during the same period, subject to a maximum of 120 days."
A perusal of the above provision shows that even under the unamended provision the benefit was admissible only in respect of the earned leave.
It also shows that the leave could be granted after the date of retirement only when it had been refused in whole or in part "or would not be granted" on grounds of "the requirements of public service."
As such, grant of earned leave after retirement was permissible only when it was initially refused in public interest.
The rule was amended.
The rigour of the provision was partly taken away.
It is no longer necessary that leave should have been refused during service.
Now, it can be got encashed even if it was never refused.
However, the limited benefit now conferred by the rule cannot be extended beyond what has been expressly provided for.
10.
It was then contended that the action is arbitrary inasmuch as the benefit of encashment of leave is admissible whenever an employee is transferred from a college or a school to the office of the Director of Public Instructions, but is not granted to a person who has not been so transferred.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The reason for permitting encashment of earned leave due to an employee serving in the office of the Director of Public Instructions at the time of his retirement is obvious.
The office of the Director is not a vacation department.
As such, earned leave is admissible to such an employee.
When an employee has got earned leave to his credit, the encashment is clearly permissible such persons as are unable to avail of the vacation while serving in schools or colleges are also entitled to the benefit of earned leave.
Even they would be entitled to the encashment of this leave.
Consequently, no arbitrariness whatsoever is involved.
11.
Mr. JS Khehar contended that half pay leave could be utilised along with earned leave as leave preparatory to retirement.
He referred to Note 4 to Rule 8.116 in support of this contention.
This Note inter alia provides that "in cases, where a Government employee who is required to retire; or who himself chooses to be retired; before the age of superannuation, may be allowed the leave due and admissible to him as indicated below, provided it does not extend beyond the date on which he attains the age of superannuation-----".
This provision has no relevance to the present controversy.
It only enables the Government to grant leave to a person who retires prior to the age of superannuation.
Strictly speaking, it is of no relevance to the present controversy.
This provision only entitles the government to permit an employee to avail of all leave including half pay leave if he retires before the age of superannuation.
The age of superannuation is 58 years.
Under the Rules, the employee can or be retired at or after attaining the age of 50 or 55 years.
He can be granted all kinds of leave due to him subject to the condition that it does not extend beyond the age of superannuation.
Such is not the position in the present case.
12.
Mr. JS Toor, counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 6603 of 1993 opened his argument with a great flourish.
He contended that even the judicial department is a vacation department, but the claim for encashment of leave has been allowed by this Court in respect of a judicial officer.
He referred to the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Shri Tara Singh v. Punjab State (CWP No. 16963 of 1989) which was decided on March 15, 1981.
13.
We have perused the judgment.
Mr. Tara Singh was a member of the Subordinate Judiciary and had retired as a Senior Subordinate Judge.
After his retirement his representation for the encashment of half pay leave was rejected by the High Court on August 27, 1988 without disclosing any reasons."
Consequently, he had filed the above-mentioned petition.
The learned Judge who heard the petition held that "it was the duty of the respondents to consider the case on merits and communicate the decision to the petitioner disclosing reasons in support of the decision.
A wholly non- speaking and cryptic order could not be countenanced, as in fact it was not a decision at all, but only an intimation, bringing to the notice of the officer, the conclusion arrived at, and not the reasons in support of the conclusion."
In view of this, the orders declining the claim made by Tara Singh were quashed and a direction was issued to the respondent "to consider the case of the petitioner afresh, after affording to him an opportunity of being heard, and to decide his claim by passing a well reasoned and speaking order within a period of three months."
This decision does not in any way, support the claim made by the petitioner.
14.
No other point was raised.
15.
In view of the above, we find no merit in these petitions, which are dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.