G R Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3889, 3890, 3891 and 6049 of 1993.
2.
A challenge has been made to the orders of termination from service almost on identical grounds.
3.
The petitioners were selected as Trainee Linemen.
On successful completion of the period of probation as trainee linemen, their services were regularised.
Later on, it transpired that the petitioners had furnished bogus certificates of experience.
A vigilance enquiry was held and it was found that the experience certificates furnished by the petitioners were bogus and their services were terminated.
Some of them filed Civil Writ Petition No. 9839 of 1991 in this Court and the same was disposed of by a Bench of this Court by order, dated November 15, 1991 observing thus :  "It may briefly be noticed that the petitioners approached this Court earlier by filing a writ petition and ex parte order was passed by the Motion Bench, calling upon the Board to consider the case of regularisation of the services of the petitioners within a specified period.
Since no action was taken by the Board, some contempt petitions were filed against the Board and it was then that the stand was taken by those Officers on behalf of the Board that the case related to the commission of fraud.
Those contempt petitions were dismissed and in one of such petitions on a suo moto action taken by the Judge, some of the petitioners were convicted.
The Board has also got criminal case registered regarding the commission of this fraud.
In exercise of extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, we do not consider it a fit case for deciding this disputed question of fraudulent induction of the petitioners into service of the Board.
Obviously if fraud was committed, as is alleged, neither any rules nor any principles of natural justice were required to be followed while terminating the services of the petitioners.
It may be that the petitioners, who were peons or Linemen working with the Board were neither misled or they themselves were parties in securing jobs in connivance with the officials of the Board.
We leave it to the petitioners to seek remedy in any other appropriate forum where the matter can be gone into in detail.
This writ petition is dismissed.
We leave the parties to bear their own costs."
4.
On receipt of the directions from this Court, the Punjab State Electricity Board (for short, the Board) held regular enquiry as envisaged under Rule 8 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971 (for short, the Regulations).
The Inquiry Officer held that except in the case of petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 3891 of 1993, the experience certificates were valid.
In the case of Baldev Singh, petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 3891 of 1993, it was held that there is a doubt about the genuineness of the experience certificate produced by him, after seeing the enquiry report, the Disciplinary Authority did not subscribe to the views of the Inquiry Officer and opined that the charge levelled against the petitioners stood proved and ordered that the petitioners' services be terminated.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the Disciplinary Authority disagreed with the report of the Inquiry Officer but it did not furnish the grounds of disagreement to the petitioners to enable them to meet with the same.
He submits that any material, which has to be used against the delinquent official must be furnished to him and he must be given an opportunity to explain the same before it can be used to his prejudice.
To the contrary, the learned counsel for the Board submitted that regulation 9(2) of the Regulations does not provide for furnishing the grounds of disagreement with the report of the Inquiry Officer by the Disciplinary Authority to the delinquent officials and as such, the petitioners cannot be allowed to urge that the orders of termination are vitiated for the reasons that the material was used against them for which they had no opportunity to explain.
6.
Regulation 9 of the Regulations reads thus :  (1) The punishing authority if it is not itself the inquiring authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of Regulation 8 as far as may be.
(2) The punishing authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for each disagreement and record its own findings of such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) If the punishing authority having regard to its finding on all or any of the articles of charge is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv) of Regulation 5 should be imposed on the employee, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Regulation 10, make an order imposing such penalty.
(4) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 5 should be imposed on the employee, it shall make an order imposing such penalty and it shall not be necessary to give the employee any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed."
7.
The Punishing Authority can remit the case to the Inquiry Officer for further inquiry in accordance with regulation 9(1) of the Regulations.
8.
Under regulation 9(2) of the Regulations, the Punishing Authority can disagree with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge and record its reasons for disagreement on each item of charge if the evidence on record is sufficient.
9.
Under regulation 9(3) of the Regulations, the punishing authority can impose penalties mentioned in Clauses (i) to (iv) of regulation 5.
Under regulation 9(4) of the Regulations the punishing authority having regard to its findings, if it opines that the penalties specified in Clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 5 be imposed on the employee, it shall not be necessary to give the employee an opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed.
Clauses (v) to (ix) of regulation 5 provides for major penalties and removal from service is one of the penalties, which can be inflicted by the punishing authority.
It is correct that rule 9 (2) does not provide for furnishing grounds of disagreement on each item of charge from the report of the Inquiry Officer to the delinquent official.
But the clause has to be so read that the requirement of natural justice was implied in the said clause or even if such basic principles of natural justice were implied, there has been no violation of the principles of natural justice in respect of the order passed in this case.
In respect of an order involving adverse or Penal consequences against an employee of Statutory Corporation like the respondent there must be an investigation into the charges consistent with the requirement of the situation in accordance with the principles of natural justice as far as these were applicable to a particular situation.
So, whether a particular principle of natural justice has been violated or not has to be judged in the background of the nature of charges, the nature of the investigation conducted in the background of any statutory or relevant rules governing such enquiries.
Here the infraction of the natural justice complained of was that the petitioner were not given an opportunity to rebut the material gathered by the Disciplinary Authority in his absence.
The Disciplinary Authority has to record reason for disagreement to the report of the Inquiry Officer and these can only be made basis of infliction punishment if these were conveyed to the delinquent official and he has been offered an opportunity to explain.
If it was not so done, action stands vitiated for non-compliance of the principles of natural justice.
10.
A precise question arose for consideration in State Bank of India v. D.C. Aggarwal, JT 1992(6) Supreme Court 673 : 1993(1) SCT 225.
The Apex Court put the following question for its reply :  "Can Disciplinary Authority while imposing punishment, major or minor, act on material which is neither supplied nor shown to the delinquent is the only issue, of substance, which arises for consideration in this appeal filed by the State Bank of India against the judgment and order of the High Court of Punjab annd Haryana ?"
and the question was answered thus :  "Taking action against an employee on confidential document which is the foundation of order exhibits complete misapprehension about the procedure that is required to be followed by the Disciplinary Authority.
May be that the Disciplinary Authority has recorded its own findings and it may be coincidental that reasoning and basis of returning the finding of guilt are same as in the CVC report but is being a material obtained behind back of the respondent without his knowledge or supplying of any copy to him the High Court in our opinion did not commit any error in quashing the order.
Non- supply of the Vigilance report was one of the grounds taken in appeal.
But that was so because the respondent prior to service of the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority did not have any occasion to know that CVC had submitted some report against him.
The submission of the learned Addl.
Solicitor General that CVC recommendations are confidential copy, of which, could not be supplied cannot be accepted.
Recommendations of Vigilance prior to initiation of proceedings are different than CVC recommendation which was the basis of the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority."
11.
In the light of the authoritative pronouncement, it has to be held that it was incumbent upon the Disciplinary Authority to furnish the grounds of disagreement from the report of the Inquiry Officer to the delinquent official before proceeding to inflict the punishment.
The Board has violated the principles of audi alterm partem and this renders the orders of termination from services invalid.
It is correct that the petitioners had got an equal efficacious remedy by way of appeal to challenge their orders of termination from service, but in the circumstances of the case, we think it will meet the ends of justice if the Chairman of the Board is advised to look into the matter personally and if he finds that the certificates of experience do not suffer from any infirmity as is suggested by the Inquiry Officer, he will rescind the orders of terminations from service and pass such orders as are warranted.
We dispose of the writ petition petitions with these observations.