RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The brief facts leading to the filing of the present writ petition are that the petitioner was working as Joint Director, Animal Husbandry, Punjab (in PAHS Class-I) when he was promoted as Director, Animal Husbandry, Punjab on 18.1.1984 w.e.f.
131983 in the pay scale of Rs. 2300-100-2500/.
Copy of the order has been attached as Annexure P/2 to the writ petition.
It was stipulation in the order of promotion that the same is without prejudice to the outcome of CWPNo.
2932 of 1979 and other petitions regarding seniority of PAHSClass-I and PAHSClass-II officers pending in the Punjab & Haryana High Court.
2.
Respondent No.1-State of Punjab through the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Animal Husbandry Fisheries Deptt.
issued a memo on 9.2.1984 vide which salary slip of the petitioner was issued.
It was mentioned in the said memo that as the promotion of Dr. Grewal had been ordered without prejudice to the outcome of C.W.P.
No. 2932 of 1979 and other petitions regarding seniority of PAHSClass-I and PAHSClass-II Officers, pending in the Punjab & Haryana High Court, as such the salary may be drawn after taking an undertaking from the petitioner, to the effect that the excess amount drawn will be refunded, if so warranted by the outcome of the abovesaid writ petitions.
Petitioner gave an undertaking on 15.2.1984 to the effect that the excess amount drawn by him as salary w.e.f.
131983 to 29.2.1984 would be refunded if so warranted by the outcome of C.W.P.
No. 2932 of 1979 and other petitioners regarding his seniority of PAHSClass-I and PAHSClass-II Officers, pending in the Punjab & Haryana High Court.
3.
From the averments made in the petition, it seems that only writ petition No.2932 of 1979 filed by S/Shri Harbhajan Singh Nat and Lachhman Singh Toor challenging the fixation of seniority in PAHSClass-I was pending in the Punjab & Haryana High Court, when the petitioner was promoted as Director in the year 1984.
The said writ petition was dismissed as infructuous on 1771986 by passing the following order:  "The learned counsel for the petitioner states that this petition has been rendered infructuous and may be dismissed as such.
Since there is no opposition to the prayer made, on behalf of the respondents, I order accordingly but with no order as to costs."
4.
While the petitioner was working as a Director, Animal Husbandry, he retired from service on 3181986 after attaining the age of superannuation.
It is not disputed that no order of reversion was passed against the petitioner prior to the date of his retirement and he continued to work as Director till he attained the age of superannuation.
5.
Vide order dated 2621988 (Annexure P/1) it was ordered that out of the gratuity sanctioned in favour of the petitioner, a sum of Rs. 1335490 which was paid in excess to him as Director, Animal Husbandry and Rs. 420075 as recovery of house rent may be deducted.
Petitioner has to quarrel regarding the latter amount.
The present writ petition has been filed challenging the abovesaid order by which it has been ordered that the amount of Rs. 1335490 be deducted from the gratuity.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that in fact the petitioner had worked as a Director w.e.f.
131983 to the date of his superannuation and therefore the question of any excess payment made to the petitioner towards salary as a Director would not arise.
According to the learned counsel, no undertaking could be asked for from the petitioner that because of some outcome of writ petitions which were pending at the time of his promotion as a Director, he would refund the excess payment towards the salary as a Director.
In any case, learned counsel has submitted that the undertaking was specific to the effect that any excess payment was to be refunded only because an outcome of the decision of C.W.P.
No. 2932 of 1979 or any other petitions regarding seniority of PAHSClass-I and Class-II Officers, which were pending on the date of his promotion.
In no other eventuality the refund was to be made of any excess payment.
Since, according to the learned counsel, writ petition No. 2932 of 1979 had been dismissed as infructuous and there was no other writ petition pending on the date when the petitioner was promoted as Director, nothing was recoverable even according to the undertaking.
7.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been submitted that writ petition No. 2932 of 1979 had been rendered infructuous as the department itself had undertaken to frame a fresh seniority list of PAHSClass-I Officers.
After the framing of such a seniority list in the year 1985, 2 separate writ petition Nos. 5532 and 5533 of 1985 were filed by S/Sh.
Harbhajan Singh Nat and Lachhman Singh Toor respectively claiming seniority over and above the petitioner and some other PAHSClass-I Officers.
These writ petitions were allowed by a Learned Single Judge of this Court against which the private respondents as well as the state Government filed LPAs, which I am told, have been dismissed.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents since the writ petitions filed by Mr. Nat and Mr. Toor were allowed and they were held to be senior to the petitioner, necessary consequence of that is that the petitioner could not have been promoted as Director from the date he was actually promoted.
In this view of the matter, learned counsel submitted that recovery was rightly ordered on the basis of the undertaking given by the petitioner.
8.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
I am not going into the point whether an undertaking, as given by the petitioner, could be asked for by the State Government, because I am of the view that even as per the undertaking given by the petitioner, no recovery could be ordered against him.
As observed earlier, it is not disputed that no order had been passed, even notionally, reverting the petitioner from the post of Director to that of Joint Director.
The petitioner had infact worked as a Director from 131983 to the date of his superannuation.
The undertaking was to the effect that if so warranted by the outcome to the abovesaid.
writ petition that the petitioner was required to refund the excess pay drawn as Director, he would refund the same.
Surely, the outcome of writ petition No. 2932 of 1979 which was dismissed as infructuous did not warrant that the petitioner was to refund the excess pay (i.e. the difference between the salary of Joint Director and that of Director).
The undertaking was not to effect that if any writ petition is filed at any time after the promotion of the petitioner as Director and it is held that somebody else was senior to the petitioner, even then the excess salary had to be refunded.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petitioner is allowed and impugned order dated 2621988, Annexure P/1 is quashed to the extent it orders the deduction of Rs. 1335490 from the gratuity of the petitioner.
The amount will carry an interest at the rate of 12% per annum, from the date of the gratuity fell due to the date of payment.
Let this amount, alongwith the interest be paid to the petitioner within two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.