Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - A Freedom Fighter's widow having failed to persuade Union of India to grant her Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension, has approached this Court through the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Battan Singh, a Freedom Fighter filed C.W.P.
No. 5803 of 1990.
He averred that he had joined under Netaji Subhash Chander Bose in the Indian National Army in March, 1942 as a Sepoy.
He served under the command of Col. Gurmit Singh and Company Commander Narain Singh.
He was apprehended and arrested by the British Army.
He was kept under detention for about 7 months of IPPO City in Burma.
In recognition of his contribution to the freedom of the country, he was awarded a `Tamra Pattar' by the Prime Minister of India, Smt. Indira Gandi in August, 1972.
The `Tamra Pattar' was actually handed over to the petitioner in a ceremony held at Amritsar which was presided over by the then Chief Minister of Punjab Giani Zail Singh.
3.
The Punjab Govt. published a booklet on February 23, 1974.
In this booklet the names of all freedom fighters and members of the INA who were awarded the `Tamra Pattar' were mentioned.
The petitioner's husband's name finds mention in this list at serial No. 17.
A photo copy of the relevant extract of this booklet has been produced by the learned counsel for the petitioner and has been placed on record as Mark `A'.
The factum of this booklet having been published is duly mentioned in the writ petition.
The original was shown at the time of hearing.
4.
The Govt. of India introduced a scheme for the grant of pension to the Freedom Fighters and their families.
Under the scheme, the pension was admissible to only such families as were in need of financial assistance on account of their meagre resources.
With effect from August 1, 1980, the benefit of the scheme was extended to all Freedom Fighters "as a token of Sanman to them."
In Paragraphs 3 and 4 of this scheme, the conditions of eligibility were prescribed.
It was inter alia provided that for the purpose of the grant of Sanman Pension the family included the widow also.
It was further provided that "a person who had suffered a minimum imprisonment of six months in the mainland jails before Independence", shall be eligible for the grant of Sanman Pension.
It was further provided that "ex-INA personnel will be eligible for pension if the imprisonment/detention suffered by them was outside India."
The minimum period of actual imprisonment was required to be 6 months.
5.
It appears that Battan Singh was a man of meagre resources and approached the Govt. of India for the grant of pension.
Having failed to get the requisite relief, he filed C.W.P.
No. 5803 of 1990 in this Court.
In this writ petition the State of Punjab, the Deputy Commissioner, Kapurthala and the Union of India were impleaded as respondents.
After the issue of notice of motion, written statements were filed on behalf of the State of Punjab and the Deputy Commissioner, Kapurthala.
The petitioner (Battan Singh) had specifically averred in the petition that he had served as a member of the INA and the complete information was furnished by him.
It had been detained for a period of about 7 months.
This specific averment was admitted in the affidavit filed by the Deputy Commissioner, Kapurthala.
The petition came up for hearing before the Bench on November 14, 1990 and was disposed of with the following order :-  "During the course of hearing, Mr. Mohunta, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3, ie the Union of India, gives an undertaking that the claim of the petitioner for the grant of 'Sanman Pension', as specified in the writ petition, would be considered afresh by the Union of India in the light of the affidavits of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, filed in this case, and the same would be disposed of by passing a speaking order in accordance with law within a period of two months.
In case of default, the petitioner would be entitled to recover the said amount along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
This petition stands disposed of as indicated above.
Sd/- I.S.
Tiwana  JUDGE Sd/-  AS Nehra  JUDGE" November 14, 1990  6.
In view of the above, the Union of India had to decide the claim of Battan Singh in the light of the affidavits that had been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab and the Deputy Commissioner, Kapurthala.
It appears that the needful was not done within the time fixed by the Court.
However, the matter was decided by an order dated March 12, 1991.
It has been held that Battan Singh had failed to produce any documentary evidence in support of his claim and "since a minimum claim of six months imprisonment" was not established according to the requirements of the scheme, "it has not been found possible to sanction you pension."
7.
Shri Battan Singh died on May 18, 1991.
His widow has now approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The order passed by the Govt. of India refusing to grant pension has been challenged on various grounds which shall be presently discussed.
Written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In paragraphs 2 and 3, the petitioner has specifically averred as under :-  "2.
That the petitioner is infirm and old aged widow of Battan Singh who had served under Netaji Subhash Chander Bose in Indian National Army in March, 1942 in the rank of Sepoy having No. 69074 in 8 Gurila 'A' Company under the command of Colonel Gurmit Singh as well as under Company Commander Narain Singh of 'A' Company of 8 Gurila.
3.
That on the surrender of Japanese Forces before British Army at IPPO CITY in BURMA during IInd World War, the husband of the petitioner, was arrested, by the British Army and was kept under detention for about 7 months."
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, these averments have been denied for want of knowledge.
Even the statement that the petitioner's husband had been awarded the Tamra Pattar on the 25th anniversary of India's Freedom, it has been averred in the written statement filed by respondent No. 3 that the contents contained in paragraph 4 of the writ petition are denied for want of knowledge..".
It has been inter alia averred that the Tamra Pattras were given on the recommendations of the State Govt. but the pension is admissible only to those who underwent a minimum of 6 months imprisonment.
Since the petitioner's husband had failed to produce any proof regarding his imprisonment the claim was rejected.
8.
I have heard Mr. CM Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Messrs HS Giani and Arihant Jain for the respondents.
9.
A perusal of the record indicates that an undertaking had been given on behalf of the Union of India to consider and decide the claim of Battan Singh regarding the grant of pension "in the fight of their affidavits of respondent Nos.
I and 2."
As perusal of the impugned order shows that the contents of the affidavits have not been even noticed.
No reference thereto has been made.
The undertaking given to this Court has not been carried out.
The order has been passed without noticing the material on the basis of which the matter had to be considered.
In the affidavit filed by respondent No. 2 in CWP No. 5803 of 1990 it had been clearly admitted that the petitioner had undergone imprisonment for a period of 7 months.
It was incumbent on the Union of India to consider this factual position and then decide the matter.
This has not been done.
On this short ground alone, this order is liable to be struck down.
10.
Even otherwise, I find that the order is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
Battan Singh had been awarded the Tamra Pattar on the 25th Anniversary of India's Freedom.
It was an official recognition of the petitioner's husband's services.
It was awarded on the recommendation of the State Govt. which had found as a fact that Battan Singh had undergone imprisonment for about 7 months, Battan Singh's name was published in the list of Freedom Fighters and members of INA who had been awarded the Tamra Pattras.
This publication was an official document.
The State Govt. had recognized the factum of Battan Singh having served the nation in its freedom struggle.
In spite of this factual position, it has been observed in the orders that Battan Singh had failed to produce any proof regarding his detention.
Admittedly, a long time has passed since.
1942.
Surely, an aged and crippled "freedom fighter" deserved better deal at the hands of the Govt. India.
11.
Even on the pleadings of the parties, before this Court, the relief claimed by the petitioner's husband as also by her deserves to succeed.
Their specific averments "that the petitioner's husband had joined the INA in March, 1942 and had undergone detention for about 7 months have merely been denied for want of knowledge.
This is no denial.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jahuri Sah v. DP Jhunjhunwala, AIR 1967 SC 109 have observed as under :-  "The High Court has pointed out that the plaintiffs have clearly stated in Para 1 of the plaint that Shankarlal had been given in adoption to Sreelat.
In neither of two written statements filed on behalf of the defendants has this assertion of fact by the plaintiffs been specifically denied.
Instead, what is stated in both these written statements is that the defendants have no knowledge of the allegations made in para 1 of the plaint.
Bearing in mind that O VIII, R.5, CPC provides that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary implication or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of the defendant shall be taken to be admitted, to say that a defendant has no knowledge of a fact pleaded by the plaintiff is not tantamount to a denial of the existence of that fact, not even an implied denial.
No specific issue on the question of adoption was, therefore, raised.
In the circumstances the High Court was right in saying that there was no occasion for the parties to lead any evidence on the point."
In view of the above, the specific averments made by the petitioner have not even been denied.
Accordingly, it is deemed to be admitted that Battan Singh had undergone imprisonment for a period of 7 months while serving as a member of the INA.
He was thus entitled to the grant of pension under the Freedom Fighters Scheme, 1972.
The action of the respondents in rejecting his claim vide letter dated December 26, 1974 which has been reiterated by the order, dated March 12, 1991 cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly quashed.
12.
It is held that Battan Singh was entitled to the grant of Freedom Fighter's pension with effect from the date of the promulgation of the scheme i.e. August 15, 1972.
It was illegally all denied to him.
This would now be paid to his widow i.e the present petitioner.
She would also be entitled to interest @12 per cent from August 15, 1972 till the date of actual payment.
All the arrears of pension along with interest thereon shall be paid to the petitioner within three months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner shall a be entitled to her costs which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.
Order accordingly.