SK Jain, J - The petitioners appeared in the Matriculation Examination of Paper-A of the Social Studies held on March 13, 1990 at Government High School, Dera Bassi centre of the Punjab School Education Board in the morning session.
The said centre was raided by Flying Squad headed by Ms. Nirmal Kanta, Principal, Government Senior Secondary School (NTC) Rajpura (Patiala).
She found that the examinees were resorting to mass copying during the examination.
She reported the matter to the Controller of Examinations, Punjab School Education Board, Mohali (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board').
On the basis of the material produced before him, the Chairman of the Board cancelled the examination Paper-A of the Social Studies held on March 13, 1990 for the then matriculation examination of two centres, namely, Government High School, Dera Bassi and Mubarikpur.
The petitioner through this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India have sought the issuance of a writ in the nature of prohibition restraining the respondents from cancelling the above said paper on the allegation of mass copying and writ in the nature of Mandamus directing them to declare the result of the petitioners of Social Studies Paper-A examination held on 1331990 at the Government High School, Dera Bassi Centre.
2.
Respondents contested the writ petition by filing written statement on behalf of the School Education Board.
3.
On behalf of the petitioners, it is contended that the impugned order was violative of Regulation 28 of the Punjab School Education Board (Penalty) for Misconduct and Use of Unfair Means in the Matriculation and Higher Secondary Examination Regulations, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Regulations') in as much as no enquiry was held into the question as to whether unfair assistance was rendered to the candidates on a mass scale thereby violating the sanctity of the examination.
Elaborating his argument learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the examination was held on 1331990 and the cancellation was ordered on the very next day i.e. 1431990 and, therefore, it was evident that no enquiry whatsoever was held.
4.
In reply, learned counsel for the Board has argued that the Chairman of the Board in exercise of his powers under Chapter VI of the Regulations, took into consideration the report of the Flying Squad and then being satisfied that the sanctity of the examination had been violated on account of the examinees resorting to copying during the examination, had cancelled the said paper.
5.
We have given a thoughtful consideration to the rival arguments.
6.
The Board in its meeting held on 3061989 in exercise of its powers conferred on it under Section 24(2)(J) of the Punjab School Education Board Act, 1969 had added Chapter VI to Punjab School Education Board General Regulations of Examinations which was published vide notification No. PSEB-EA-5Estt-89/1687 dated Mohali the 14.9.1989.
It has been reproduced in Preliminary objection No. 1 of the written statement and reads as under :-  "Chapter VI Re-Examination If on receipt of a report from the Centre Supdt.
or observer or Flying Squad or any other Officer deputed by the Board to check the examination centre (s) or on the basis of information/material received from any other source, the Chairman is satisfied that at a particular centre(s) the senctity of an examination has been violated as a consequence of unfair assistance rendered to the examinees or the examinees themselves resorting to copying during the examination, the Chairman may cancel that examination/paper(s) and order re-examination in the concerned paper(s).
The candidates of such a centre(s) can be asked to appear at a centre(s) other than that/those originally allotted to them."
7.
Ms. Nirmal Kanta, Principal, Government Senior Secondary School (NTC) Rajpura (Patiala) who headed the Flying Squad and raided the Government High School.
Dera Bassi Centre on 1331990 in the morning session had found a large crowd standing outside the centre.
On seeing the raiding party, they had informed the centre authorities of the arrival of the Flying Squad by shouting loudly.
The Headmaster was standing in the varandah of the centre.
A lot of papers were lying scattered around the centre.
Headmaster and the Centre Supdt.
were joined and on search a bag of papers, packets, 30 leaves i.e. 60 photostat pages of answers and 30 leaves of maps were recovered from within and outside the rooms in their presence.
The Headmaster and the Centre Supdt.
had refused to sign the recovery memo as witnesses.
The Centre Suptd.
after lifting the bag got ready to leave the centre and asked them in a threatening manner to take the charge of the centre.
The Supervisors in the Centre declared that if unfair means case was made against the candidates appearing in that centre they would not support the prosecution.
They collected papers from the candidates appearing in the centre and threw them away.
Mass copying at a very large scale and in an organised manner was being done in the centre with the active help of the entire supervisory staff, including the Headmaster of the School.
A report to this effect was sent by Ms. Nirmal Kanta to the Chairman of the Board.
A copy thereof has been attached with the written statement as Annexure 2.
8.
The order of the Chairman of the Board dated 1431990 which has been reproduced in preliminary objection No. 1 in the written statement is as under :-  "On perusal of the report and seeing the material collected by the Flying Squad, I am satisfied that sanctity of examination has been violated gravely as a consequence of examinees resorting to copying during the examination.
The examination of Social Studies Paper-A at Government High School, Mubarikpur and at Government High School, Dera Bassi (Morning Session) is therefore cancelled and the candidates separately made to appear at a centre to be notified in the paper."
9.
A careful examination of the above said order would show that the Chairman of the Board, on the basis of the material placed before him including the above said report of the Flying Squad, was satisfied that the sanctity of the examination had been violated gravely as a consequence of examinees resorting to mass copying during the examination of Paper-A of Social Studies in the morning session of the centre in question and had rightly cancelled that paper in exercise of the powers vested in him under Chapter VI (ibid) of the Regulations.
10.
Thus, the Board being satisfied that a vast majority of the examinees at these centres while appearing in Social Studies Paper-A in morning session had adopted unfair means, it was not necessary for the Board, before cancelling the examination as a whole at those centres, to give an opportunity to the candidates to represent their cases.
The Board had not charged anyone with unfair means so that he could claim to defend himself.
The examination was vitiated by adoption of unfair means on a mass scale.
In these circumstances, it would be wrong to insist that the Board must hold a detailed enquiry into the matter and examine each individual case to satisfy itself as to which of the candidates had not adopted unfair means.
The examination as a whole had to go.
11.
The Universities and the School Boards are responsible for their standards and the conduct of examinations.
The essence of the examinations is that the worth of every person is appraised without any assistance from an outside source.
If at a centre the whole body of the students receive assistance and manage to secure success in the neighbourhood of 100% when others at other centres are successful only at an average of much lower percentage it is obvious that the university or the Board must do something in the matter.
It cannot hold a detailed quasi-judicial inquiry with a right to its alumni to plead and lead evidence etc. before the results are withheld or the examinations cancelled.
If there is sufficient material on which it can be demonstrated that the Board/University was right in its conclusion that the examinations ought to be cancelled then academic standards require that the Board's or Universities' appreciation of the problem must be respected.
It would not do for the Court to say that you should have examined all the candidates or even their representatives with a view to ascertaining whether they had received assistance or not.
To do this would encourage indiscipline if not also perjury.
In holding the above view, we are fortified by the ratio laid down in The Bihar School Examination Board v. Subhas Chandra Sinha and others, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 1269.
12.
Besides what has been stated above, the menace of mass copying in the examination conducted by the Universities or the School Boards, is on increase and is likely to assume alarming proportions in future if the same is not curbed in time by the competent authorities, who are duty bound to maintain academic standards in the country.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.