RC Gandhi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner seeks to quash Order No. PSC/Ex- 2001/KCS (Judicial) 107 dated 21st May, 2002 whereby the candidature of the petitioner seeking consideration for selection to the Post of Munsiff, KCS (Judicial) has been rejected by the Public Service Commission, on the ground that the petitioner is not having three years actual practice at the Bar.
2.
The Public Service Commission issued notification vide advertisement Notice No. PSC/Ex-2001/64 dated 4122001 for Fifty posts of Munsiffs.
Pursuant thereto, the petitioner submitted his Application Form, seeking such consideration.
On scrutiny of the application form, the Public Service Commission rejected the same on the ground that the petitioner is not having experience of three years of actual practice at the Bar.
The advertisement notice prescribes that a candidate desirous to apply for the post of Munsiff must possess a Bachelor Degree coupled with three years actual practice at the Bar as per the guidelines issued by the High Court, on the date on which he submits his application form as per guidelines issued by the High Court.
3.
The plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner possesses three years actual practice at the Bar and the rejection of his application form by the Public Service commission is arbitrary.
In support of his plea, he has relied upon the evidence annexed with the petition, which is a of letter dated 1121999, whereby the High Court has sought the consent of Advocate Mr. Lal Husasain practicing at District Court, Poonch to be the guide of the Petitioner to impart him training as required by the Bar council of India Training Rules, 1995.
The consent was obtained and thereafter the petitioner was enrolled as trainee on 1721999 and conveyed to the petitioner that Mr. Lal Husasain, Advocate has been approved as his guide to impart him training.
Advocate's License was issued to the petitioner on 24.4.1999 provisionally.
On this evidence, the petitioner asserts that from 1121999, his actual period of practice at the Bar should be counted.
It is also stated that the file was put up by the clerk on 921999 before the Deputy Registrar, therefore, it should be counted from 921999.
In support of his plea, he has relied upon the Judgment of Supreme Court in case V Sudeer v. Bar Council of India, reported in 1999(2) R.C.R.
(Civil) 1 : 1999(2) S.C.T.
1 : (AIR 1999 SC 1167).
Para 15 is relevant.
For the purpose of facility, relevant portion is extracted below :-  "...The said Rule 2, as amended upto 19th July, 1998 further reads that : "However, while undergoing training, the trainees shall be enrolled provisionally as "Trainee Advocates" after approval of name of their guides by the State Bar Council and the State Bar Council shall issue identity card to said provisionally enrolled "Trainee Advocates" for their identification".
Detailed procedure has been laid down how a trainee advocate has to function during the period of training.
Such candidate has to maintain two types of diaries as approved by the State Bar Council -One for the work done in Chambers and the other for the work in Courts.
As per Rule 4 the training period shall commence from the certificate of guide that the candidate is being trained by him.
Rule 5 deals with `qualification of advocate to become guide of such trainees'.
Rule 7 deals with `period of training for a minimum of one year'.
Rule 10 provides that : "No candidate shall engage himself in any employment, profession, business, trade or calling during the course of training in any manner".
Rule 15 lays down `seniority of a trainee advocate on successful completion of the training period by providing that he shall be entitled to seniority from the date of provisional enrolment as trainee under the Rules.
Such a trainee advocate as per Rule 15(b) shall be entitled to appear in the Court for seeking adjournments and to make mentioning on instruction of their guide and shall be under disciplinary control of the State Bar Council and the Bar Council of India.
Rule 15-AA provides that "in case period of training of a particular candidate is extended by the State Bar Council under Rule 9 on the ground of inadequate training, said extended period shall not be counted towards seniority".
This Judgment also does not help the petitioner for the simple reason that the eligibility can be ascertained by mathematical calculation.
The petitioner applied for the post and the last date of receipt of application was 1st February, 2002.
Those candidates who wanted to submit their application forms through registered post, the last date of receipt of application form was 8-2-2002.
Counting the actual practice at the Bar from 1121999 till the last date of receipt of Application Form, the petitioner is not possessing the experience of three years as required and stipulated in the advertisement notice which is the requirement of eligibility for seeking consideration.
The petitioner could not make out a case for admission of the petition, which fails and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.