Swatanter Kumar, J - Since in these four writ petitions common question of law arises for consideration, upon similar facts, therefore, it will be appropriate for us to dispose of these writ petitions together by a common judgment.
2.
For the purpose of convenience, we are referring to the facts of Civil Writ Petition No. 14605 of 1999.
3.
All the petitioners in this petition were appointed as Drivers on contract basis with the Haryana Roadways Ambala, during the years 1992 to 1995.
On 28th July, 1994, the State Transport Commissioner, Haryana issued a policy decision for regularisation of services of the drivers and conductors, who were working on contract basis and who have completed two years of service.
However, this policy decision was withdrawn vide letter dated 17111995, which later on, again was withdrawn vide letter dated 2491997.
In other words, the policy decision for regularisation of services of such drivers dated 28.7.1994 remained in force.
When the services of the petitioners were not regularised in terms of the said policy, copy of which is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/1, they approached the High Court for enforcement of the said policy and for regularisation of their services.
It was directed by the High Court that the petitioners were entitled to regularisation of their services and directed the respondents to take steps in accordance therewith.
On 23rd March 1998, the policy decision was reviewed by the respondents in the light of judgment of the court and instructions were issued, copy of which is annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P/3.
It was stated therein that all the drivers and conductors who were appointed on contractual basis and had completed two years of service from 16th June, 1994 to 7th January, 1998 were entitled to regularisation.
The services of petitioner Nos. 3 and 4 were regularised, vide order dated 1561998.
The services of petitioner No. 2 were regularised on 1721999.
Similar letters of order regularising the services of these petitioners have been placed on record.
It is also averred that similar letters regularising the services of the petitioners No. 1 and 5 to 9 were also issued and their services were regularised with effect from 161998, 11101995, 24101998, 161998 and 16.2.1995 respectively.
4.
The sole grievance of the petitioners in these petitions is that their services have been regularised but not from the date they were entitled to for such benefits.
According to them, their services ought to have been regularised from the date on which they completed two years of service on contractual basis with the respondents-Roadways.
Further, it is stated in the writ petition that services of the persons junior to the petitioners have been regularised from the earlier date and copies of such orders have been placed on record as Annexures P/5 and P/6 etc.  5.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed reply.
According to the respondents, the services of the petitioners have been regularised from the due date and as such the present writ petition does not survive.
On merits, it is contended that due to non-availability of the post and pendency of the disciplinary action against the petitioners, while working on contractual basis, their services could not have been regularised in terms of the policy decision, Annexure P/3 to the writ petition dated 23rd March, 1998.
The cases of all the petitioners were considered as per their seniority and keeping in view the instructions contained in the policy.
The petitioners could not have been regularised prior to the dates from which date they have regularised now.
Even the seniority of the drivers and conductors is maintained depot-wise basis and thus they cannot derive any advantage even if their juniors have been regularised in other depots, as there is no common seniority between them.
6.
At the very outset, we must notice that there is no challenge to the validity of the instructions issued by the Government, Annexure P/3 to the writ petition.
In fact, the very foundation of the claim of the petitioners is the policy decision of the government dated 23rd March, 1998.
In this policy under clause 4, it has been specifically stated that the drivers and the conductors on contractual basis, against whom disciplinary actions are pending, be not got regularised till their cases are finalised.
Once, there is no challenge to this policy of the government, then the petitioners have to accept the policy as a whole under which they claim benefits.
It was open to the petitioners to challenge the validity of such policy whether such a condition would or would have not merit is not for us to determine in this petition.
7.
The Government would be free to formulate its policies for regulating conditions of such services of its employees.
Such policies are to be implemented as framed unless, they were set aside, as offending the constitutional protection available to the employees.
Clause 4 of the Policy has been acted upon by the respondents and they have applied this principle uniformly to all the cases.
All the persons including the petitioners were issued letters of appointments and preface of the appointment letters clearly indicate due application of mind by the authority concerned to the contention raised by the respondents.
Relevant part of said order reads as under :-  "Several writ petition in the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana have been filed recently by the drivers and the conductors working on contractual basis whereby they have sought the claim of regularisation of their services just after the completion of two years of continuous service.
Some of the petitioners whose services have already been regularised w.e.f.
the different dates, have also claimed that their services be regularised after the completion of two years service on contractual basis instead of the dates from which their services have been regularised.
In this regard, the matter was considered in light of various applicable departmental instructions.
In the wake of increasing litigation, it became expedient to decide the matter in a consolidate manner instead to considering the claim of petitioners only.
While deciding the matter as mentioned above, the instructions dealing with the regularisation of contractual drivers and conductors dated 28.7.1994, 23.3.1998 & 22.6.1998 were referred to.
As far as instructions dated 28794 is concerned, it has been stipulated therein that the services of contractual drivers and conductors be regularised after the completion of two years service.
Similarly, it was made clear vide instructions dated 23398 that only those drivers and conductors working on contractual basis may be regularised in service against whom no disciplinary action is pending.
The clarifications issued vide instructions dated 22698 have also been kept in view."
8.
Certainly, taking disciplinary proceedings against the an employee and consideration for regularisation or regular appointment are the concepts which are distinct and different.
To a great extent, they have the effect on each other.
Disciplinary proceedings/action by the employers itself is an integral part of condition of service governing the government servant.
Reference of one to other, thus, is not irrelevant or undesirable.
The conduct of an employee during the period of probation is certainly relevant and, in fact, is one of the determining factors for confirming and continuous of employment in service.
A person, who is daily wager and is claiming regularisation, his conduct during the period of his contractual or daily wages services would be relevant factor and if his services are found to be unsatisfactory, there would be no legal obligation upon the State to regularise the services of such employees, during the pendency of such proceedings.
9.
Unlike pendency of disciplinary proceedings against regular government servant, which take a considerable period, the disciplinary proceedings in the cases of daily wagers are concluded within a short time, as per rules/instructions applicable to such employees.
The petitioners have been denied the regularisation from a particular date as disciplinary proceedings were pending against them.
Such an approach on the part of the State cannot be termed to be arbitrary or discriminatory.
The names of all the persons, who had completed two years of service were considered in order of their seniority and all persons against whom disciplinary proceedings were pending, their cases were deferred for regularisation of service.
This approach of the State is neither violative of principle of natural justice nor it offends the basic cannons of service jurisprudence.
Satisfactory performance of service is a subject which clearly falls within the domain of the concerned employer and the subjective satisfaction arrived therefrom would clearly be not subjected to judicial review.
10.
No replication has been filed to the written statement filed by the respondents.
11.
In other words, the facts averred in the written statement at least cannot be taken to be incorrect.
12.
Under the policy or regularisation declared by the State, satisfactory service is one of the condition precedent to grant of such benefits.
Once the policy under which the benefit is claimed stipulates such a condition in that event it may not be appropriate for the court to negate that condition while granting benefits to the employee of this policy.
An authority cannot be permitted to approbate and approbate at the same time and if they claim a policy of regularisation being the welfare policy of the State, they must bear the consequences of the condition stipulated to the policy unless such conditions were held to be invalid.
13.
Reliance was placed by the learned counsel for the State in the case of Ram Khilawan v. Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chd., 1995(2) SCT 793.
In this case, the principle laid down is that the jurisdiction of the employer to take disciplinary action cannot be confused with the right to be regularised.
The learned Judge in this case has stated a principle of law otherwise well accepted in service jurisprudence.
It appears that the State did not raise the contention now sought to be raised with regard to the essence of policy of regularisation being `satisfactory service'.
Thus, the petitioners herein cannot derive any advantage from this judgment.
The policy notified, vide notification dated 1st June, 1993 as well as 11th May, 1994 issued by the government in exercise of its power conferred by proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India read with the proviso to clause 6 of the Haryana Government General Administration department (General Services) and all other powers enabling the authorities clearly stated that the cases for regularisation of such employees alone shall be considered against whom disciplinary proceedings are not pending at the relevant point to time.
We have already noticed that there was no challenge before us to the constitutionality or otherwise of these clauses of the notified policy of the government.
It may be useful, at this stage, to notice that a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Vijay Kumar & others v. State of Punjab and others, reported as 2001(2) SCT 732 (P&H)(DB) : 2002(1) S.L.R.
694, while dealing with the question of equal pay for equal work and noticing the relevancy of the policy for regularisation of the State held that the working performance of the employee should be satisfactory for deriving the benefit of the said policy.
14.
Learned counsel for the State has argued that in the interest of administrative and disciplinary control of the State upon its employees particularly in the cases of contractual or daily rated employees, it is essential that the State should carefully examine the working of such employees before granting them benefits particularly like regularisation of service.
It was also contended that such employee cannot claim better advantage than the probationers, who are appointed against regular posts.
Such employees must be subjected to proper discipline and due discharge of their duties.
This can only happen if their conduct and behaviour during the period preceding claim for regularisation is found to be satisfactory in all spheres.
15.
There is merit in this contention and the employees whose performance during the initial period of their contractual employment, is under a cloud of disciplinary proceedings, for their mis-conduct in course of their employment, is pending, they cannot be permitted to score over the persons whose services have been found to be satisfactory and who have been discharging their duties with due responsibilities.
Deferment of regularisation of services of such employees cannot be said to be arbitrary, as welfare policy of the State cannot be stretched to mean that even a person guilty of mis-conduct should be regularised.
The State is not bound to retain and regularise the services of such of its employees whose conduct and working is not satisfactory during the initial period, more particularly when the disciplinary proceedings are pending against them.
The State would consider the claim for regularisation of such employees on a date when the disciplinary proceedings have culminated into an order in favour of the workman or no such proceedings remain pending against them.
Admittedly, the State despite their earlier conduct has regularised their services with effect from 9.9.1998.
We see no reason to interfere in this action of the respondent-State.
16.
This controversy also arises in the other three connected writ petitions.
However, so far, petitioner No. 11 in Civil Writ Petition No. 10129 of 1999 is concerned, we may notice that, according to the respondents, no such person is employed in the department mentioned by the petitioner in the writ petition.
There is no rebuttal to this fact.
Thus, no relief can be granted to this petitioner.
Petitioner No. 16 in the same writ petition has not completed two years of service as on 811998.
Resultantly, he does not satisfy the essential conditions of regularisation.
This fact is not disputed before us.
Further services of the petitioner No. 20 in the same writ petition has already been terminated after due inquiry.
This fact is also not disputed.
Consequently, petitioners No. 16 and 20 also cannot be granted any relief.
17.
In view of our above discussion and the fact that the services of all petitioners except one's specifically mentioned above have already been regularised by the State with effect from 9.9.1998, we are of the considered view that these writ petitions have no merits and the same are liable to be dismissed.
18.
Dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.