MY Eqbal, J - In all these four writ applications the petitioner have challenged the order dated 14-2-97 issued by respondent No. 4, Regional Directorm, Animal Husbandry Departmemt, Ranchi whereby the service of the petitioners have been terminated.
The petitioners have further sought a direction to the respondents to release their salary which is due since December 1995.
2.
Petitioners' case, in a nutshell is that they joined the services in Animal Husbandry Department, Govt. of Bihar, sometimes in 1993-94 by the order of respondent No. 5, Regional Joint Director, Animal Husbandry Department, Ranchi.
It is stated that the services of the petitioners was extended by respondent No. 5 till further orders vide order dated 8-7-95.
It is contended that the petitioners (sic) but even then they were not paid their salary since December, 1999.
The respondents instead of releasing their salary, issued show cause notices dated 19-12-96 asking them to show cause as to how they were illegally and arbitrarily joined the services.
The petitioners filed their show causes but the respondents removed them from services by passing the impugned order dt. 14-2-97.
3.
A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, Regional Director Animal Husbandry, Ranchi stating inter alia that the petitioners were appointed on the post of Pravaidik Sahayak (TA) by Regional Joint Director, Animal Husbandry, Ranchi.
The appointment was made on adhoc basis for six months which was then extended for indefinite period by the said Regional Joint Director.
It is stated that the post of Pravaidik Sahayak is State cadre technical post and appointment to such post can be made only by the Director.
Animal Husbandry on getting recommendation of' the State Subordinate Service Commission.
When Animal Husbandry Scam came to light it was detected that a large number of illegal appointments were made by different regional offices who were never delegated with such powers.
Respondents further case is that all these appointments were made surprisingly after the cut-off date by which all types of appointments were restrained and Govt. letter was circulated to all offices including the office of Regional Director, Animal Husbandry, Ranchi vide order dated 23392.
4.
I have heard learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and the learned Govt. Pleader No. II.
5.
From perusal of the writ petition it appears that the petitioners have not pleaded that pursuant to any advertisement they applied for the post and they were subjected to written test and interview.
Simply the petitioners, have pleaded that they joined the services of Animal Husbandry Department in 1993- 94 and there services were extended immediately after six months by joint Director, Animal Husbandry, Ranchi.
The petitioners have neither pleaded that any appointment letter was issued nor they have annexed the copies of the appointment letters.
Petitioners have based their claim on the basis of letter issued by the Joint Director, Animal Husbandry, by which their services were extended for indefinite period.
It is, therefore, clear that the petitioners were taken into service by back-door method illegally and arbitrarily by the Regional Joint Director, Animal Husbandry, Ranchi and also without following the procedures of appointment and recruitment Rules in violation of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
It can be safely concluded that the appointments of petitioners itself is illegal and in violation of Art. 16 of the Constitution.
6.
In a similar circumstance one Akhilesh Prasad who was appointed by the Regional Joint Director, Animal Husbandry Department, challenged the order of termination of services by filing MJC No. 3372/97 (R).
The writ application was dismissed by me and against that judgment the petitioner, Akhilesh Prasad filed LPA No. 163/99 (R).
A Division Bench of this court affirmed the order and dismissed the appeal holding that the Regional Joint Director, Animal Husbandry was not competent to make appointment and such appointment was wholly illegal and arbitrary.
The Division Bench observed :-  "In the present case as stated above, the appellant was appointed for certain period and therefore, his services were regularized in breach of rule of appointment of class III.
The authority who appointed the appellant was also not competent to appoint him.
If any sympathy or mercy is shown in such cases that will result in miscarriage of justice and encourage the persons to get entry through back door and thereafter get the services regularized after certain period of time.
Equitable relief under Art, 226 of the Constitution is not meant for such persons".
7.
In the case of Nand Kishore Rout v. State of Bihar, 1991(1) BLJR 441 : 1991(2) SCT 365 (Patna) (FB), a Full Bench of this court while considering the validity of order of termination held that if appointment is made without following the procedure prescribed under the rules and in defiance of the bar imposed on such appointment then such appointment does not create any right of the incumbent and even the principles of natural justice do not apply to such cases.
8.
In the case of State of UP v. UP State Law Officers Association, 1994(2) SCC 204 : AIR 1994 SC 1654 : 1994(1) SCT 863 (SC) while considering the validity of removal of the law officers, the Apex Court held that when persons are appointed by arbitrary procedures and their induction itself being product of operation of the spoiled system, then they cannot challenge termination of their services on the ground of the same being arbitrary.
No public interest is involved in saving their appointments even though the appointments were made to a public office by the Govt. or public body.
9.
In the case of ML Gupta v. Instrumentation Ltd., 1992(1) PLJR 137 a Bench of Patna High Court observed :  "Right to work is not a fundamental right but a right to be considered for appointment is such a right to be considered for appointment, as enshrined under Article 16 of the Constitution must be held to be available to all persons who are eligible therefor.
Any appointment which does not conform to the requirement of Article 16 of the Constitution, therefore, cannot be said to be a valid appointment and consequently any back door method adopted to confer any permanency in the job in the violation thereof cannot be encouraged by the High Court."
10.
In the case of Bijay Kumar v. State of Bihar, 1993(1) PLJR 99, a Division Bench of the Patna High Court, in similar circumstance, held that if appointment is made in violation of the mandatory provisions of Recruitment Rules as also Art. 16 of the Constitution, the same is a nullity and the State as an employer is not bound to recognise the appointment made by its servant ignoring the mandatory provisions of recruitment Rules or Art. 16 of the Constitution of India.
11.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and the law discussed hereinabove, I am of the opinion that the petitioners have been rightly removed from services and there is no reason to interfere with the said orders.
12.
So far the claim of the petitioners for payment of salary is concerned, I am not inclined to issue any direction in the facts and circumstances of the case, for payment of salary.
However, the petitioners will be at liberty to file representation for payment of salary and the authorities shall pass appropriate order for payment of salary if the petitioners in fact, worked for the said period.
13.
With the aforesaid directions/observations these writ applications are dismissed.
Applications dismissed.