THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner filed this writ petition invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the order of this dismissal from service vide Annexure P-9.
2.
The petitioner while serving as Constable in the Central Reserve Police Force was charge sheeted and a regular departmental inquiry was held against him on the charges of remaining absent from duty on 5101993 and also marrying one Sahida Mukham Begam in 1993 without prior permission from the concerned authority.
In the departmental inquiry, the Inquiry Officer found that the petitioner married Sahida Mukham Begam on 5101993 without obtaining prior permission though he is having a living spouse.
The Inquiry Officer found that the petitioner was absent without permission while on active duty.
A copy of the inquiry report was given to the petitioner and his explanation was called for.
On a consideration of the explanation of the petitioner, he was dismissed from service with effect from 3111994 vide Annexure P-9 which is under challenge in this writ petition.
3.
Rule 15 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 prohibits a member of the Force who has wife living from contracting any other marriage without first obtaining the permission of the Government notwithstanding that such subsequent marriage is permissible under the personal law for the time being applicable to the members of the Force.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner has not obtained the permission of the Government for contracting the second marriage.
In fact, the second marriage has been proved on the material placed on record during the course of the regular inquiry conducted against the petitioner.
It has also been proved that the petitioner was absent from duty on 5101993 for performing the second marriage.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that a minor penalty should have been imposed under Section 11 of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949, but this Court has no power to go into the quantum of punishment.
It has been held by the Apex Court in BC Chaturvedi v Union of India and others, JT 1995(8) SC 65 : 1996(1) SCT 617 (SC) that the High Court/Tribunal while exercising the power of judicial review cannot normally substitute its own conclusion on penalty unless the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority shocks the conscience of the High Court or Tribunal and the High Court may in exceptional and rare cases impose appropriate punishment.
In the case on hand, I do not find any ground for imposing any other penalty on the facts of the case.
The fact that the petitioner belongs to a Disciplined Force cannot be lost sight of.
He was found absent while on active duty only to perform second marriage and the second marriage though permissible under the personal law cannot be entered into without the prior permission of the Government.
Thus the petitioner violated the statutory provisions in contracting the second marriage while having a spouse living.
6.
In the circumstances of the case, no interference in the impugned order (Annexure P-9) is called for.
7.
The writ petition, therefore fails and is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.