SB Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 23299 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court whereby and whereunder the learned Judge dismissed the writ application filed by the appellant herein.
2.
The appellants are said to be organising teachers of V.I.P.
Nagar Junior High School.
The said school was recognised in the year 1981.
According to the appellants, they were appointed on 4388.
It has further been stated that their names appeared in the report of the District Level Inspection Team.
As their services were not approved they filed a writ application before this Court and pursuant to a direction, the Director of School.
Education asked the then District Inspector of School to make an enquiry and pass an appropriate order.
Pursuant to such a direction the then District Inspector of School, approved the services of the appellants.
Thereafter complaints have been made by several persons, whereupon the Director of School Education directed the District Inspector of Schools to make a further investigation, pursuant whereto the impugned order dated 25th January, 1999 has been passed.
3.
Mr. Chatterjee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, submits that apart from the fact that in the report of the District Level Inspection Team the names of the appellants appeared as having been appointed on 4388, a Special Officer appointed by his Court pursuant to the order of DK Basu, J, found that the appellants are bona fide teachers.
The learned Counsel submitted that the complainant bore a grudge as against the appellants and the said complaint ought not to have entertained keeping in view the fact that he had resigned as Secretary in 1987.
On the other hand, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State drew our attention to the fact that ex facie no reliance can be placed on the report of the District Level Inspection Team inasmuch as from a perusal thereof, it would appear that three members had signed the report in 1986 and thus question of recording therein that the appellants have been appointed in the year 1988 would not arise.
Furthermore, according to the learned Counsel, the District Inspector of Schools has made a thorough enquiry before arriving at a conclusion that a fraud has been committed.
4.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that in view of the order proposed to be passed by us, we should refrain ourselves from arriving at any conclusion, as any finding arrived on by us on the rival contention of the parties may prejudice the concerned authority.
It is true as has been held by the learned trial Judge, that the question as to whether a fraud has been practised or not, could be adjudicated upon in a Civil Court; but keeping in view the fact that if the appellants are sought to be victimised at the instance of certain interested persons who are occupying high position, we are of the opinion that the same should not be encouraged.
We, therefore, are of the opinion that the Director of School Education should consider the matter afresh and pass an appropriate order after giving an opportunity to both the parties to adduce their respective evidence and after giving them an opportunity of hearing.
We make it clear that it would be open to the parties concerned to cross-examine the witnesses appearing on behalf of the other side if any and adduce evidence contra.
We are sure that the Director of School Education shall arrive at an independent finding without in any way being prejudiced by the order passed by the District Inspector of Schools.
We further direct that the continuation of the appellants as assistant teachers in the said school shall abide by the result of the findings of the Director of School Education.
We are passing this order keeping in view the fact that the Director of School Education being concerned with such matters would be in a position to see that no such incident occurs and would further, in the event, an occasion therefor arises, may take appropriate to disciplinary or other action against all the erring officers or persons including initiation of criminal proceedings against them.
Such an order may be passed at an early date and preferably within a period of two weeks from the date of communication of this order.
The Director of School Education shall take immediate steps for taking the entire records in his custody.
5.
Original certified copy of the judgment impugned filed today be kept on record.
6.
The appeal as also the application are disposed of accordingly without any order as to costs.
7.
Let plain copy of the this order duly countersigned by Assistant Registrar (Court) be handed over to the learned counsel for the parties on usual undertaking.
Order accordingly.