Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) The members of the Process Serving Establishments in the States of Punjab and Haryana have approached this Court through these two writ petitions.
They pray for issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents, viz., the State Governments and this Court, to give them a minimum scale of Rs. 950-1800 instead of the existing scale of Rs. 810-1440.
This claim is based on the hypothesis that the petitioners are the members of the ministerial establishment of the Courts and they have to be classified as belonging to the Class-III service.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been pointed out that the qualifications and the nature of duties attached to the post of Process Server do not warrant a scale of pay higher than what has been given to the petitioners.
Secondly, it has also been pointed out that by a specific provison in the Rules, Process Servers have been excluded from the category of the ministerial establishment.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
It is the admitted position that the minimum qualification for the post of a Process Server is lower middle pass, which means that the candidates should have studied upto the VIIIth Class.
Secondly, the Process Servers do not perform any clerical job.
They are only entrusted with the duties of serving the notices/processes issued by the Courts on the parties to a case.
Thirdly, a perusal of the Rules framed by the High Court under Section 35(3) of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, shows that the various categories of employees have been mentioned in Rule II.
Posts from Sr. Nos. 9 to 11 viz. the Civil Nazirs, Execution Bailiffs and Process Servers have been included in the establishment of the Subordinate Courts.
A specific provision has been made providing that posts from Sr. Nos. 1 to 8 viz. Clerks to Nazirs in the Sessions Courts shall be classified as General Line while posts from Sr. Nos. 9 to 11 viz. Civil Nazirs to Process Servers shall be classified as Process Serving Establishment.
The posts of Process Servers etc. have been further described as `Lower Grade Posts' while the other categories of posts are ` High Grade Posts'.
In the Note to the Rule, it has been categorically provided that ``the term `ministerial' used in this rule is not intended to overrule the definition of a ministerial Government servant given in Fundamental Rule 9(7).
Bailiffs and Process Servers will, therefore, continue to be regarded as non-ministerial and inferior Government servants, respectively, for the purpose of the rules relating to the retirement, as contained in Fundamental Rule 56 for Bailiffs and Articles 481 to 485 of the Civil Services Regulations for Process Servers.......''  5.
If on a cumulative consideration of the prescribed qualifications, nature of duties and the statutory rules, the competent authority has considered it appropriate to place the Process Servers in the pay scale of Rs. 810-1440, it cannot be said that the action is either violative of the rules or otherwise arbitrary and unfair so as to attract the wrath of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
6.
The classification of posts and the fixation of pay scales is the prerogative of the competent authority.
The State has to see the financial resources.
The writ Court can only interfere when the classification and pay scales are shown to be apparently arbitrary.
Otherwise, the scope for interference is limited.
In the present case, it has not been shown that any other category of employees for which the prescribed qualification is below matriculation, has been placed in a scale of pay higher than that given to the Process Servers.
Mr. Sudeep Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioners, has submitted that initially the pay scale given to the Process Servers was at par with that sanctioned for the posts of Patwaris and Policemen.
It may be so.
It is the admitted position that at that time even the minimum qualifications for recruitment of Patwaris, Police Constables and the Process Servers were the same.
However, subsequently when it was provided that the Patwaris and Policemen have to possess a minimum qualification of matriculation, a higher pay scale was sanctioned for these two categories of posts.
In respect of the Process Servers, minimum academic qualification is still below matriculation.
In this situation, it is apparent that the minimum academic qualification for the petitioners is not the same as prescribed for the posts of Patwaris and Policemen.
On the basis of academic qualifications, differential treatment is permissible and no legitimate grievance can be made by the petitioners on this score.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has also contended that under the rules, the petitioners should be classified as a part of the ministerial establishment.
This is a matter of policy.
If the Process Serving Establishment has been specifically excluded from the category of ministerial establishment by the rule-making authority, we do not find any illegality.
This is so particularly in view of the fact that so far as the members of the Process Serving Establishment are concerned, a higher age of retirement i.e. 60 years has been fixed.
While members of the ministerial establishment retire at the age of 58, the petitioners are allowed to continue for two more years.
In this situation, it is apparent that the petitioners are a class apart and have been treated as such while fixing the pay scales.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in these petitions which are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.