GC Garg, J - The challenge in this writ petition is to the order of penalty passed in disciplinary proceedings vide which petitioner has been compulsorily retired vide order dated 29.9.1993, Annexure P-39.
2.
This case has a chequered history.
Even allegations of mala fide have been levelled against the ex-chief Minister, Sh. Bhajan Lal.
However, it is not considered necessary to notice the facts in detail as during the course of hearing Mr. RK Malik, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioner confined his attack only against the order of compulsory retirement on the merits thereof.
3.
Petitioner, an ex-serviceman joined the State Civil Services after qualifying the competitive examination held in the year 1972-73 as `A' Class Tehsildar candidate against posts reserved for ex-serviceman.
4.
Petitioner received memo dated 691991, English version whereof is appended as Annexure F-24 with the writ petition, whereby it was proposed by the Government of Haryana that it intended to take action against him under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 on the grounds set out in the statement of charges enclosed with the memorandum.
He was required to state in writing within a period of 15 days of the receipt of memo whether he admits the truth of all, or any of the charges, what explanation or defence, if any, he has to offer and whether he desired to be heard in person.
He was also informed that for the purpose of preparing his written statement he may inspect the official record in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Hisar, on any working day after prior appointment.
The charges levelled against the petitioner when translated into English read thus :-  ``While working as Tehsildar, Hisar, from 781989 to 851991 Sh. RS Dhull has committed the following acts of omission and commission, for which he is charged as under :- ``(i) That Shri RS Dhull was appointed as Duty Magistrate by the Deputy Commissioner, Hisar vide his orders, dated 2741991 in view of the Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha Elections 1991.
For this purpose he was alloted Fatehabad and Tohana Sub Divisions including area (bordering Punjab) of Ratia Tehsil, but he derelicted in the performance of his duties which tantamounts to clear disobedience to the orders of the Deputy Commissioner.
(ii) That Sh. RS Dhull with a view to evading any duty likely to be entrusted to him in connection with Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha elections, 1991, he did not wilfully got his jeep repaired well in time.
In view of the position given above, Sh. RS Dhull had disobeyed the orders of his senior Officer (i.e. Deputy Commissioner) which has proved that he had no regard for his official duties.
Thus, it has rendered him liable to disciplinary action under Rule 3 of the Haryana Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1996.''
He was thereafter placed under suspension vide order dated 2471991, Annexure P-11.
5.
Petitioner submitted his reply to the charge sheet on 9101991.
He denied all the charges levelled against him.
The reply submitted by him was considered unsatisfactory and consequently vide order dated 2711992 Sh. Raj Kumar, IAS, Joint Secretary to Government Haryana, Revenue Department was appointed as Enquiry Officer to hold a regular departmental enquiry in respect of the charges detailed in the charge sheet, served upon the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
Petitioner challenged the order of appointment of the Enquiry Officer, but it is again not considered necessary to go into the details thereof.
Suffice it to say that the Enquiry Officer submitted the enquiry report on 9101992.
The Enquiry Officer found the petitioner guilty of disobedience of the orders of the District Magistrate on various dates during the months of April and May 1991 when elections to the Lok Sabha were being held.
The Enquiry Officer came to the conclusion that charge No. 1 stood fully proved against him.
It is worthwhile to mention at this place that petitioner had been appearing before the Enquiry Officer on some dates, whereas he did not appear before him on some dates immediately preceding the date of submission of the enquiry report as he was proceeded ex-parte after he or his counsel did not put in appearance for the reasons which are not necessary to be noticed.
The report of the Enquiry Officer as noticed above was thus ex-parte.
6.
After the submission of the enquiry report, the matter was considered and provisional opinion was formed as to why a penalty of compulsory retirement be not imposed on the petitioner.
Petitioner was thus served with a show cause notice on May 26, 1993 with a view to afford him another opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him and making representation which he may like to make in that behalf.
Petitioner was informed that the representation, if any, made by him would be considered before taking the proposed action.
7.
After the receipt of the second show cause notice petitioner submitted an interim reply dated 1461993, Annexure P-26.
By way of interim reply it was submitted by the petitioner that interim reply was being sent as complete enquiry report along with exhibits/annexures, written arguments of the Presenting Officer and order sheet have not been received and that he may be allowed two months time to file the detailed representation after receipt of the above documents.
He also forwarded alongwith the interim reply a copy of C.W.P.
7214 of 1993 and prayed that the same may be treated as interim representation.
In Para 5 of the interim reply he referred to two judgments in support of his case namely 1974(1) SLR 27 and AIR 1968 SC 33.
Petitioner specifically made a further request in the interim reply that he may be heard in person along with his counsel before taking a final decision.
This interim reply was considered by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana and he by his order dated 27.7.1993 informed the petitioner that a copy of the enquiry report had already been sent to him on 26.5.1993 and that there was no provision for the supply of exhibits/Annexures and written arguments of Presenting Officer.
Consequently the request for extension of time to submit the reply was declined.
Copy of this letter is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
Petitioner did not hear anything thereafter and the matter was considered by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana and he by his order dated 29.9.1993 passed the impugned order, whereby a penalty of compulsory retirement from Government service with immediate effect was inflicted upon him.
It is this order which is under challenge in this writ petition.
Respondents have filed written statement, controverting the allegations made in the writ petition.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the order of penalty is illegal and deserves to be quashed being against the principles of natural justice inter alia on he grounds (i) that while passing the order of penalty, even the interim reply submitted by the petitioner was not considered, (ii) that Annexures, order sheet and brief of written arguments submitted by the Presenting Officer in the absence of the petitioner before the Enquiry Officer had not been supplied so as to enable the petitioner to make an effective representation to the show cause notice, and (iii) that the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of personal hearing which had been specifically prayed and asked for.
9.
Learned counsel initially submitted that the petitioner while submitting the interim reply dated 1461993 specifically made a request that he may be heard in person before the passing of the final order.
The Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana by order dated July 27, 1993 only refused to supply to the petitioner the exhibits, Annexures and brief of written arguments submitted by the Presenting Officer and did not intimate to him any thing about his request for personal hearing.
Petitioner did not hear anything from the punishing authority after the submission of the interim reply till he received the final order of penalty and the order of penalty was passed without affording him an opportunity of being heard.
Learned counsel submitted that the order is vitiated and deserves to be set aside on this ground.
10.
Learned counsel next submitted that the Enquiry Officer gave the enquiry report after hearing the departmental representative and taking note of the brief of written arguments filed by him in the absence of the petitioner.
Petitioner was proceeded ex-parte and on a request made by the petitioner brief of written arguments submitted by the departmental representative was not made available to him so as to enable him to lay an effective challenge to the enquiry report.
Since the brief of written arguments had not been supplied to the petitioner he could not make an effective representation to the show cause notice and the action of the authorities in passing the order of penalty without supplying a copy of the brief of written arguments is vitiated and deserves to be quashed on this ground as well.
11.
Learned counsel lastly submitted that the interim reply submitted by the petitioner was not considered before passing the order of penalty.
Learned counsel highlighted that what to talk of considering the interim reply, it was not even referred to in the final order of penalty that has been passed.
It was rather assumed that the petitioner did not submit any reply to the second show cause notice.
Since the interim reply has not been considered the order of penalty passed by the punishing authority in the absence of consideration of interim reply is vitiated and deserves to be quashed.
12.
Mr. Rathee, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, submitted that rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 does not provide for affording an opportunity of being heard in person, petitioner is, therfore, not entitled to such an opportunity even if he had specificalloy asked for it.
Learned State counsel sumitted that a copy of the Inquiry report was duly furnished to the petitioner and thus no other document was required to be furnished and his requiest for supply of brief of written arguments submitted by the departmental representative or copies of some other documents asked for was not necessary to be supplied and that the order of penalty was passed after considering the facts and circumstances of the case and therefore no interference was called for and the order of penalty deserves to be upheld.
Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987, in so far as relevant for the purposes of this writ petition reads thus :-  ``7.
Inquiry Before imposition of certain penalties.
1 to 5 xxx xxx 6.
After the enquiry against a Government employee has been completed, and after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed, the Government employee shall, if the penalty to be imposed is major penalty be supplied with a copy of the report of the enquiring authority and be called upon to show cause, within reasonable time, not ordinarily exceeding one month against the particular penalty propsed to be inflicted upon him.
Any representation submitted by him in that behalf shall be taken into consideration before final orders are passed.
Provided that if the punishing authority disagrees with any part or whole of the findings, of the enquiring authoriy, the point or points of such disagreement together with a brief statement of the ground thereof, shall also be supplied to the Government employee.''
13.
In State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SCT 123(P&H) : 1992(1) Services Law Reporter 174, an enquiry was held under the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules against the official for his absence from duty.
He was ordered to be dismissed from service in disciplinary proceedings.
The official challenged the order of dismissal inter alia on the ground that no valid enquiry had been held; no reasonable opportuity had been given to him to cross-examine the witnesses and the punishment imposed was violative of the sagfeguard provided in the rules under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
Suit was decreed by the courts below and in Second appeal contention was raised that the issuance of notice and consideration of the reply by the punishing authority amounted to substantial compliance of Rule 1624 of the Rules and as such it was not necessary to give a personal hearing to the respondent before passing the impugned order.
While dealing with this matter the Bench held that the issuance of written show cause notice to the delinquent official and the consideration of the reply received in response thereto amounted to substantial compliance of Rule 1624(i) and this exercise having been gone through fulfils the requirement of law.
The Bench, however, observed as under :-  ``We are however not unmindful of the fact that the written representations are often dealt with in a casual and perfunctory manner and to obviate this possibility we hold that should a delinquent official request a personal hearing, it must be given to him and its denial would vitiate any action against the official.''
The relevant portion of Rule 1624(ix) which deals with the procedure to be followed in the conduct of enquiry against the police officials reads thus:-  ``Before an order of dismissal or reduction in rank is passed the officer to be punished shall be produced before the officer empowered to punish him, and shall be informed of the charges proved against him, and called upon to show-cause why an order of dismissal or reduction in rank should not be passed.
Any representation that he may make shall be recorded shall form part of the record of the case, and shall be taken into consideration by the officer empowered to punish him before the final order is passed.''
In Ashok Kumar v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(1) SCT 533 (P&H) : 1990(3) Services Law Reporter 127, petitioner was dismissed by the Senior Superintendent of Police after dispensing with department enquiry.
Appeal against the order of dismissal was filed before the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The appellate authority did not grant personal hearing.
In this situation it was held that personal hearing cannot be declined even if the enquiry has been dispensed with under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and that it was incumbent on the appellate authority to give a personal hearing to the official before taking a decision on the appeal.
In Darshan Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1991(2) SCT 714 (P&H) : 1991(4) Services Law Reporter 102, again a case of police official, petitioner was dismissed from service by invoking the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Appeal there against was dismissed.
This court while interpreting Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules held that the petitioner was not given a personal hearing by the appellate authority and the impugned order passed in appeal was clearly invalid and could not be sustained.
In Committee of Management, Kisan Degree College v. Shambhu Saran Pandey and others, 1995(2) SCT 12 (SC) : 1995(1) Judgments Today 280, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report and on the basis of that report a show cause notice as to why he should not be dismissed from service was given to the official.
No explanation was submitted.
A request was however made to the Committee to convene a meeting in which he desired to submit his explanation.
There being no provision to give hearing to an employee in the meeting of the committee, the same was not given and a resolution was passed to dismiss him from service.
The decision was challenged by filing a writ petition.
Order of dismissal was set aside, leaving it open to hold fresh enquiry, if necessary.
In appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended that the question of hearing the official by the Committee did not arise inasmuch as there is no such provision in the bye-laws of the Society or the Rules and therefore there was no violation of the principles of natural justice.
The Apex Court while deciding the matter observed as under:-  ``It is stated in the letter written by the enquiry officer that inspection of documents would be given at the time of final hearing.
That obviously is an erroneous procedure followed by the enquiry officer in the first instance he should be given the opportunity for inspection and thereafter conduct the enquiry and then hear the delinquent at the time of conclusion of his enquiry.
In this case that procedure was not adopted.
Therefore, the procedure in conducting the enquiry adopted is clearly in violation of the principles of natural justice.
Accordingly, we agree with the High Court, though for different reasons, in the setting aside of the order of dismissal passed by the Management as approved by the Vice-Chancellor and Chancellor on the respective dates referred to hereinbefore.''
In Digamber Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 695, after noticing that it is high time that the quasi-judicial authorities realise their duty to act fairly and in consonance with the principles of natural justice the Bench observed as under :-  ``Having indicated the principles, was may revert at back to the impugned orders.
Annexure P.5 in both the writ petitions shows that after making a mention of the fact that show-cause notice dated 1841990 was served on the petitioner, his reply was not found satisfactory and a second show-cause notice was served on him, the Chief Engineer has recorded that the explanation submitted by the petitioner has been carefully gone through and that the petitioner has failed to bring about any new facts in his defence warranting change in the proposed penalty.
This, in our opinion, is a most unsatisfactory method of passing an order of punishment which definitely has a perennial effect on the career of the employee.
We are not suggesting that the disciplinary authority should not punish a delinquent employee but our emphasis is that while punishing an employee for his act of delinquency the disciplinary authority must abide by the principles of natural justice.
The impugned orders do not contain even a single reason as to on what ground the punishing authority has arrived at a conclusion that the replies filed by the petitioners are not satisfactory.
It has not recorded any reason for recording the conclusion that the petitioners are guilty.
Even this much has not been recorded that the replies filed by the petitioners have been found to be unsatisfactory.
Total failure of the disciplinary authority to indicate and demonstrate the application of mind to all the facts of the case is sufficient to hold that impugned orders are non-speaking.''
In Collector of Customs v. Md Habibul Haque, 1974(1) SLR 321 a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court observed that the requirement of rules and principles of natural justice demand that the respondent should have been served with a copy of the written brief filed by the Presenting Officer even though service of such a copy is not expressly provided in the rules and failure to supply such a copy results in denial of reasonable opportunity to the official to defend himself and it renders the entire disciplinary proceedings invalid.
14.
On a consideration of the entire matter I find that the petitioner while submitting the interim reply to the show cause notice issued by the disciplinary authority made specific prayer that he be heard in person along with his counsel before passing any order.
Not only this petitioner had also requested for the supply of certain documents indicated in the interim reply.
The interim reply was considered by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana and he was informed that a copy of the enquiry report has already been sent to him and there was no provision for supply of exhibits/annexures and arguments of the Presenting Officer.
The extension sought for submission of the reply was refused vide annexure P-27.
The request of the petitioner that he be afforded a personal hearing was neither specifically granted nor declined.
The fact however remains that the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of being heard in person and the impugned order was passed in the absence of such opportunity.
Having regard to the decisions in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, Ashok Kumar v. State of Punjab and others and Darshan Singh v. State of Punjab and another (supra) and peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, I cannot help concluding that it was incumbent on the part of the punishing authority to afford the petitioner an opportunity of hearing before passing the impugned order.
It is true that there is no specific provision in the rules providing for such an opportunity, but principles of natural justice, which are now so well recognised, so commanded that it has to be read in the rules that in the event a personal hearing is asked for, it should be granted.
Had the petitioner been granted such an opportunity, he may have explained to the punishing authority that he was prevented by sufficient cause in not filing a detailed reply to the show cause notice in the absence of documents and in any case that he was innocent of the charges levelled against him.
The punishing authority has not addressed itself to this request of the petitioner even while passing the order of penalty.
The Punishing authority thus in my opinion was not alive to the situation that a personal hearing had been asked for and whether it is liable to be granted or not.
This alone in my view vitiate the orders being violative of the principles of natural justice.
It is correct that the rule does not envisage the granting of such an opportunity but that does not mean that it is not to be granted in all cases though the facts warrant differently.  . A reference to the order of penalty, Annexure P-39 shows that the   punishing authority in his order initially referred to the report of the enquiry officer and that a second show cause notice was served upon him on 25.6.1993 giving him an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken.
The punishing authority thereafter noticed that Sh. Dhull, instead of submitting his representation submitted an interim reply on flimsy and unfounded grounds that a complete enquiry report alongwith annexures/exhibits, written arguments of the Presenting Officer and order sheet had not been received by him.
It was further observed that the petitioner knew fully well that he has been supplied a complete copy of the enquiry report as also he had received a copy of the statement of the witnesses from the Enquiry Officer and further that he had himself brought on record written documents of the enquiry and was having copies of these documents with him and there was no provision in the rules to supply him the copies of the order sheet and written arguments of the Presenting Officer and there being no provision under the rules for the supply of exhibits, annexures and written arguments of Presenting Officer, his request for supply of these documents and extension of time was declined.
The punishing authority thereafter did not discuss at all any material which may justify the punishment imposed and the order of penalty was passed only by observing that the official has nothing to state in this regard.
15.
During the course of arguments it could not be disputed and rather it is established on the record that ex-parte proceedings had been taken against the petitioner before the submission of the report by the Inquiry Officer and the report of the Inquiry Officer is ex-parte.
It was in the absence of the petitioner, brief of written arguments was submitted by the Presenting Officer before the Enquiry Officer before the submission of the enquiry report.
It is in this backdrop to be seen whether the action in refusing to supply the documents as asked for or atleast the brief of the written arguments submitted by the Presenting Officer was justified and the non-supply thereof vitiates the order.
As held in the case of Collector of Custom v. Md Habibul Haque (supra), I am of the opinion that the requirement of the principles of natural justice demanded that the respondent should have been supplied with atleast a copy of the written arguments filed by the Presenting Officer before the Enquiry Officer and before the submission of the enquiry report in ex-parte proceedings, even though the supply of such a copy is not expressly provided in the rules, the failure to supply such a copy would result in denial of reasonable opportunity to the respondent to defend himself and would thus render the order of penalty invalid.
This apart as already observed above, the punishing authority did not consider the submissions made by the petitioner in his report dated 1461993, Annexure P-26.
The petitioner while submitting the interim reply referred to atleast two judgments of the Supreme Court in support of his case besides that he may be heard in person along with his counsel before taking a final decision in the matter.
None of the judgments referred to in the interim reply had been considered by the punishing authority while passing the impugned order.
It has not even said that these judgments are not relevant to the facts of this case.
It only shows that the punishing authority did not take into account any submission or request made by the petitioner in his interim reply while taking a final decision on the enquiry report.
This is my view again vitiates the order of penalty as anything stated in the interim reply was not considered.
The denial of the documents as asked for in the interim reply did not mean that no part of the interim reply was to be taken into consideration by the punishing authority before arriving at the final conclusion on the report submitted by the Enquiry Officer.
Looked from any angle and for the reasons indicated above, I come to the conclusion that the impugned order, Annexure P-39, cannot be sustained being violative of the principles of natural justice.
The same is accordingly quashed.
However, it would be open to the respondents to proceed in the matter afresh according to law and pass any order that may be just and fair in the facts and circumstances of this case after complying with principles of natural justice and after atleast making available to him a written brief of the arguments submitted by the Presenting Office and affording him an opportunity of being heard.
The petition stands allowed accordingly with no corder as to costs.
Petition allowed.