Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner prays that the order dated October 31, 1995 by which his selection and appointment to the post of Assistant Secretary has been set aside on the ground that "he did not fulfil the requisite experience of three years in a Government or Semi-Government Body" be quashed.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
In July 1991, the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board advertised 11 posts of Assistant Secretaries.
Besides the academic qualifications, it was provided that the candidates should have "at least three years experience in a Government Office/Semi-Government Body".
The petitioner applied for this post.
He was selected and appointed.
On August 1, 1992, the petitioner joined service as an Assistant Secretary.
Soon thereafter, 12 writ petitions including Civil Writ Petition No. 1465 of 1992 were filed.
The petitioners in all the petitions were aggrieved by the selections made by the Respondent Board.
They challenged the selection on the ground that persons who did not fulfil the qualification of three years' experience in a Government or Semi Government Organisation as prescribed in the advertisement have been wrongly selected.
All these writ petitions had come up for hearing before one of us (Jawahar Lal Gupta, J) on January 2, 1995.
It was apointed out that in pursuance to an interim direction given by a Motion Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 616 of 1992, report had been given by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies that the certificates produced by two persons were not supported by the record of the respective Societies.
On the basis of this report, it was contended on behalf of the petitioners in those petitions that the entire selection was tainted.
On behalf of the selected candidates, it was pointed out that it would not be fair to up-set the entire selection on the basis of an ex parte report.
These writ petitions were disposed of with the following observations:-  "In this situation, it appears to be just and proper to remit the matter to the Chief Administrator of the Board who will examine the qualifications of each selected person.
In case, the petitioners so desire, they may put forth the factual position with regard to each selected candidate in writing.
If on consideration of the material as may be produced by the petitioner, the Chief Administrator finds that there are doubts regarding the eligibility of one or the other candidates, he would give an opportunity to that candidate to show that he fulfilled the qualifications.
Thereafter, the respondent shall decide the matter finally by passing a speaking order.
In case, it is found that a person who did not fulfil the prescribed qualification has been selected, the selection and appointment of such person shall stand quashed.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order."
In pursuance to the above directions, the Chief Administrator of the Respondent Board constituted a committee to verify the documents regarding the eligibility of the selected candidates.
The committee made its report.
It found that in fact 15 candidates has been selected.
Eight of them fulfilled the qualifications.
However, there were doubts regarding the eligibility of the remaining 7 candidates including the petitioner.
Consequently, vide memo dated June 9, 1995, a show cause notice was given to the petitioner to explain as to why action in pursuance of the decision of the High Court may not be taken against him.
A copy of this show cause notice is on record as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted his reply vide his letter dated June 26, 1995.
He submitted that he had worked for a period of one year and 29 days in the Haryana Warehousing Corporation at Barwala during the period from October 5, 1984 to December 5, 1985.
He further claimed to have rendered service in the Hissar National Cooperative House Building Society Limited, Hissar from April 24, 1988 to April 30, 1991.
The petitioner claimed that this Society was a subsidiary of the Haryana State Cooperative Housing Apex Limited, Chandigarh.
He also alleged that the Apex Body has more than 75% share capital belonging to the Haryana State.
He maintained that the Society was a Semi-Government Body.
Thereafter, the matter was considered by the Chief Administrator.
He found that out of the seven candidates to whom show cause notices had been given, three were qualified.
With regard to the remaining four including the petitioner, it was found that they did not fulfil the requisite experience of three years in a Government or Semi Government Body.
It was held that the selection was not in order.
As a result, it has been ordered that the selection and appointment of the four persons who did not fulfil the qualifications stand quashed.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the Hissar National Cooperative House Building Society Limited, Hissar is a Semi-Government Body.
He further points out that vide notification dated October 6, 1995, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 on the record, the qualification of three years' experience has been deleted.
Having served the Respondent-Board from August 1, 1992, the petitioner claims that he now fulfils the qualifications and as such, his services cannot be terminated.
Consequently, he prays that the impugned order passed by the Chief Administrator on October 31, 1995 be quashed.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Respondent-Board.
It has been stated that alongwith his application, the petitioner had produced two experience certificates.
He claimed to have worked as a Godown Keeper in the State Warehousing Corporation at Barwala and as Secretary of the Hissar National Cooperative House Building Society Limited, Hissar.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner had joined duty as Assistant Secretary in the Board on January 10, 1992 and not on August 1, 1992.
With regard to the amendment of the rule in the year 1995, it has been pointed out that it is effective from October 6, 1995 and is, thus, of no benefit to him.
It has been further stated that the reply submitted by the petitioner to the show cause notice was duly examined.
The Society is only registered under the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984.
Neither the State Government has contributed to its share capital nor is any of the State officers on the Board of Directors.
The State Government has no control over its activities and management.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner had worked in a Semi-Government Body.
It has been further stated that the impugned order is in strict conformity with law and the order passed by this Court.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. PK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that after the Board had made the selection and appointment, it was estopped from passing the impugned order.
Learned counsel further submitted that the rule having been amended prior to the passing of the order, the requirement of experience could not be a ground for terminating the petitioner's services.
In any event, the counsel contended that the petitioner is now qualified and his services can't be terminated on the ground that he did not possess the experience at the time of his selection.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. CB Goel who appeared for the respondent-Board.
He also pointed out that a similar writ petition No. 19781 of 1995 (Manohar Lal v. Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board) which questioned the validity of the order dated October 31, 1995, was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court (to which one of us was a party) vide order dated November 20, 1995.
5.
It is the admitted position that the selection and appointment of the petitioner was questioned soon after he had joined service in the year 1992.
Vide order dated January 2, 1995 various writ petitions were decided.
As already noticed, the Chief Administrator was directed to examine the question regarding the eligibility of the candidates and decide it after giving them an opportunity.
It was categorically held that "in case it is found that a person who did not fulfil the prescribed qualification has been selected, the selection and appointment of such person shall stand quashed."
This order was not challenged.
It had admittedly attained finality.
That being so, the Chief Administrator of the Respondent-Board was bound to examine the question and decide about the eligibility of each of the candidates.
It is in pursuance to the directions of this court that matter has been considered and decided.
In such a situation, the question of estoppel did not arise.
6.
Consequently, the contention of the learned counsel that the Respondent having selected the petitioner is now estopped from terminating his services, cannot be sustained.
7.
Equally untenable in the plea that the rule having been amended by notification dated October 6, 1995 and the qualification regarding experience having been deleted, the selection and appointment of the petitioner made in the year 1991-92 was legal.
Admittedly, the amendment is only prospective.
At the relevant time, the rule required the candidates to possess the prescribed experience.
As has been found by the authority, the petitioner did not fulfil the prescribed qualification.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the order of termination is violative of the amended provision.
8.
Lastly, it was contended that the petitioner having been appointed in January 1992, he had acquired the requisite experience before October 31, 1995 when his service were terminated.
That being so, the action of the respondent in terminating his services was illegal and invalid.
Learned counsel placed reliance on the decisions in Ram Sarup v. State of Haryana and others, 1978(2) SLR 836 and Dr. Anil Kumar Vij and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(4) SLR 538.
9.
The position in the present case is vitally different from that in the above mentioned decisions.
The factual position in Ram Sarup's case (supra) appears to be that he was appointed as a Labour -cum-Conciliation Officer on January 1, 1968.
He had continued to work as such till April 19, 1977.
He was sought to be reverted on the ground that he did not possess the requisite experience of five years in the working of Labour Laws which was required under Rule 4 Clause (1) of the Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955.
In this situation, it was held by their Lordships that the initial appointment of Ram Sarup was merely irregular and that his appointment should be considered as regular from the date when the completed five years.
Thereafter, he could not be reverted to the lower post of Statistical Officer.
Such is not the position in the present case.
The selection and appointment of the petitioner had been challenged at the threshold.
While disposing of the writ petitions, it had been directed that in case, it is found that the petitioner did not fulfil the requisite qualifications, his appointment shall "stand quashed".
This judgment has attained finality.
10.
Similarly in Dr. Anil Kumar Vij's case (supra) a person was required to possess three years' experience in the Speciality concerned before he could be eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor.
It was the admitted position that the concerned candidate had worked as a Senior Lecturer in Medicine from April 6, 1987 to February 26, 1990.
Thereafter, he was appointed as a Senior Lecturer in Gastro-Enterology on February 27, 1990 and continued to work such till his appointment as Assistant Professor (Medicine) in January 1991.
His appointment was challenged on the ground that his teaching experience in the field of medicine was short by about two months.
In this case, it was found that a certificate had been issued by the competent authority that the concerned candidate had been performing the duties of a Senior Lecturer (Medicine) in addition to that of Gastro Enterology during the period when he was appointed as Senior Lecturer in Gastro-Enterology.
The Bench had accepted this factual position and held that the respondent was eligible as he possessed the requisite experience.
The position in the present case, as already noticed, is totally different.
In view of the above, we find no merit in any of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Accordingly, we dismiss this petition.
However, there will be no order as to costs.