MS Liberhan, J - The short question raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners in this writ petition is that JBT Teachers with Prabhakar or Giani qualifications are entitled to the grades granted to the language teachers with Prabhakar or Giani qualification.
From May 1, 1990 JBT with Prabhakar or Giani qualification were equated with the teachers possessing qualifications of OT with Prabhakar or Giani trained language teachers.
The grade of both these categories of teachers were common.
There is no dispute nor asserted in the course of arguments that post language teacher with qualification of Prabhakar or Giani with OT was not equated with JBT Teachers.
The only distinction pointed out by the learned counsel for the State of Haryana is that language teachers were given three advance increments prior to the revision of scales.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioners averred that petitioners are discharging the same duties as are being discharged by the language teachers with the similar qualifications.
Though the respondents averred in the written statement that JBT Teachers with qualification of Prabhakar or Giani are teaching languages to the students in Middle Schools while language teachers i.e. OT with Prabhakar or Giani qualification can teach up to Mattic Classes, though no specific instructions have been pointed out from either side.
3.
Be that as it is.
There is no dispute that grade of JBT teachers with Prabhakar or Giani qualifications were equated with the language teachers having qualifications of OT with Prabhakar or Giani prior to the revision of pay scales.
Thus both categories of teachers were getting pay in the same pay scales.
4.
It has been laid down that once the posts have been equated on the ground that the incumbents were discharging similar functions, there is no reason to provide two different grades to the similarly situated persons.
It was further laid down that once the posts have been equated while revising the pay scales, ordinarily they cannot be treated differently.
I find support for my above view from the judgments reported in Shiv Kumar and others v. State of Haryana, 1994(1) SCT 8 (P&H) : 1994(1) RSJ 171, Arjun Dev and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(2) RSJ 498 : 1992(2) SCT 119 (P&H) (SC), Tara Chand and other v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(2) RSJ 329, Bhagwan Dutt Sharma, Govt. High School Roopgarh and others v. The State of Haryana through the Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department, Chandigarh and others, 1988(2) PLR 458 and Dr. Gautam Mahajan and others v. State of Punjab, 1989(2) SLR 70.
5.
No contrary view has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents except an attempt was made to distinguish the facts of the case in hand, inter alia on the ground that language teachers were given advance increments at the time of their recruitment before 1986.
As observed above, the grant of advance increments at the stage of initial recruitment would not make the two categories as two distinct categories or cadres with different pay scales particularly when they incumbents are discharging similar functions.
It has not been denied during the course of arguments on my repeatedly putting questions, that JBT with Prabhakar or Giani qualifications cannot be posted in the High or Senior Secondary Schools for teaching languages.
6.
In Civil Writ Petition 1810 of 1976 (Labha Singh Garcha and others v. State of Punjab and another, 1998(2) R.C.R.
(Civil) 529) decided on 2071976 while rejecting the contention of the State of Punjab, a Division Bench of this court observed :-  "The learned Deputy Advocate General appearing on behalf of the Punjab State, has tried to justify the stand taken in the return lied in Civil Writ Petition No. 2152 of 1976.
By contending that the petitioners were appointed in the cadre of Basic Trained Teachers against the JBT vacancies as JBT teachers and in the grade meant for them; and that these teachers even on acquiring the qualifications of Giani/Prabhakar, do not automatically become entitled to the grade meant for Punjabi or Hindi teachers, unless they are promoted departmentally.
This contention has, however, no basis and is even contrary to the ratio of 172 S.L.R.
402 which was affirmed by the Supreme Court in 1975(2) S.L.R.
621.
Chief Justice AN Ray speaking for the court observed in the latter case that the contention of the State that there was not to be a mass increase of scale of pay is unsound to scales of pay according to category 'A' (the relevant category in that case).
It was further held that the revised pay scale would be effective either with effect from the date when the teachers acquired the desired qualifications or the crucial date i.e. May 1, 1957 whichever was later.
The relief claimed by the petitioner in the present writ petitions is based upon the same circular latter of the Government which was the subject matter of scrutiny by the Supreme Court.
The only distinguishing feature is that the present petitioners fall under category 'B', whereas those who had taken the matter to court in the earlier cases, were from category 'A'.
The petitioners are, therefore, quite justified in contending that the inaction on the part of the Government in the matter of release of pay scales admissible to their category is arbitrary and discriminatory."
This judgment has been affirmed by Hon'ble the Supreme Court.
7.
The facts of the case as well as the law laid down in the above writ petition is pari materia with the facts and circumstances of the case in hand.
I am of the considered view that grant of two different pay scales to the similarly qualified persons discharging almost similar functions and who were equated in the matter of pay scale before revision of pay scales cannot be treated differently later on without there being reasonable basis.
No reasonable basis worth noticing has been pointed out to take a different view.
8.
In view of the observations made above, I find the action of the respondents in not granting the grade of Rs. 1400-2600 of the JBT teachers with Prabhakar or Giani qualifications as granted to the language teachers i.e. OT Teachers with same qualifications is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Resultantly the Writ Petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the grade of Rs. 1400-2600 to the petitioners who are holding the aforesaid qualifications, with effect from the date these were released to the language teachers.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.