N K Kapoor, J - Petitioner has sought issuance of writ of quo warranto declaring that respondent No. 3-Dr. Rajinderjit Kaur Pawar is not qualified to be appointed as Reader in the Law Department and further direction against the Guru Nanak Dev University to declare her appointment as null and void.
2.
Petitioner a Lecturer in Law, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar has assailed the appointment of Dr. Rajinderjit Kaur Pawar on a number of grounds, namely :-  (i) That respondent No. 3 has been selected in a mala fide manner.
(ii) That Selection Committee was not properly constituted as provisions of the Calendar of the University specifically debar appointment of a person who has since retired.
(iii) That even on merits petitioner is far more qualified than respondent No. 3.
(iv) That the Selection Committee acted in haste in selecting and appointing respondent No. 3.
(v) That even as per qualification prescribed, respondent No. 3, did not possess the requisite qualification.
3.
Consequent to the notice of motion issued by this Court, respondents No. 1 and 2 have put in appearance and filed written statement controverting various material submissions made in the petition as well as have raised some preliminary submissions.
By way of preliminary submissions it has been stated that Guru Nanak Dev University has not been impleaded as respondent in the writ petition and thus the writ petition is liable to be dismissed at this short ground.
Secondly, the petitioner's main contention is that respondent No. 3 was not qualified to be appointed as Reader as she did not possess the necessary qualifications stipulated in the advertisement.
However, such an objection could not be raised by the petitioner, as the matter is primarily within the domain of the Selection Committee.
In the present case Selection Committee consisted of Shri R S Narula, retired Chief Justice of Punjab and Haryana High Court, Dr. Upindera Baxi, Vice Chancellor, Delhi University, Dr. K K Nigam, Professor, Delhi University, Dr. S G Singh, Professor, Department of Laws, besides others.
A bare reading of the names constituting the Selection Committee itself brings out that the same consisted of eminent jurists and since the Selection Committee found respondent No. 3 possessing requisite qualification as well as worthy of the post the matter sought to be raised does not lie within the purview of the Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
4.
Before us the learned counsel for the petitioner after referring in brief various points urged by him in this petition chose to address us primarily on the ground of mala fide i.e. other objections pertaining to the constitution of the Selection Committee or with regard to the respondents not possessing requisite qualification were in fact not pressed.
Elaborating, the counsel drew the attention of the Bench to submissions made in this regard in para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7 and 13 of the writ petition.
It is case of the petitioner that firstly in the year 1989 that a post in the cadre of Reader in the Department of Laws was advertised vide advertisement No. 5/89.
Pursuance to this advertisement petitioner and one Dr. Mohan Singh applied but no interview was held.
Once again in the year 1990 an advertisement was given, pursuance to which four candidates applied i.e. Dr. Mohan Singh, Dr. Subhash Sharma and respondent No. 3.
This interview was also postponed for no legitimate reason except that respondent No. 3 though called for interview was in fact not qualified to be appointed as a Reader and it was only in June, 1992 that a fresh advertisement was given, pursuance to which petitioner, Dr. Mohan Singh, Dr. Gurjit Singh and respondent No. 3 applied.
The Selection Committee selected respondent No. 3 to be appointed as Reader in the Department of Laws.
Thus, the narration of the above facts clearly reveal that postponement of the interview on three earlier occasions was with sole aim so as to favour respondent No. 3 who did not possess the requisite qualification till such time.
This was managed in connivance with the Vice Chancellor of the University, Professor Gurdip Singh Randhawa with whom the husband of respondent No. 3 had developed good friendly relations, both being teachers in Khalsa College, Delhi at a given time.
5.
It may be noticed that respondent No. 3 despite service has neither put in appearance nor filed any written submissions.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 as noticed earlier also have filed written submissions justifying the selection made by the Selection Committee, denying the submissions made by the petitioner in para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7 and 13 as well as explaining in detail how and in what manner the interviews in fact materialised justifying the selection made by the Selection Committee, which consisted of eminent jurists.
Explaining in detail, the reason for not making selection on the first three occasions which was on account of very poor response, the counsel drew the attention of the Bench that in pursuance to the first advertisement only two applicants applied for the post.
Even on second, only three persons applied and on third, only four persons applied.
Out of these four applicants only three possessed the requisite qualifications namely, Dr. Mohan Singh, Dr. M D Singh and respondent No. 3.
The third interview could not be held on account of administrative reasons and thus it is only in the fourth round that ultimately respondent No. 3 was selected whereas, Dr. Gurjit Singh was placed on the waiting list.
As petitioner was not even in the waiting list, grievance made by the petitioner in this petition is in fact devoid of any substance.
Persons comprising the Selection Committee consisted of eminent jurists who cannot be accused of the charge of bias.
In fact the petitioner has not levelled any such charge against any of the members except to the inclusion of the name of the Professor S G Singh on the ground that on his re-appointment, he could not be given an assignment in the administration side.
Since the selection has been made by the eminent persons constituting the Selection Committee this Court in law as well as in equity should refrain from substituting its views as no fault can be found either in constituting such a Selection Committee or the choice made by them in selecting respondent No. 3.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length of time and perused the relevant material during the course of arguments.
Selection in the instant case has been made by a Selection Committee which comprised of eminent personalities namely, retired Chief Justice of Punjab and Haryana High Court, Vice Chancellor of Delhi University and other eminent persons holding respectable positions in their departments who after interviewing the petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 and others have ultimately selected respondent No. 3 to the post of a Reader in the Department of Laws at Guru Nanak Devi University, Amritsar.
Counsel for the petitioner has confined his submission with regard to the selection being mala fide, other objections with regard to the constitution of the Selection Committee or that the respondent No. 3 did not possess requisite qualification were in fact given up.
We find no substance in the plea of the petitioner that selection of respondent No. 3 is in fact mala fide.
Ground urged by the petitioner to term the selection as mala fide is in fact without any substance.
It has been asserted by the respondents that on account of very poor response to the advertisement, the selection process were deferred except for the third occasion when the interview was postponed on account of administrative reasons.
To infer from such deferment/postponement of interview a mala fide intention on the part of the respondent No. 2 and that too for the reason that at one time husband of respondent No. 3 and respondent No. 2 were Lecturers in the same College at Delhi would be too much in the circumstances of the present case.
The contention raised by the petitioner does not appeal to reason at all.
One cannot loose sight of the fact that eminent persons after examining respective merits of the candidates have chosen respondent No. 3 to be appointed as Reader in the Department of Laws.
No fault can be found with the selection made by such Selection Committee.
We also do not find much merit in the objection of the petitioner that Professor S G Singh could not be associated in this selection as he had retired earlier.
Even if it be taken that Professor S G Singh could not be a member of such a Committee, it has neither been alleged nor demonstrated that Professor S G Singh was sole arbiter to make this selection.
Thus, we find no merit in any of the submissions made by the petitioner and consequently dismiss the petition being devoid of any merit.
No costs.