Arun Kumar Mitra, J - This writ petition has been moved with the following prayers :-  (a) A writ of or in the nature of Certiorari commanding the respondents to certify and transmit to this Hon'ble Court the records of the case including the impugned order dated 04.02.2004 being annexure `P 9' herein so that conscionable justice may be administered by quashing the same.
(b) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to rescind, recall, revoke and/or withdraw the impugned order dated 04/02/2004 being annexure "P 9" herein and to forbear from giving any effect or further effect to the same.
2.
A writ of in the nature of Prohibition restraining the respondents from acting in any manner pursuant to the order dated 04.02.2004 being annexure "P 9" herein.
The challenge is thrown to the order dated 04/02/2004 which is annexure `P 9' to the writ petition.
3.
The writ petitioner joined the service of Calcutta State Transport Corporation (shortly termed as CSTC) on 22/01/1966 as Mechanical Helper and he is presently posted as Charge Hand-II (Motor Mechanic).
Consequently, the job of the petitioner is mechanical in nature.
4.
According to the petitioner, the conditions of service of the employees of CSTC are governed by CSTC Employees Service Regulations, 1 960 (hereinafter termed as said regulations).
5.
The respondent No. 1 had been formed under the State ruled Transport Corporation Act, 1958 (shortly termed as said Act).
The respondent no.1 is an "Other Authority" and is thus a "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
6.
On 8th November, 1967 an award was passed by the Id.
5th Industrial Tribunal West Bengal laying down the promotional policy of the staff of CSTC.
The said award was published on 4th January, 1968 which has been made annexure `P 1' to the writ petition.
7.
The respondent No. 1 followed the said award and started taking steps towards implementation thereof and the said award still holds field.
According to the petitioner on 01/09/1972 and afterwards and afterwards about 300 promotions were awarded by CSTC to different categories of mechanical staff in the depots as well as the Central workshop superseding the claims of several employees in the respective posts and in violation of the award passed by the 5th Industrial Tribunal.
Against such promotion many employees filed writ petitions before the High Court and the High Court directed CSTC to set right the promotion in adhering to the award of the ld 5th Industrial Tribunal.
Accordingly the affected employees, who were superseded by the juniors were awarded notional promotion to the respective posts w.e.f.
the date they are superseded by the juniors.
8.
According to the petitioner he was deprived by the illegal promotion order issued in 1972 but still then he was not awarded notional promotion w.e.f.
the date he was superseded by his juniors.
9.
In the year 1985 a Gradation list of CSTC employees in the department of Motor Mechanic was published.
From the said Gradation list it will appear that so many employees are juniors to the petitioner in terms of the length of service rendered.
10.
The petitioner has also alleged that nothing was communicated to him regarding his performance if the same was found to be unsatisfactory.
No adverse remark is There in the confidential report of the petitioner or nothing as such has been communicated to him.
11.
By an order dated 04/04/1991 the Deputy Managing Director sought to amend the wrong made by CSTC in the matter of promotion of employees by superseding many other employees including the writ petitioner.
In this order it was mentioned inter alia that the Managing Director has been pleased to allow promotion to the petitioner to the post of Fitter (Motor Mechanic) w.e.f.
01/12/1988 against the of Central workshop having regard to his seniority in service as mate (Motor Mechanic) w.e.f.
01/09/1972.
It was further ordered that the petitioner's pay in the promotional post of Fitter will be fixed w.e.f.
01/12/1988 on the ground that the petitioner had been discharged the functions of higher responsibility.
The said order (copy) has been made annexure `P 2' to the writ petition.
12.
In the year 1996 when the petitioner was in the zone of consideration for being promoted to the next higher post by deemed of his seniority to the post of Fitter, the respondent authorities conducted an examination or promotion in complete violation of promotion policy prevalent in the respondent Corporation.
Such examination was conducted by issuing notice in the depots and the petitioner joined the said examination.
13.
Pursuant to said examination held, in 1997 promotion was given to many employees in the Mate (Motor Mechanic) and Helper (Motor Mechanic).
The petitioner alleged that if the records of the same promotion orders are produced it will clearly reveal that the petitioner was superseded by many juniors.
The Gradation list published in 1985 will reveal that employees, who had joined subsequent to the date of joining of the writ petitioner in service, had been promoted superseding the petitioner.
14.
It has been also alleged that the authority took it on seniority-cum- merit basis and the merit being considered on the basis of service record for preceding three years.
The petitioner has further alleged that he had no knowledge about the award passed by the Id.
5th Industrial Tribunal at that relevant point of time and he participated in the examination.
Later on the petitioner came to know about the promotional policy, as laid down by the Id.
5th Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal and made a representation to the Labour Commissioner, Government of West Bengal regarding violation of the award dated 08/11/1997 passed by the Id.
5th Industrial Tribunal.
The said letter dated 7th June, 1999 has been made annexure `P 3' to the writ petition.
15.
The petitioner further alleged that from an Order dated 25/03/1999, issued by the Deputy Secretary Transport Department Government of West Bengal to the Managing Director of the respondent No. 1 it will appear that the State Government had requested the Managing Director not to give effect to the resolution adopted in respect of item Nos. 3, 5, 6, 8 and 10 of the meeting dated 3rd December, 1998 without specific permission from the Government.
16.
The petitioner further alleged that the approval of the Government is required by the respondent Corporation in respect of certain matters including the revision of policy.
From the Agenda item No. 6 it will appear that the Board of Directors of CSTC adopted revised promotion policy for the employees of CSTC with retrospective effect from 1st January, 1993 by reducing working experience criteria of three years to two years.
The petitioner annexed this letter as annexure-`P 4' to the writ petition.
17.
Subsequently, in a meeting held on 05/05/1999 the Board of Directors, CSTC decided that the observations of the Finance Department Government of West Bengal regarding following the unrevised promotion policy would be noted and the unrevised promotion policy also would continue to operate till the Government's approval of the revised promotion is obtained.
The petitioner alleged that unrevised promotion policy is the one as framed by the learned Industrial Tribunal.
18.
By an order dated 21/09/2001 the Assistant Labour Commissioner to the Government of West Bengal held that circular dated 28/11/1996 of CSTC issued by the Deputy Managing Director proposing and describing technical test for promotion/appointment to the post of Charge Hand-II was in violation of the award passed by the learned Industrial Tribunal.
The complaint of the petitioner was found to be substantive and the Managing Director was requested to scrutinize the case of the petitioner in respect of promotion and to act strictly in terms of the award of the learned 5th Industrial Tribunal within a month of receipt of communication under intimation to the Office of the Assistant Labour Commissioner.
The petitioner has annexed the copy of the said order dated 21/09/2001 as annexure-`P 6'.
19.
In consequence of the said order passed by the Assistant Labour Commissioner, the Managing Director CSTC complied with the order as also the order dated 25/03/1999 passed by the Finance Department and by an order dated 8/10/2001 the Managing Director ordered that the case of the petitioner, the then Fitter will be considered for promotion w.e.f.
the date his juniors have been promoted.
Copy of this order passed by the Managing Director dated 08/10/2001 has been made annexure-`P 7' to the writ petition.
20.
Then the writ petitioner was promoted to the post of Charge Hand-II (M/M) and posted at Paikpara depot with retrospective effect from 08/07/1997.
A further direction was there in the order that the petitioner would be treated as on probation with retrospective effect from 08/07/1997 for a period of one year of promotion.
Such order was issued by the Depot Manager.
Paikpara Depot on 16/10/2004.
A copy has been annexed as annexure-`P 8'.
21.
Suddenly, by an order dated 04/02/2004, issued by the Managing Director, received by the petitioner on 05/02/2004 it was found that the petitioner had been sought to be demoted to the post of Fitter (M/M) with a further direction that he may be considered for promotion to the next higher post from the date as may be due of satisfaction of the existing promotion policy of the Corporation.
The said order also contained further that decision to be taken pursuant to the cancellation of the promotion order dated 16/10/2001 with regard to the alleged excess payment made to the petitioner which he had drawn while post at CH-II (M/M) retrospectively w.e.f.
08/07/1997.
Copy of the said order dated 04/02/2004 has been made annexure-`P 9' to the writ petition and this is the impugned order which is under challenge.
22.
In this matter an interim order was passed on 23/02/2004 in terms of prayer (g) to the writ petition until further order.
The said prayer (g) is as follows :-  "(g) An interim order directing the respondents to allow your petitioner to continue in the post of Charge Hand-II (M/M) and or such other higher post which your petitioner may be entitled to in terms of the promotion policy as adjudicated by the learned Fifth Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal, vide award dated 08111967 being annexure "P-1" herein with connecting benefits and conditions of service attached to such post till the disposal of this application."
23.
On the basis of the said interim order the petitioner is continuing as Charge Hand-II (M/M).
On behalf of the respondents no affidavit-in-opposition was filed.
But an application for vacating the interim order being CAN 1833 of 2004 was filed on behalf of the respondent nos. 1 to 3.
In the said application the respondents stated that Calcutta State Transport Corporation Employees Service Regulations was made by the Calcutta State Transport Corporation under the provision of Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950 and the same was notified in the Calcutta Gazette of 11/09/1961.
The said regulation was made available to all the employees of the Corporation excepting the Chief Executive Officer.
Chief Accounts Officer, personnel working under the Corporation on deputation from the State Government.
Casual and Badli personnel.
Apprentices and persons earning daily wages.
The service conditions of those employees to whom the said regulations applied are regulated under the said application.
24.
The respondents relied on regulation 10 of the said Regulations and stated that promotion is to be based on merit but where the candidates are found to be of equal merit, preference is to be given to the seniority in service.
25.
According to the respondents, as per channel of promotion the post of Mechanic (M/M) is the feeder post of the next higher post Charge Hand-II (M/M) and the post of Fitter (M/M) is the lower feeder post.
According to the respondents the next higher post of Helper is Mate.
The next higher post from the post of Mate is Fitter.
The post of Charge Hand-II is the next higher post from the post of Mechanic (M/M) which is the next higher post to the post of Fitter.
26.
In the application for vacating, the respondent authorities stated that the petitioner joined his service under the Calcutta State Transport Corporation in the year 1966 as Helper (M/M) In course of his service the petitioner was promoted to the next higher post of Mate(M/M) and thereafter in the year 1991 he was further promoted to the next higher post of Fitter w.e.f.
1/12/1988 having regard to the seniority as Mate from 01/09/1972.
27.
According to the respondents the writ petitioner accepted the said promotion having no objection in relation thereof.
28.
The respondents then in paragraph 5 of the said application quoted prayers of the writ application filed by the petitioner being WP No. 2604(W) of 2004.
In the said writ application, according to the respondents; the petitioner stated that in the year 1997 the respondent Corporation conducted an examination in which as he admitted, he participated.
29.
It was contended by the petitioner that in the year 1996 the petitioner was in the zone of consideration for promotion to the next higher post but at that time many employees junior to him were given promotions superseding the petitioner.
30.
According to the respondents it appears that the petitioner was unsuccessful in the said examination and no objection was raised by him at that time.
31.
The respondents in paragraph 7 of the said application stated that the writ petitioner, in spite of his participation in the said test and being unsuccessful, made in application before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Government of West Bengal on 07/04/1999 which is an afterthought that is after a lapse of about two years alleging violation of an award of 5th Industrial Tribunal whereby promotion to all posts corresponding to non-gazetted posts in Government service would be on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, merit being determined only by the service record for the preceding three years.
32.
The respondents alleged that the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Government of West Bengal was considering the complaint made by the petitioner in regard to the breach of award dated 02/11/1967 passed by the Id.
5th Industrial Tribunal and further that such proceedings were in nature of prosecution contemplated in Section 29 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
33.
In paragraph 11 it has been stated or alleged that the Depot Manager, Paikpara depot thereafter by an order dated 16/10/2001 promoted the petitioner to the post of Charge Hand-II (M/M) with retrospective effect from 08/07/1997 in the scale of pay of Rs. 1140-2160/- jumping one scale that is, Mechanic (M/M).
34.
In paragraph 13 of the application for vacating it has been stated that the present Managing Director in order to avoid discontentment among the employees by his order dated 04/02/2004 had to cancel the promotion order of the petitioner with certain other directions.
35.
The respondents in the application for vacating and/or modification of the order passed by this Court in the instant matter on 23/02/2004 prayed for vacating of the interim order in the interest of justice.
36.
Since on behalf of the respondents no affidavit-in-opposition was filed this Court accepted the application for vacating filed on behalf of the respondents as their affidavit-in-opposition.
37.
From the facts stated above it is admitted that the writ petitioner was given promotion to the post of Charge Hand-II(M/M) by the Deputy Manager, Paikpara depot.
It is also admitted that this was done in pursuance of the order of the Managing Director and that was also on the basis of the order of the Assistant Labour Commissioner who relied on a decision of the Id.
5th Industrial Tribunal.
The petitioner enjoyed the promotional benefit remained in the promotional post for a long time and suddenly in the year 2004 direction was given that the status of the petitioner be determined as if he was continuing in the post of Fitter (M/M) that mean the petitioner's rank was reduced and it was also stated in the said order impugned dated 04/02/2004 that so far as the excess payment made to the petitioner decisions will be taken in due course after getting report from the Chief Accounts Officer-cum- FA regarding the extent and magnitude of the overdrawn amount period wise.
By this order the authority wanted to mean that the petitioner was given promotion wrongly, stagewise and ultimately they came to realize and the petitioner was posted as Charge Hand-II (M/M).
38.
The question before this Court is whether the impugned order is a valid order or not that is whether after giving promotion to a person and thereafter successive promotions and lastly after being posted in a particular rank there can be reduction in rank in such a fashion.
39.
It is no doubt about it or it goes without saying that the respondent authorities did not file any affidavit-in-opposition but however, filed an application for vacating but excepting making some bald statement could never show how the promotional channel runs; though the respondents in the application for vacating showed one channel but didn't show or couldn't show whether this channel is in pursuance of the regulations of CSTC.
Only provision of regulations was relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents is the regulation which is quoted herein below :-  "Promotion.
10.
Promotion shall be based on merit preference shall be given to seniority in service."
40.
Regulation 10 speaks of promotion on the basis of merit.
It is not however, been shown also, how the merit in the instant case was judged.
What is the examination standard Who took the examination Who was in the selection committee or interviewing committee ?
What is the result panel ?
Whether the petitioner became unsuccessful in the examination; nothing has been shown and nothing has been mentioned.
The petitioner has made representation after representation but nothing was considered and ultimately promotion was given to him but suddenly one fine morning the authority said that look here, your promotion is illegal and we have done it by mistake.
What is the mistake?
That is not known.
What is the merit-cum-seniority?
That is not made clear.
Seniority is undisputed merit is not made clear but promotion is termed as illegal and therefore reduction in rank, reduction in payment and also a hint of future deduction insofar as the arrear salary is concerned Regulation 10 does not say anything about it in the application for vacating which is treated as affidavit-in-opposition also.
What is the criterion of deciding the merit, why not the petitioner is meritorious, why the petitioner is non- meritorious or the petitioner is a worthless employee, why all these imputations like mistaken promotions, all these things have not been made clear.
41.
Of course, the Government has authority to correct its mistake but provided there is mistake.
Punishment is a major one which has been given or inflicted to the petitioner, reduction in rank and deduction in pay.
No opportunity of hearing, no show-cause, no charge-sheet, nothing of this sort, at least nothing has been mentioned in the application for vacating.
Natural justice has grossly been violated.
In the celebrated judgment of Union of India & Anr. v. Tulsiram Patel delivered by by the Hon'ble Apex Court (in its Constitution Bench) and reported in AIR 1985 SC.
p. 1416 has cleared out the position and it is not a doctrine of pleasure and it is not a theory of dispensing with disciplinary inquiry.
It is purely a case of violation of natural justice.
If pleasure theory is not there then obviously the question of violation of the principle of natural justice must be there and in that view of the matter, in my opinion, the impugned order dated 04/02/2004 passed by the Managing Director being annexure-`P 9' is ex facia illegal and is set aside.
42.
The petitioner be placed in his original promoted post and he be given the salary/emoluments which he is entitled insofar as the said post is concerned and there will be no deduction from his salary in the name of "overdrawn arrear salary."
The writ petition is thus made absolute.
Writ of Mandamus is issued accordingly.
There will be no order as to costs.
Urgent Xerox certified copy, if applied for, be given to the parties as expeditiously as possible.
Order accordingly.