Soumitra Pal, J - The writ petitioners have prayed for setting aside the order dated 21st December, 2004 passed by the learned Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta refusing to grant interim order staying the orders of transfer.
2.
The facts, as stated in the writ petition, are that the petitioners were appointed in group `C' post in the Shipping Office at Calcutta.
The petitioner Nos. 1, 3 and 4 after being selected by the Staff Selection Commission under the direct recruitment quota were appointed as Lower Division Clerks.
The petitioner No. 2 was appointed as Lower Division Clerk pursuant to an interview arranged by the Regional Employment Exchange, Calcutta (for short "REC") and also on the basis of an examination held by the appointing authority.
The petitioner No. 1 was appointed in the year 1981, the petitioner No. 2 in 1979 and the petitioner Nos. 3 and 4 in 1983.
The petitioner No. 1 having 60% permanent/partial deformity belongs to the physically handicapped category.
Since appointment they are posted in Calcutta.
It is stated that the petitioner nos. 1, 3 and 4 at the time of making the application before the Staff Selection Commission by opting for group `Y' posts indicated their intention to be posted in the eastern region.
Transfer cannot be a condition of service since they were inducted in group `Y' posts or at best transfer can be effected within the said zone.
Since the petitioner No.2 was selected upon being sponsored by the REC there is no scope for transfer beyond the jurisdiction of the concerned exchange which sponsored him.
3.
Referring to the CCS (Re-Deployment of Surplus Staff) Rules, 1990 scheme, circular and the reports of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances or the Staff Selection Unit (for short "SSU") or the Internal Works State Unit (for short `IWSU') constituted by the Ministry, it has been stated that there is a procedure for reduction and declaring the staff as surplus.
The said procedure has not been adhered to.
Moreover, under the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission in case of employees under group `C' and `D' recruited on a regional basis, postings should be given in the home town/district wherever feasible and transfers should be restricted within the region and/or zone.
In the guise of re-organization, the Deputy Director General of Shipping, Mumbai and Government Shipping Office issued a relieving order without issuing any transfer order.
It has been submitted that the order does not reflect that the posts have been abolished and there is a re-organization and redeployment of staff.
Thus, it was in violation of the statutory rules and in disregard to the report of the SSU and IWSU.
The Deputy Director General issuing the order on 6th November, 2004 directed the petitioners to be released immediately.
While petitioner No. 1 was directed to join at Paradeep, the petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4 were directed to report at Mumbai.
Representations were submitted on 9th November, 2004, 16th November, 2004, 22nd November, 2004, 25th November, 2004 and 29th November, 2004 but without any result.
However, it has been stated that the order of transfer was modified and instead of Paradeep, the petitioner No. 1 was transferred to Haldia which had no staff strength.
By filing an application being OA No. 1146 of 2004 before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench, the orders of transfer were challenged.
Prayer was made for setting aside the orders of transfers.
Interim order was also prayed for.
On 21st December, 2004, the learned Tribunal after hearing, refused to pass an interim order.
According to the petitioners, while passing the order, the contentions raised by the petitioners were not considered.
4.
Since the learned advocates in course of argument agreed to the hearing of the writ petition on merits, affidavits were called for Affidavits including supplementary affidavit were filed.
Thereafter, matter was heard.
5.
Mr. Saktinath Mukherjee, learned senior advocate ably assisted by Mr. Subrata Talukdar reiterating the statements made in the writ petition submitted that the Tribunal while passing the order failed to appreciate that the respondent authorities acted illegally by issuing the impugned order dated 6th November, 2004 as the petitioners were transferred under the shield of re-organization which cannot have been done without adhering to the prescribed rules.
Since petitioner Nos. 1, 3 and 4 opted for group `Y' posts at eastern region, transfer to any other region is bad in law.
Re-organization if at all, should be done in accordance with the guidelines framed and if the petitioners are declared surplus, they should be redeployed in terms of circular dated 1st April, 1989.
Having not done so the respondents cannot transfer the petitioners according to their whims.
Even if there is downsizing, the junior most member should be declared surplus but in the instant case the petitioners have been declared surplus and except the petitioner No. 1, others have been directed to he transferred to a post outside the eastern region.
It was argued that the petitioners being ignorant of the relevant provisions of law regarding transfer, by letters dated 13th December and 21st December, 2004 sought for time to join their respective ports.
These letters should be ignored.
It is submitted that since the petitioners are lowly paid Central Government Employees under group `C' the transfer order shall hit them hard particularly the respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 4 who have been directed to join at Mumbai.
Assuming though not admitting the order of transfer is valid if the petitioners are transferred to Mumbai, there is no assurance that government accommodation shall be provided.
If the petitioners make individual arrangements, pending allotment of government accommodation, it shall cause financial hardship.
6.
Mr. Jayanta Banerjee, learned advocate ably assisted by Mr. Rajen Banerjee appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that since nothing has been shown that there is malafide exercise of power or violation of statutory norms, the order transferring the petitioners are just, proper and correct.
According to him, Director General of Shipping, Mumbai and Ex-officio Additional Secretary to the Government of India is the Cadre Controlling Authority not only of the Directorate and but also to the attached and subordinate offices.
Accordingly, the Director General being the competent authority has directed the transfer and posting of the petitioners.
The decision of the Directorate is in public interest which has been arrived at after careful consideration of the work load of the concerned offices.
It was submitted the staff has not been declared surplus and the process has been adopted to utilize the manpower according to requirements.
Consequent to abolition of jobs relating to selection of seamen by the Seamen's Employment Office, (for short `SEO') at Mumbai and Calcutta, most of the employees of the said offices have been sitting idle for the past four years and accordingly the staff of SEO, Mumbai had been already relocated and five of the staff attached to SEO, Calcutta have been transferred to the Director General of Shipping, Mumbai.
Since there is need in the Directorate office at Mumbai and other attached and subordinate offices under the control of Directorate, such procedure of relocation has been adopted after selecting suitable employees.
Referring to and relying on the appointment letters of the petitioners annexed to the affidavit in opposition, it was submitted that since it was specifically mentioned that the appointment of the petitioners would be governed by Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, Central Service (Conduct Rules) and such other relevant rules and having accepted the said terms and conditions, the petitioners cannot now go back and challenge the orders of transfer.
After the order of transfer was issued, the petitioner No. 2 by a letter dated 13th December, 2004 to the respondent No. 2 intimated that since his wife was seriously ill he was not in a position to attend the duties and shall be reporting after her recovery.
Similarly, the petitioner No. 3 by letter dated 13th December, 2004 prayed for the grant of earned leave for fifteen days with effect from 13th December, 2004 on account of the examination of his daughter and stated he would be joining the Directorate after the examinations.
Similarly, the respondent No. 4 by letter dated 14th December, 2004 requested for grant of 15 days earned leave with effect from 13122004 since he was unable to join office at Mumbai due to some acute domestic problem.
Thereafter, all the petitioners by letters dated 21st December, 2004 addressed to the respondent No. 3 agreed to join their respective transferred posts and requested for the grant of two months salary in advance and TA/DA as admissible under the Rules.
It was clear that the petitioner by letters dated 13th/14th as well as the letters dated 21st December, 2004 had accepted the order of transfer and thus, the writ petition is wholly misconceived and not maintainable.
Further it was submitted that under the same order two other employees under the group `C' category who had been transferred had joined their respective posts.
It was submitted that the apprehension of the petitioner that they shall not be provided with suitable accommodation in Mumbai is without any' basis as the concerned estate officer shall allot quarters for the petitioners as and when they are available.
However, it was assured that the petitioners would be put up in Mumbai in government accommodation pending allotment of quarters.
7.
Mr. Banerjee, submitted that transfer is not only an incidence of service but condition of service as well.
In the absence of any rule, the petitioners do not have any legal right to be posted forever at any particular place or place of his choice.
Mr. Banerjee relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Union of India and Ors. v. HN Kirtania reported in (1989)3 SCC 445, Shilpi Bose (Mrs.) & Ors. v. State of Bihar and ors. reported in 1991 Supp(2) SCC 659 and State of UP and another v. Siya Ram and another reported in (2004)7 SCC 405 in support of his contentions.
According to him the orders issued were valid and the learned Central Administrative Tribunal was justified in declining to pass interim order.
8.
The short point for consideration is whether the orders of relieving and transferring the petitioners were valid.
9.
There is no dispute to the fact that the petitioner No. 1 was appointed in the year 1981, petitioner No. 2 in 1979 and the petitioner Nos. 3 and 4 in 1983.
It appears from the letters of appointments that the appointment was subject to certain conditions.
The condition (i) is as under :  "(i) The appointment will be governed by the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules and such other relevant rules and orders, in force from time to time."
10.
The petitioners accepted the offer of appointment and joined their posts.
Now, the question is having accepted the offer of appointment can the petitioner challenge the order of transfer.
Though relying on the advertisement issued in the year 1993 regarding recruitment of clerks submission was made that as the petitioners opted for group `Y' posts transfers should be confined within the zone opted and were posted, but nothing has been shown by the petitioners from the records that the right to exercise such option existed when they were so appointed and were so exercised by them.
In our view, since the petitioners were appointed in 1979, 1981 and 1983, the reliance on the 1993 advertisement is misplaced.
Thus, the contention of the petitioners that they should be posted within their zones should fail.
11.
The submission that, if declared surplus, the petitioner should be redeployed as have been done in some other branches of the Government is not tenable, as it is in the nature of policy decision with which the Courts are not supposed to interfere.
The argument that pursuant to the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission the petitioners should be given postings in the town/home cannot be accepted as paragraph 2518 takes into consideration the case of the employees in group `C and `D' who have been recruited on regional basis and only in such cases "whenever feasible" transfers are to be restricted within the region and zone.
A perusal of the said paragraph reveals that even there is no bar in transferring group `C' employees who have been appointed on regional basis.
The words "whenever feasible" show that ground realities have to be considered while transferring an employee.
It calls for factual adjudication.
It is not for the Courts or the Tribunals to go into such adjudication.
The distinction becomes apparent from a reading of paragraph 2519 where a recommendation has been that normally there should be "no transfer of group `D' employees from one station to another except in very special circumstances".
In our view since we have held that the petitioner have not been able to demonstrate from records that the right to opt for a particular zone existed at the time of the respective appointments that is during late seventies or early eighties, reliance on the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission is without any basis.
12.
The principles on which an order of transfer can be interfered with by the Courts, as laid down by the Apex Court are clear.
13.
The Apex Court in Union of India and others v. HN Kirtania (supra), while considering the justifiability of the transfer of a Central Government employee, held as follows :  " ....The respondent being a Central Government employee held a transferable post and he was liable to be transferred from one place to the other in the country, he has no legal right to insist for his posting at Calcutta or at any other place of his choice.
We do not approve of the cavalier manner in which the impugned orders have been issued without considering the correct legal position.
Transfer of a public servant made on administrative grounds or in public interest should not be interfered with unless there are strong and pressing grounds rendering the transfer order illegal on the ground of violation of statutory rules or on ground of mala fides.
There was no good ground for interfering with the respondents transfer."
(paragraph 5)  Similarly, the Supreme Court in Shilpi Bose (supra) held as under : "In our opinion, the Courts should not interfere with a transfer order which is made in public interest and for administrative reasons unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any mandatory statutory rule or on the ground of mala fide.
A government servant holding a transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to the other.
Transfer order issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal right.
Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions or orders, the Courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party should approach the higher authorities in the department.
If the Courts continue to interfere with day to day transfer orders issued by the Government and its subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the administration which would not be conducive to public interest.
The High Court overlooked these aspects in interfering with the transfer orders."
(paragraph 4)  The Apex Court in a very recent judgment in State of UP and another (supra) held as follows :  "The High Court while exercising jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India had gone into the question as to whether the transfer was in the interest of public service.
That would essentially require factual adjudication and invariably depend upon peculiar facts and circumstances of the case concerned.
No government servant or employee of a public undertaking has any legal right to be posted forever at any one particular place or place of his choice since transfer of a particular employee appointed to the class or category of transferable posts from one place to other is not only an incident, but a condition of service, necessary too in public interest and efficiency in the public administration.
Unless an order of transfer is shown to be an outcome of mala fide exercise or stated to be in violation of statutory provisions prohibiting any such orders as a matter of routine, as though they were appellate authorities substituting their own decision for that of the employer/management, as against such orders passed in the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned...." (paragraph 5)  14.
The principles which can be deduced from these judgments are unless an order of transfer is shown to be an outcome of malafide exercise or in violation of statutory provisions prohibiting such transfer, Courts normally should not interfere with such orders.
Moreover, since it requires factual adjudication, it is for the authorities to decide whether the transfer order is in public interest or not.
15.
Therefore, as nothing has been shown that the orders transferring the petitioners have been done in violation of the rules or is in malafide exercise of power, we are of the view, there is no merit in the writ petition.
Further as the orders have been issued by the administration in public interest taking into account the factual aspect- whether there is workload in Kolkata or not, we are not inclined to go into that question.
16.
Hence, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
Interim order is vacated.
The petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 4 shall join the transferred post within a fortnight.
However, in view of the assurance given on behalf of the respondents, the petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 4 shall be provided suitable accommodations in Mumbai till quarters are provided by the authorities.
The respondents shall allot quarters to the petitioners if necessary out of turn, positively within three months from the date of their reporting at Mumbai.
So far as petitioner No. 1 is concerned who is physically handicapped, liberty is granted to file a representation to the respondent No. 4 ventilating the difficulties to be faced by him in case the order of transfer is effected.
If such representation is filed within a period of two weeks from date, the respondent No. 4 shall sympathetically consider the representation within a period of two weeks from the date of filing such representation after giving an opportunity of hearing.
Thereafter, an order shall be passed by the respondent No. 4 and communicated to the petitioner No. 1.
Till such order is passed, the order relieving and transferring the petitioner No. 1 shall not be given effect to.
No order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this judgment and order be given to the appearing parties, if applied for, on priority basis.
Soumitra Pal, J - I agree.
Later.
After the judgment is delivered Mr. Talukdar prays for stay of this judgment so far as petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 4 are concerned.
We do not find any reason, therefore, we are not inclined to grant stay.
Xerox plain copy of the operative part of the order duly counter signed by the Assistant Register (Court) be given to the learned Counsel for the parties on their usual undertaking.
DK Seth, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.