Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - This petition seeks direction to grant disability pension to the petitioner.
Case of the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Army on 781963 and was invalidated out of service on medical grounds in terms of Army order 46/80 on 1881970.
The petitioner represented for grant of disability pension but vide order dated 1021990, his prayer was declined and it was mentioned that the petitioner suffered disability while on duty but the said letter was never supplied to the petitioner.
This petition was filed on 912001.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that the disease from which the petitioner suffered was a constitutional disease and was not attributable to military service.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in absence of a note being made at the time of recruitment about a particular disease, presumption is that disablement is on account of army service.
He relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Union of India and others v. Ex-Sepoy Satwinder Singh through his wife Smt. Kulwant Kaur and another, 1998(4) RSJ 467 and Union of India and others v. Ex.Hav.
Clk Wishwa Nath, 2000(2) Labour and Services Judicial Reports 547 : 2000(2) SCT 570 (P&H).
Learned counsel for the petitioner also submits that in the matter of pension, there is continuing cause of action and even though relief which may be given may commence 38 months prior to the filing of the petition but it cannot be denied altogether on this ground.
Reliance is placed on a Single Bench judgment of this Court in Hav.
Raj Mal Singh v. Union of India and others, 2001(2) S.C.T.
744 : 2001(2) RSJ 459 and by a Single Bench of the Gujarat High Court in AK Solanki v. State of Gujarat, 2003(1) SCT 668.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents submits that the petitioner was invalidated out of service in the year 1970 and he filed the petition after 30 years.
He further submits that the disease was not attributable to military service.
Reliance is placed on a Division Bench judgment of the Delhi High Court in Ex-Signalman Shri Bhagwan v. Union of India, 2003(1) SCT 646.
Learned counsel for the respondents also relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Lt. Col. Balwant Singh v. Union of India and others, 2002(1) SCT 914 (P&H) : 2003(3) SLR 627 wherein it was held that after such a long period, the writ petition will not lie and also that disability should be shown to be attributable to military service.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I do not find any merit in this writ petition.
As per minutes of the Medical Board, the disease from which the petitioner was suffering, namely, neurosis, was a constitutional disease and was not connected with the military service.
The Medical Board gave a specific finding in this regard.
In Part-I of the said minutes filled up by the petitioner, against column Nos. 4 and 5, the petitioner has replied in the negative.
The said columns require a person to give details of incidents during service which is considered to be the cause of disability or to narrate what happened which resulted in wound or injuries.
Against both the columns, the petitioner has mentioned `No'.
The Medical Board has specifically mentioned that the disease was not attributable to military service.
The petitioner never challenged the findings of the said Medical Board for a period of 30 years.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner mainly relied on certain decisions of this court holding that once there was no note about a disease at the time of recruitment of a person in Army, presumption was that any subsequent disease was attributable to army service.
The said decisions proceed on the footing that it is for the authorities to prove the condition in which the disease has arisen.
In the present case, even in columns filled up by the petitioner, no incident is mentioned which may have caused the disease.
The decisions relied on behalf of the petitioner are, thus, distinguishable.
In Balwant Singh (supra), after referring to the judgment of the Apex Court in Union of India v. Baljit Singh, 1996(11) SCC 31 : 1997(1) SCT 386 (SC), the employee was held not to be entitled to disability pension.
Reference is also made to judgment of this Court in Union of India v. Karnail Singh, 2002(4) SLR 86 : 2002(2) SCT 113 (P&H) wherein inference was drawn against the employee when the employee in Part-I of the proforma had replied in the negative about the incidents which took place while in service.
7.
In the present case, the petition has been filed after 30 years.
Even though, delay per se may not be always conclusive but in the circumstances of the case where correctness of decision of the Medical Board is to be examined, delay is a handicap for going into such a question and adopting a possible course of directing reconsideration by another Board etc.  For the above reasons, the petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.