SS Nijjar, J - The petitioners have been working as Workshop Attendants in various schools of Punjab.
In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, they seek issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus, directing the respondents to place them in the grade of Rs. 400-600/-.
The petitioners claim that they are performing the same duties as Laboratory Attendant/Senior Laboratory Attendants.
They claim that the qualification for the two posts are also the same.
The respondents have arbitrarily divided the Laboratory Attendants working in various schools into two categories.
Non-matriculates are designated as Laboratory Attendants and their pay scale is Rs. 300-400/-.
The other category comprises of those whose educational qualification is Matriculation.
The employees of the second category are designated as Senior Laboratory Attendants.
They are placed in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600/-.
The petitioners were recruited into service on various dates from 1975 till 1985.
The qualification prior to 1982-83 for recruitment on the posts of Laboratory Attendants was Matriculation only.
Thereafter, the qualifications prescribed for the Laboratory Attendants is Matriculation with Science subject.
However, a large number of Senior Laboratory Attendants working in various Government Schools in Punjab are simply Matriculates.
The Workshop Attendants are placed in the pay-scale of Rs. 325-495.
This service was introduced in the schools in the year 1975 following introduction of Vocational Education as a subject at the school stage.
The minimum qualification prescribed for selection as Workshop Attendant is Middle with ITI certificate.
Rule also provided that in case of non-availability of persons of aforementioned qualifications, Matriculates with one year experience to technical work are also eligible.
Since candidates possessing Middle with ITI were not available, most of the persons recruited in the service are Matriculates with technical experience.
The duties of the Workshop Attendants are the same.
The workshop Attendants are required to assist the Vocational Masters, whereas the Laboratory Attendants perform a similar type of work i.e. they assist the Science Masters.
The Workshop Attendants maintain the Workshop in schools while the Laboratory Attendants maintain the laboratories.
Both perform functions of technical nature.
Workshop Attendants have to handle tools while Laboratory Attendants have to handle chemicals.
It is apparent that the two categories of employees have similar qualifications and perform identical functions.
There is hardly any difference in the nature of responsibilities shouldered by the persons belonging to two categories.
It is further the case of the petitioners that pay scales were introduced with effect from 111978.
The Workshop Attendants were placed in the grade of Rs. 325-495/- whereas the Laboratory Attendants irrespective of their qualification were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430/-.
Subsequently, on the representation of the Laboratory Attendants, the service of Laboratory Attendants was bifurcated into two categories.
The Laboratory Attendants : Non-Matriculates and Senior Laboratory Attendants: Matriculates.
The grade of Senior Laboratory Attendants was revised to Rs. 400-600/- with retrospective effect from 111978.
Aggrieved by the decision, the Union of the petitioners made a grievance about the removal of the disparity in the pay scales on the basis of educational qualifications.
Respondent No. 2, had recommended that Workshop Attendants who are Matriculate with ITI certificate or Matriculate with Science subject should be given a grade of Rs. 400-600/- like Laboratory Attendants.
2.
These recommendations were not accepted by the State on the ground that it does not have financial resources available.
Therefore, according to the petitioners, there was no controversy regarding the fact that the persons working in two services are equally qualified and discharge identical functions.
The State, therefore, has acted arbitrarily in denying the pay scale of Rs. 400-600/- to the petitioners.
3.
A written statement has been filed by the respondents.
It is categorically stated that the duties and qualifications for the workshop Attendants and Laboratory Attendants are quite different.
It is denied that the Workshop Attendants are entitled to pay scale of Rs. 400-600/- as admissible to Senior Laboratory Attendants.
The factual position as set out by the petitioners, is denied.
The respondents state that the pre-revised grade for Senior Laboratory Attendants was Rs. 100-160/- and for the Workshop Attendants, it was Rs. 80-120/-.
The action of respondent No. 2 is, therefore, not discriminatory.
It is further stated that the Workshop Attendants are working not only in Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools but also in the Middle schools.
The petitioners do not have the same qualifications.
Some of the petitioners are not even Matric.
The basic qualifications for the Workshop Attendants is Middle with ITI and for the post of Senior Laboratory Attendants is Matric with Science.
It is further stated that there are two categories of Lab.
Attendants i.e.
Laboratory Attendants and Senior Laboratory Attendants.
The categories of Senior Laboratory Attendants have been covered from Class-IV to Class-III with pay scale of Rs. 400-600/- with minimum qualifications Matric with Science.
The Workshop Attendants possessing the qualification of Middle with ITI certificate, have been placed in the grade of Rs. 325-495/-.
Giving the details about the nature of the work, the respondents have explained that the Senior Laboratory Attendants perform duties in Science Laboratories.
They are to handle dangerous chemicals and Acid in the Science Laboratories.
The Workshop Attendants are to handle tools and other items needed in the trades such as Carpentry, Motor Mechanics etc.
Therefore, the representation made by the petitioners has been rejected by the respondents.
4.
It is submitted in the writ petition that there is no rational for providing different scales of pay only on the basis of educational qualifications.
5.
I have considered the submissions made in the writ petition.
6.
I am of the considered opinion that the petitioners have failed to establish a case of discrimination.
By now, it is settled proposition of law that different pay scales can be prescribed on the basis of educational qualifications.
The quality is to be maintained among equals.
That is the mandate of Articles 14 or 16 of the Constitution of India.
At the same time, unequals cannot be treated equally.
In a given case, the respondents may be justified in giving a higher scale of pay to an employee possessing higher qualifications.
This proposition has been accepted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Mysore & anr. v. P Narasing Rao, 1968 SCR 407.
In that case, the Supreme Court was considering the case of respondent, who was employed as a Tracer in the Engineering Department in the erstwhile Hyderabad State, where the cadre of Tracers consisted of both matriculates as well as non-matriculates and no distinction was made between them.
Subsequently, on the re-organisation of the States in 1956, he was allotted to the Mysore State where the cadre of Tracers was reorganised into two, one consisting of matriculate Tracers in a higher scale of pay and the other of non-matriculates in a lower scale.
The respondent did not accept the division of the cadre of Tracers.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court for quashing of the order splitting the cadre and for a direction to the State to fix his pay in the scale prescribed for matriculate Tracers.
The High Court allowed the petition holding that there was no valid reason for making a distinction as both matriculate and non-matriculate Tracers were doing the same kind of work and the distinction was made in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The State of Mysore went in appeal to the Supreme Court.
It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as follows :-  "The argument was stressed on behalf of the respondent that success in the SSLC examination had no relevance to the post of tracer and the tracers of the erstwhile State of Hyderabad who were allotted to the new State of Mysore were persons similarly situated and there was no justification for making a discrimination against only some of them by creating a higher pay scale for tracers who had passed the SSLC examination.
It is contended for the respondent that all the tracers who were allotted to the new State of Mysore were persons who were turning out the same kind of work and discharging the same kind of duty and there was no rational basis for making two classes of tracers, one consisting of those who had passed the SSLC examination and the other consisting of those who had not.
In our opinion, there is no justification for the argument put forward in favour of the respondent.
It is well-settled that though Art. 14 forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation.
When any impugned rule or statutory provision is assailed on the ground that it contravenes Arts.
14, its validity can be sustained if two tests are satisfied.
The first test is that the classification on which it is founded must be based on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things grouped together from others left out of the group; and the second test is that the differentia in question must have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the rule or statutory provision in question.
In other words, there must be some rational nexus between the basis of classification and the object intended to be achieved by the statute or the rule.
As we have already stated, Arts.
14 and 16 form part of the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other.
In other words, Art. 16 is only an instance of the application of the general rule of equality laid down in Art. 14 and it should be construed as such.
Hence, there is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who complains of discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who are alleged to have been favoured, Article 16(1) does not bar a reasonable classification of employees or reasonable tests for their selection.
It is true that the selective test adopted by the Government for making two different classes will be violative of Arts.
14 and 16 if there is no relevant connection between the test prescribed and the interest of public service.
In other words, there must be a reasonable relation of the prescribed test to the suitability of the candidate for the post or for employment to public service as such.
The provisions of Art. 14 or Art. 16 do not exclude the laying down of selective tests, nor do they preclude the Government from laying down qualifications for the post in question.
Such qualifications need not be only technical but they can also be general qualifications relating to the suitability of the candidate for public service as such.
It is therefore not right to say that in the appointment to the post of tracers the Government ought to have taken into account only the technical proficiency of the candidates in the particular craft.
It is open to the Government to consider also the general educational attainments of the candidates and to give preference to candidates who have a better educational qualification besides technical proficiency of a tracer.
7.
I am of the considered opinion that the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case and support the plea taken by the respondent.
As noticed earlier, the qualifications of Laboratory Attendants and Senior Laboratory Attendants are different from the Workshop Attendants.
Their pay scales have always have different.
In fact, the Workshop Attendants who possess the qualifications of Matric with Science have been given the pay scale in Rs. 400-600/-.
Since the petitioners do not possess the qualifications which is equivalent to the Senior Laboratory Attendants, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents is either arbitrary or discriminatory.
I am of the considered opinion that Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India have not been violated.
Consequently, the present petition is dismissed but without any costs.
Petition dismissed.