MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution seeks quashing of order dated March 17, 1989, in which a request of the petitioner for payment of encashment of leave for a period of 240 days instead of 120 days has been rejected.
A further prayer has been made for issuing direction to the respondents to pay the petitioner salary in lieu of the period of 240 days instead of 120 days.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner superannuated from the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police on October 31, 1975.
He was granted cash benefit in lieu of encashment of leave to the extent of 120 days.
The claim made by him in the present petition is that since he had eight months earned leave balance in his service record, he was entitled to encashment of atleast 240 days in accordance with the policy of leave encashment of 240 days issued on November 24, 1988.
For the afore-mentioned claim, the petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in CWP No. 2040 of 1987, decided on October 5, 1987 titled as Mr. RP Khosla, Former Judge, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh v. Union of India.
3.
Mr. DD Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that once the petitioner has to his credit leave to the extent of eight months, which is earned leave, he could not be denied the encashment of whole leave as has been the policy followed by the respondents in pursuance of Annexure P-7 issued on November 24, 1988.
According to the learned counsel, the cut off date made applicable by the afore-mentioned instructions would not apply and the petitioner also constitute a class with those, who have retired after January 1, 1986 because the letter issued in 1988 grants the benefit retrospectively to those retirees, who have retired before the issuance of letter on November 24, 1988.
Therefore, the post-retirees of January 1, 1986 and the retirees earlier to that date could not be divided into two classes for the purposes of granting benefit of the letter in preference to the former.
In support of his argument, the learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgement of the Supreme Court in DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130.
4.
Ms. Radhika Suri, learned AAG, Punjab, has argued that a retiree like the petitioner, who had retired on October 31, 1975 would not become entitled to the benefits of a policy issued on November 24, 1988 for the simple reason that the right of such a retiree were crystalised on the date of his retirement and it cannot be claimed that he constituted a class with those who were retired after November 24, 1988.
In support of her submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on various judgments of the Supreme Court including Krishan Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1782; Sita Ram Bansal and others etc. etc v. State of Punjab and others etc. etc., AIR 1997 SC 2341; Sasadhar Chakravarty and another v. Union of India and others, 1997(1) SCT 428 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 336; State of Rajasthan v. Sevanivatra Karamchari Hitkari Samiti, 1995(2) SCT 682 (SC) : JT 1995(1) SC 315 and All India Reserve Bank Retired Officers Association and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1992 SC 767.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the cut off date fixed by the letter dated November 24, 1988 does not create an artificial class of employee as was the case in DS Nakara (supra).
The employees who have already retired and have been given the benefit of cash equivalent of leave earned by them would not be entitled to the benefits made available to the retirees, who have retired after November 24, 1988.
Those employees cannot be considered to constitute a class with the employees, who have retired long back.
The policy letter issued on November 24, 1988 is supposed to be based on various financial considerations, data available with the State and other host of factors.
Similarly, the policy granting cash equivalent of earned leave to the employee for 120 days, who retired in 1975 would also be based on similar factors.
Therefore, by enlarging the scope of the scheme a large number of ex-employees would become entitled to benefit of the policy framed in 1988.
Even the financial management of the State would be interfered, which otherwise is not permissible.
Even otherwise, the judgement rendered in DS Nakara's case has been watered down in a large number of cases and it has been observed that DS Nakara is a judgment on his own facts.
The Supreme Court in the case of Commander Head Quarter, Calcutta and others v. Capt.
Biplabendra Chanda, 1997(1) SCT 435 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2607 has made such observation and, therefore, it would not apply to a case where a date has been fixed for the purposes of granting benefits to one class while excluding the other class from these benefits.
Similar observation has been made by the Supreme Court in State of West Bengal v. Rattan Behari Dey, 1994(1) SCT 96 (SC) : (1993) 4 SCC 62, which reads as under :  "In our opinion, the principle of Nakara has no application to the facts of this case.
The precise principle enunciated in Nakara has been duly explained in Krishena Kumar by a coordinate Bench.
For reasons to be assigned hereinafter it cannot be said that prescribing April 1, 1977 as the date from which the new Regulations were to come into force is either arbitrary or discriminatory.
Now, it is open to the State or to the Corporation, as the case may be, to change the conditions of service unilaterally.
Terminal benefits as well as pensionary benefits constitute conditions of service.
The employer has the undoubted power to revise the salaries and/or the pay scales as also terminal benefits/pensionary benefits.
The power to specify a date from which the revision of pay scales or terminal benefits/pensionary benefits, as the case may be, shall take effect is a concomitant of the said power.
So long as such date is specified in a reasonable manner, i.e., without bringing about a discrimination between similarly situated persons, no interference is called for by the court in that behalf.
It appears that in the Calcutta Corporation, a pension scheme was in force prior to 1914.
Later, that scheme appears to have been given up and the Provident Fund Scheme introduced.
Under the Provident Fund Scheme, a certain amount was deducted from the salary of the employees every month and credited to the Fund.
An equal amount was contributed by the employer which too was credited to the Fund.
The total amount to the credit of the employee in the Fund was paid to him on the date of his retirement.
The employees, however, were demanding the introduction of a pension scheme.
The demand fell on receptive ears in the year 1977 ... may be because in that year the Left Front Government came to power in that State, as suggested by the writ petitioners.
The State Government appointed a Commission to examine the said demand and to recommend the necessary measures in that behalf.
The three members constituting the Commission differed with each other in certain particulars.
The Government examined their recommendations and accepted them with certain modifications in the year 1981.
After processing the matter through relevant departments, the Regulations were issued and published in the year 1982.
In the above circumstances, the State Government throught that it would be appropriate to give effect to the said Regulations on and from April 1, 1977 ie, the first day of the financial year in which the Pay Commission was appointed by the Government - a fact which could not have been unknown to the Corporation employee.
We cannot say that the Government acted unreasonably in specifying the said date....." 6.
When the principles laid down in the afore-mentioned judgments are applied to the facts of the present case, it becomes evident that the policy issued on November 24, 1988 cannot be applied retrospectively as the petitioner stood retired on October 31, 1975.
No arbitrary date as such has been fixed.
The policy only stated that those instructions would apply w.e.f.
1.1.1986 which in fact is the date of revision of pay as recommended by the 3rd Pay Commission.
Fixation of such a date constitutes a rational basis and it cannot be termed as arbitrary.
The writ petition is devoid of merit and is thus liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.