Swatanter Kumar, J - Rule 20(3) of Part-F of Chapter-4, Volume 5 of "The Rules and Orders of the Punjab and Haryana High Court", read with Order 6 Rules 14 and 15 of Civil Procedure Code, makes it mandatory that every pleading shall be signed by the party and his pleader.
Under proviso to Rule 14 and for the reasons contained therein it may be signed by a person duly authorised by him to sign the same.
In other words, the petition must be signed by the petitioner or by a person duly authorised by him to do so.
Such petition should also be signed by the counsel appearing for the petitioner, if any.
However under Rule 15 of Order 6 of Civil Procedure Code, a petition can be verified by the party or any one of parties who have signed the pleadings.
Pleading could be verified even by a person who, as per the satisfaction of the Court, was acquainted with the facts of the case.
2.
The present petition is not signed by all the petitioners though has been signed and verified by one of the petitioners.
It cannot be said to be substantial compliance of the mandatory provisions.
These provisions relate to the practice and procedure of the Court.
They must be substantially complied with.
We are also aware of the fact that it is an irregularity which is curable.
3.
It is a settled principle of law that the things must be done as prescribed under law and in no other way even under the law relating to practice and procedure.
Adherence to the prescribed procedure is the bounden duty of all concerned.
However, the Court may taken a lenient view keeping in mind the facts and circumstances of a given case and permit the party to the lis to cure the irregularity.
We are of the considered view that the above provisions cannot be rendered redundant and ineffective.
The parties are obliged to act in conformity with the provisions of the law.
Such an approach on the one hand would check the parties from taking irresponsible or frivolous pleas while, on the other hand, it would help in maintaining the dignity of judicial system.
The purpose sought to be achieved by their compliance is to require a party to effectively own its pleadings and not take the other party by surprise.
4.
In writ petitions, various allegations are made against the authorities and even allegations of personal malafide or of other serious nature are made in most of the petitions against the respondents officially private.
Thus, it is imperative for the petitioner to sign and verify the allegations made in the petition.
But if the petition is not signed by the petitioners or their authorised agent who has been empowered to sign on their behalf, it will be very difficult for the Court to fix responsibility, in the event such allegations are found to be incorrect.
The petitioner may take the stand that he is not even aware of the allegations which have been made in the petition.
He may disown the petition itself at a subsequent stage in the event the Court intends to take any action for false and frivolous allegations made in the petition.
On the other hand, another petitioner who has alone signed the petition and was not authorised by other petitioners to sign the petition, on their behalf as well, may withdraw the case or after seeking benefit for himself may not even persue the petition on behalf of others.
In other words, such petitioner may act to the prejudice of the others, to obviate such possibility which may even hamper proper administration of justice.
It will be appropriate to bind the parties by their pleading at the very outset of the proceedings.
5.
Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the petitioners seeks time to take appropriate steps in accordance with law, either by amending the petition or by filing a power of attorney in favour of an appropriate person (in the present case in the name of the petitioner who has signed and verified the present petition.
6.
Such a defect is curable and, thus, we find it just and fair to grant request of counsel for the petitioners.
The case is adjourned to 10.4.2002 by which date, the counsel may take proper steps.
7.
After obtaining leave of Hon'ble the Chief Justice, a copy of this order be sent to the registry of this Court.
Order accordingly.