SS Sudhalkar, J - Petitioners are part-time workers.
They have prayed for regularisation of their services and for quashing of the impugned order by which they have been held to be ineligible for the post.
The petitioners have joined the services on part-time basis on the posts of Sweeper and Kahar in the years 1985, 1986 and 1987.
A Division Bench of this Court in Writ Petition No. 15602 of 1997, - Mange Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others and other connected matters decided on 2421998 gave directions to the respondents to draw up a policy regarding regularisation.
A copy of the judgment annexed as Annexure P-3, reads as under :-  "In view of the above, we dispose of these petitions with a direction that the State Government should draw up a policy laying down the criteria and conditions subject to which the eligible persons shall be entitled to hold posts on regular basis.
The State shall be free to fix the scale of pay etc. in accordance with the nature of duties.
The needful should be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
After the policy decision has been taken, the claims of individuals should be considered within three months thereof.
The orders that may be passed shall be communicated to the persons concerned.
The services of the petitioners shall not be terminated till the authority takes the final decision except on grounds of discipline.
In the circumstances, we make no order as to costs."
2.
In view of the aforesaid judgment, the Government issued instructions dated 121999, copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-4.
Vide memo dated 30121998/2521999, the respondents had issued further instructions.
As per the instructions dated 121999, it has been directed that whenever a Group "D" post became available in the same institution/office of the State Government, where a part time employee is working and has completed at least five years continuous service on the date of issue of these instructions, he shall be given preference for being considered for regular appointment against the post.
There are three conditions embodied in the said instructions, which are as under :-  "(i) That the employee should have been recruited through the employment exchange or directly appointed by the appointing authority after obtaining the non-availability certificate from the employment exchange.
(ii) That the employee possesses the prescribed qualifications for the post; and (iii) That the work and conduct of such employee has been satisfactory."
3.
The subsequent part of the instructions is regarding continuation of the existing policy regarding appointment of part-time workers and it has been directed that if necessary, such jobs should be got done through contractual agreement with private agencies.
Annexure P-4 is regarding regularisation of part-time class-IV employees.
Agsint regular sanctioned vacant posts, the condition embodied in the same are as under:-  (i) Part-time employees fulfilling the requisite qualification prescribed for regular class-IV employees in the Haryana state, Secondary Education Field Offices (Group-I) Services Rules, 1998.
(ii) That part-time candidates who have been recruited through the Employment Exchange should have atleast three years experience on their posts.
(iii) Those candidates recruited on part-time basis through direct recruitment, they should have atleast 6 years experience on their posts."
4.
Respondents 1 to 3 have filed joint written statement and respondent No. 4 has filed separate written statement.
5.
Counsel for the petitioners argued that though the petitioners are working as part time workmen for more than 10 years, their services are not regularised, though similarly situated other employees are regularised.
The respondents, vide the impugned order, Annexures P-6, P-7 and P-8, have rejected the cases for regularisation of petitioners 1, 2 and 3 similar on the ground argued for rejection of the case of other petitioners.
The rejection is mainly on two grounds :- (i) eligibility and (ii) age limit.
Petitioners have relied on a judgment of this Court in the case of Raldu Ram etc. v. The State of Haryana etc., C.W.P.
No. 10774 of 1999, decided on 422000 passed by a Division Bench of this Court.
6.
Respondents have not shown as to what is the eligibility required for the post.
Moreover, respondents are working as part time employees on the respective posts for a long period as mentioned above and therefore, the question of age limit cannot come in their way.
It is not the case of the respondents that when the petitioners were appointed as part-time employee, they had crossed the required age limit.
Hence, the age of the petitioners at the time of consideration of their case for regularisation is irrelevant as decided by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Raldu Ram (supra).
7.
Counsel for the respondents argued that there is non-availability of the posts for regularising the petitioners.
In the case of Raldu Ram (supra), a Division Bench of this court has observed as under :-  "So far as the second ground is concerned, it is sufficient to point out that the work for the petitioners was with the respondents and they continued to serve and are in service even as on today and since they have already rendered more than 10 years service, it cannot be said that their services cannot be regularised for non-availability of the required posts.
Once the respondents have engaged the petitioners on work, which is of continuous nature, and permitted them to serve on their respective posts for more than 10 years, it will be unfair for the respondents to decline the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services for non-availability of posts."
8.
When the respondents have framed the policy of regularisation, it does not lie in their mouth to say that there is no post available.
The petitioners are working on the job and hence the work is available and it is for the respondents to create necessary posts.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has cited a case Hindustan Machine Tools and others v. M Rangareddy and others, 2001(1) SCT 267 (SC) : 2000(4) RSJ 429, wherein it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that when the High Court had directed the respondents-appellants to evolve a scheme of absorbing the petitioners who had completed more than 5 years continuous service and employer had taken a plea that company was burdened with heavy accumulated loss of several crores of rupees and has formulated a voluntary retirement scheme, it was held that tested on touchstones of principles laid down and keeping in mind the mandate of Constitution, the direction issued by the High Court to frame a scheme for regularisation to service of the petitioners, does not warrant any interference.
10.
In view of the above reasons, this writ petition is allowed in the same terms as that of Raldu Ram (supra) and it is ordered that the impugned orders are quashed and the respondents are directed to pass necessary orders regarding the regularisation of the services of the petitioners with effect from the due date with all consequential service benefits available to them.
It is further ordered that if the petitioners are entitled to other monetary benefits, the same shall be restricted to a period of three years and two months prior to the filing of this Writ Petition, which was filed on 442000.
Petition allowed.