Amitava Lala, J - In this writ petition the petitioner has challenged the refusal of appointment of the petitioner in the Language Group in the Subject of Arabic having equal qualification of special BA Degree in Arabic.
According to the petitioner, in the earlier occasion an order was passed by this Court on 13th October, 1999 in WP 2336(W) of 1999 Anjumanara Begum v. State of West Bengal and others, wherein it was held as follows :-  The candidates in Arabic are completing 300 marks in Arabic, 300 marks each in respect of two other subjects wherein who are getting qualification of special BA in Arabic in addition to general BA they are not completing the course of 300 marks in Arabic in addition to 300 marks each in other three subjects totalling to 1200 marks.
Therefore, the petitioner has prayed before this Court to direct the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, being the appropriate authorities of the School Service Commission to recommend the name of the petitioner for appointment as an Assistant Teacher in any School within the jurisdiction in Arabic within a particular time.
Such prayer was vehemently opposed by the learned Counsel appearing for the School Service Commission by saying that under similar circumstances another single Bench of this Court was pleased to disallow the prayer of the petitioner in W.P. No. 1969(W) of 1999 Sri Monimoy Chattopdhyay v. State of West Bengal and others.
A copy of such unreported judgment and order has been placed before this Court for consideration.
2.
After going through the judgment and order I find that a single Bench of this Court was pleased to consider the various aspects in respect of similarly placed matter.
It was held in the said judgment and order as follows :  "It is further stated that by a Notification No. 772-Edn(S)/188-8174 dated 8th July, issued by the Joint Secretary, Education Directorate, Secondary, Branch West Bengal.
In paragraph 7 of the said notification, it has been stated as follows : "The minimum academic qualification of a teacher should be passed degree with such combination of subjects as would enable the teacher to teach the school course prescribed by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education under the New Curriculum."
Thereafter, it was also recorded in the said judgment and order that the West Bengal School Service Commission did advertise calling for applications from the eligible candidates giving the following specification which is as follows :  "The West Bengal School Service Commission is going to hold the First regional level selection test for appointment of teachers in recognised non-Government, aided Schools in West Bengal as per the State Government Rules and Procedures from Citizens of India in the Subjects as per the Coded list."
As single Bench of this Court, further held therein that it is, therefore, implicit and the Rules and Proceedings governing such appointment as may have been made by the Government in relation thereto would be applicable.
However, by a subsequent circular being Circular No. 276-Edn(S)/4A-5/92 dated 13th March, 1992, the Education Department considered the matter with regard to the appointment in language Group.
The observation of such Bench was held therein as follows :  "It is stated therein that an order was issued by the Department being No. 401-Edn(S) dated 10.4.1980 stating that henceforth appointment in language group in Secondary Schools should be made only from amongst the candidates who has among others relevant language subject in his degree class.
A question arose as to whether a candidate who have English/Bengali for 100 marks only can be treated as duly qualified for appointment to the post of Assistant Teacher for language group considering them at per with those studying English and Bengali for 300 marks.
Necessary classification was given in the following terms : `The entire matter, has, therefore, been reviewed and the State Government in the Education Department has decided that hence forth selection of Assistant Teachers in any language subject in recognised high and Junior High Schools should be made only from amongst those candidates who had studied the relevant language as a combination subject of at least three hundred marks at the graduation level.
A candidate having studied a language as an additional subject of less than three hundred marks shall not be deemed eligible for appointment as a language teacher."
Therefore, such Court was pleased to hold that the qualification for a Language Group teacher is that he should have a Bachelor Degree and the subject should be one of the combination subjects in his Graduation.
Even thereafter, the Court considered extensively as to the question of 200 marks in respect of special BA Course and ultimately, came to the finding that there is no legal infirmity in refusing the candidature of the candidates therein.
3.
In the instant case, it appears from the Mode of Selection that the qualification showing under the Advertisement of The West Bengal Central School Service Commission for the purpose of filling up the post is a Bachelor Degree from any recognised University.
It will also correspond from the said Mode of Selection where it appears that Paper-I will correspond to knowledge expected at the Pass Course Degree level of the Universities of West Bengal.
There is no strict specification which is commonly called as Special BA which is not called for, for the purpose of selection.
4.
Under such circumstances, the petitioner also handed over another Advertisement of the West Bengal Central School Service Commission in the following year, i.e. in 1999 wherein it is specified that `any candidate having special BA in that subject will not be eligible'.
Therefore, it is crystal clear from the existing Advertisement being the subject-matter of the writ petition that the Special BA Degree in Arabic cannot be eliminated.
Moreover, when a University has validly given a Bachelor Degree in the subject other than the subject of combination of original Degree, it cannot be said that it is not the Degree at all.
It can at best be construed as an additional Degree.
Thus being so, I cannot ignore the stand of the writ petitioner in this respect.
Therefore, the writ petition succeeds and the same is allowed on contest.
Interim order, if any, stands confirmed.
5.
The writ petition is, thus, disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the parties within 7 days from the date of submitting the requisites.
Petition allowed.