SB Sinha, J - Whether fixation of cut off date by the appellant herein in relation to grant of certain retireal benefits attracts Article 14 of the Constitution of India and thereby the Respondents herein would be entitled thereto or not is the question involved in this application.
2.
The original applicants are retired employees of Union of India, Rule 2423-A of Indian Railways Establishment Code, Vol. II was introduced by the respondents granting other benefits with effect to 141991.
The respondents had retired on diverse dates between 31.12.1971 to 30.6.1990.
3.
Rule 2423-A (CSR) 404 of Indian Railway Establishment Code, Vol. II was amended by Circular No. 35 of 1988 dated 4121987.
An application was filed before the Central Administrative Tribunal by the Added Respondents claiming added years of Pensionary benefits purported to be in terms of Rule 45 of the Pension Rules for calculation of superannuation benefit.
The said application was registered as OA No. 944 of 1991.
The learned Tribunal by the impugned order dated 251987 held :-  "It is true as pointed out by the Ld.
Counsel for the respondents that this relaxation purportedly had has taken effect only on 11291 after all the petitioners had retired.
In answer to this contention, the Ld.
Counsel for the petitioners has urged that the cut-off date should be regarded as arbitrary and cannot, therefore, be sustained and the benefit must be given to all the officers irrespective of the date of retirement.
After giving our anxious consideration, we find a good deal of force in the argument of the Learned Counsel for the petitioners.
There is hardly any ground to deny the benefit of relaxation to an officer, who had retired on 30.11.91 and to extend the benefit to a similarly placed officer, who has retired on the following day.
Therefore, introduction of a cut-off date cannot but be regarded as an arbitrary discrimination and no effect can be given to it.
However, for reasons stated in the preceding paragraph, the petitioners can very well claim benefit even without such relation."
4.
The benefits claimed under Rule 2423R II by the original applicants are in the following terms :-  "The benefit of added years of service is admissible to a person if in addition to other requirements, the service on the post to which he had been appointed was one for which recruitment rules provide - (a) For post graduate research or specialised qualification etc., as essential for appointment, and (b) For upper age limit of more than 25 years of age for the purpose of recruitment."
5.
A supplementary affidavit was filed wherein a letter dated 16693 was enclosed and in the said letter it was stated that the said Rule has been amended and benefit had been extended to all members of the Indian Railway Medical Service Cadre.
6.
The petitioners herein contend that as the respondents were appointed as Assistant Surgeon, the benefit of the said Rule, viz. 2423-A is not available to the Respondents as incumbents of the said posts did not satisfy the requisite qualifications and other conditions as laid down therein.
7.
The only contention which has been raised before us is as to whether fixation of the cut off date as 1121991 can be said to be arbitrary.
8.
Mr. RN Das, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, inter alia, submitted that the applicants-respondents cannot get the benefit of the said circular which had been issued after their superannuation.
Strong reliance in this connection has been placed on Union of India v. PN Menon and others, reported in AIR 1994 SC 2221 : 1994(4) SCT 91 (SC) and Union of India v. R Sarangapani and others, reported in 2000(4) SCC 335.
9.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents on the other hand, submitted that as Rule 2443A(II) had been made applicable to all members belonging to Indian Railway Medical Service Cadre, the same has to be granted to all the retired employees irrespective of the date of retirement.
In support of the aforementioned contentions reliance has been placed on DS Nakara v. Union of India and others, reported in AIR 1983 SC 130, V Kasturi v. Managing Director, State Bank of India, Bombay, reported in 1998(8) SCC 30 : 1998(4) SCT 662 (Patna) and Dhanraj and others v. State Bank of Jammu and Kashmir, reported in 1998(4) SCC 30.
10.
The fact that the original applicants-respondents were appointed as Assistant Surgeon is not in dispute.
They were later on promoted to the post of Divisional Medical Officer.
As noticed hereinbefore, they had retired on diverse dates from 31.12.1971 to 30.6.1990.
It appears that by a letter dated 481997 the Ministry of Railways, Government of India to the General Manager, Eastern Railway stated :-  "Erstwhile Rule 2423A R. II (Rule 45 of Railway Service (Pension) Rules, 1993) is a codal provision which affords the benefit to officers recruited to which candidates of more than 25 years of age are recruited and for which posts, postgraduate or specialist qualifications or experience in scientific, technological or professional fields is essential.
These rules were not applicable to doctors till 1991.
On acceptance of recommendations of the High Powered Tikku Committee Report, which has equated MBBS which is a course of 5-1/2 years duration with post- graduate qualification, the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare who is the Nodal Ministry for Health Services have decided to implement this decision by an order followed by amendment in the Recruitment Rules.
The decision of the Nodal Ministry was also adopted in the Ministry of Railways for IRMS cadre w.e.f.
1121991 by way of an executive order, followed by amendment in the Statutory Recruitment Rules, giving retrospective effect to provisions in the recruitment rules would not be correct.
It is also noticed from a Judgment dated 17394 of Supreme Court (UOI v. PN Menon and others) in OA No. 517 of 1987 that Government has the right to fix a cut off date for extension of certain benefits to the employees and such fixation is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
11.
The learned Tribunal, however, although has held that weightage in qualifying service for the purpose of computation of pension is available to an official if the service on post to which he was appointed was one for which the recruitment rules provide for post-graduate research or specialised qualification or experience in scientific, technological or professional fields as essential and upper age limit of more than 25 years for the purpose of recruitment proceeded to grant the relief holding that the cut off date fixed by the Railway Administration is arbitrary.
It was held that although, those conditions are not satisfied in case of an appointment as Assistant Surgeon but admittedly the Respondents even though initially appointed as Assistant Surgeon, were later promoted to higher post, the same is applicable in their case.
12.
In view of the aforementioned findings itself, in our opinion, the order of the learned Tribunal should be set aside.
13.
The question, however, which requires to be considered is as to whether the cut off date mentioned being 1121991 is arbitrary or not.
14.
A cut off date has to be provided while granting retiral benefits to certain employees.
In Union of India v. PN Menon, reported in AIR 1994 SC 2221, the Apex Court has clearly held :-  "Whenever the Government or an authority, which can be held to be a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution frames a scheme for persons who have superannuated from service, due to many constraints it is not always possible to extend the same benefits to one and all, irrespective of the dates of superannuation.
As such any revised scheme in respect of post- retirement benefits, if implemented with a cut-off date, which can be held to be reasonable and rational in the light of Article 14 of the Constitution, need not be held to be invalid.
It shall not amount to `picking out a date from the hat', as was said by this Court in the case of DR Nim v Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1301, in connection with fixation of seniority.
Whenever a revision takes place, a cut off date becomes imperative, because the benefit has to be allowed within the financial resources available with the Government."
It was further held :-  "The scheme to merge a part of the dearness allowance for purpose of fixing the dearness pay was evolved, and was linked with the average of cost of living index fixed at 272, which fell on 30th April, 1977.
In this background, it cannot be said that the date 30th September, 1977, was picked out in an arbitrary or irrational manner, without proper application of mind.
The option given to employees, who retired on or after 30th September, 1977 but not later than 30th April 1979, to exercise an option to get their pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity calculated by excluding the element of dearness pay as indicated in the aforesaid Office Memorandum or to get it included in their pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity, was not an exercise to create a class within class.
The decision having a nexus with the price index level at 272, which it reached on 30th September, 1977, was just and valid.
It has been rightly pointed out that respondents had never been in receipt of dearness pay and as such the Office memorandum in question could not have been applied to them.
Similarly, the encashment of leave was a new scheme introduced which could not have been extended retrospectively to respondents, who had retired before the introduction of the said scheme.
Same can be said even in respect of family pension scheme which was earlier contributory, but with effect from 22nd September, 1977 the scheme was made non-contributory.
The respondents not being in service on the said date, were not eligible for the said benefit and no question of refunding the amount, which had already been contributed by them did arise.
According to us, the High Court was in error in applying the principle of DS Nakara, AIR 1983 SC 130 (supra) in the facts and circumstances of the present Case."
15.
Reference in this connection may be made to Union of India v. R Sarangapani and others, reported in 2000(4) SCC 335, Punjab National Bank v. KC Chopra and another, reported in 1997(6) SCC 488 and West Bengal Headmasters' Association and others v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1995 LIC 1919.
16.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents, however, inter alia, submitted that as the cut off date is arbitrary his clients would be entitled to the benefits of the amended provisions.
17.
As indicated herein before, the said benefit had been given to a class of employees.
The original applicants-respondents who do not fall within the said class cannot, as a matter of right, claim the said benefit.
DS Nakara v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1983 SC 130 has been distinguished by the Apex Court in many judgments.
In that case the classification was held to be unreasonable.
18.
In V Kasturi v. Managing Director, SBI, Bombay, reported in 1998(8) SCC 30, the Apex Court observed :-  "If the person retiring is eligible for pension at the time of his retirement and if he survives till the time of subsequent amendment of the relevant pension scheme, he would become eligible to get enhanced pension it would become eligible to get more pension as per the new formula of computation of pension subsequently brought into force, he would be entitled to get the benefit of the amended pension provisions from the date of such order as he would be a member of the very same class of pensioners when the additional benefit is being conferred on all of them.
In such a situation, the additional benefit available to the same class of pensioners cannot be denied to him on the ground that he had retired prior to the date on which the aforesaid additional benefit was conferred on all the members of the same class of pensioners who had survived by the time the scheme granting additional benefit to these pensioners came into force.
The line of decisions tracing their roots to the ratio of Nakara case, 1983(1) SCC 305 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 145 would cover this category of cases."
The Apex Court, however, clearly observed :-  "However, if an employee at the time of his retirement is not eligible for earning pension and stands outside the class of pensioners, if subsequently by amendment of the relevant pension rules any beneficial umbrella of pension scheme is extended to cover a new class of pensioners and when such a subsequent scheme comes into force, the erstwhile non-pensioner might have survived, then only if such extension of pension scheme to erstwhile non- pensioners is expressly made retrospective by the authorities promulgating such scheme; the erstwhile non-pensioner who has retired prior to the advent of such extended pension scheme can claim benefit of such a new extended pension scheme.
If such new scheme is prospective only, old retirees non- pensioners cannot get the benefit of such a scheme even if they survive such new scheme.
They will remain outside its sweep.
The decisions of this Court covering such second category of cases are : Commander, Head Quarter v. Capt.
Biplabendra Chanda, 1997(1) SCC 208 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 444 : 1997(1) SCT 435 (SC) and Govt. of TN v. K Jayaraman and others, 1997(9) SCC 606 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 1208 : 1997(2) SCT 10 (SC) to which we have made a reference earlier.
If the claimant for pension benefits satisfactorily brings his case within the first category of cases he would be entitled to get the additional benefits of pension computation even if he might have retired prior to the enforcement of such additional beneficial provisions.
But if on the other hand, the case of a retired employee falls in the second category, the fact that he retired prior to the relevant date of the coming into operation of the new scheme would disentitle him from getting such a new benefit."
19.
In Dhan Raj and others v. State of J&K and others, reported in 1998(4) SCC 30, it has been held that though who retired prior to that date had not been specifically excluded and as such it was held that there was no justifiable criteria for the State Government to draw the line between those who retired earlier and those who retired after 9.6.1981 as both sets of employees were equally placed in the same Undertaking, Corporation being temporary in character and all of them had severed in the same organisation for more than 20 years.
The said decision cannot be said to have any application in the instant case.
20.
For the reasons aforementioned we are of the opinion that the learned Tribunal erred in granting the said benefit to the applicants-respondents.
21.
For the reasons aforementioned this application is allowed.
The impugned order is set aside and the original application of the Respondents is dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Application allowed.