VK Bali, J (Oral) - Challenge herein is to the promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Superintendent.
The controversy centres around the qualification and experience of respondent No. 3 to be eligible or not for promotion to the post under contention.
Whereas, it is the case of petitioner herein that respondent No. 3, under the statutory rules, did not have eight years ' experience on the post of Assistant and, therefore, he was not eligible to be promoted, the case of respondents is that even though respondent No. 3 had not gained experience of eight years, as required under the Rules, he had occupied other posts which were equivalent to that of an Assistant and, therefore, no objection could possibly be had to the promotion of respondent No. 3.
Rule 9(1) of the Punjab Social Welfare (State Service Class III) Rules, 1973, which deals with the matter under contention, reads thus :-  ``In the case of the office Superintendent :- By selection from amongst the Head Assistants, Deputy Superintendents, Senior Auditors and Assistants, who have an experience of working on any one or more of these posts for a minimum period of eight years''.
2.
It is conceded position that insofar as respondent No. 3 is concerned, he had nearly five years ' experience on one of the posts from which posts an employee could be promoted to the post of office Superintendent.
Respondent No. 3 worked on the post of Assistant for nearly five years.
Respondent No. 3 had also worked on the posts of Accountant and Cashier and the total period spent by him on the said three posts i.e. Assistant, Accountant and Cashier is stated to be about 12 years.
If, therefore, experience of respondent No. 3 on the posts of Accountant and Cashier is also taken into consideration, he shall be eligible for promotion but if experience on the said posts is to be excluded, obviously, he shall not be entitled to promotion.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that unless in the statutory rule i.e. Rule 9(1) of 1973 Rules, there was a mention of an equivalent post, no person can be promoted unless he was to have experience on the specified posts as mentioned in the Rules i.e. Head Assistants, Deputy Superintendents, Senior Auditors and Assistants.
The framers of the Rules, in their wisdom, did not mention along with four posts, referred to above, an equivalent post and the Court is not supposed to add into the Rule something which is not mentioned.
Obviously, if the contention of learned counsel appearing for the respondents is accepted, it would mean adding into the statutory rule which is not permissible.
Mr. Balram Gupta, however, relies upon observations made by the Supreme Court in SB Mathur v. Hon'ble the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court and others, 1988(4) SLR, 505 which are reproduced below :-  ``For treating certain posts as equated posts or equal status posts, it is not necessary that the holders of these posts must perform completely the same functions or that the source of recruitment to the posts must be the same nor it is essential that qualifications for appointment to the posts must be identical.
All that is required is that there must not be such difference in the pay scales or the qualifications of the incumbents of the posts concerned or in their duties or responsibility or regarding any other relevant factor that it would be unjust to treat the posts alike''.
The observations of the Apex Court, reproduced above, cannot possibly be pressed into service in the context of the facts of the case in hand.
There is no dispute in the present case as to whether the other two posts held by respondent No. 3 were equivalent or not to the post of an Assistant.
The only question that has been mooted out in the present case is as to whether an incumbent of only four posts, mentioned in the rule, could be considered for promotion to the post of office Superintendent or that a person holding an equivalent post despite the fact that an equivalent post has not been mentioned in the rule, could be so considered.
This Court is of the firm view that unless the word `equivalent post' was mentioned in the rule itself, none other than those occupying either of the posts mentioned in the rule, could ever come in the zone of consideration for promotion to the post of Office Superintendent.
4.
In view of discussion made above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the official respondents to consider the case of petitioner for promotion to the post of Office Superintendent, a day before respondent No. 3 was so promoted.
It may be clarified at this stage that respondent No. 3 belongs to reserved category and his claim when considered would be vis-a-vis his counter-parts as, Mr. Masih, informs the Court that there may be some senior/eligible candidate in that category, whose case for promotion might have precedence over the petitioner.
However, if in such a consideration, the petitioner is promoted, he would get all consequential benefits and inasmuch as he has already retired, his retiral benefits shall also be refixed.
It may also be mentioned that respondent No. 3 has already retired and even if the petitioner, on reconsideration, gets the desired relief, it cannot adversely affect respondent No. 3 in any way as he worked on the promoted post for all the years till he retired.
5.
Before I part with this judgment, I would like to mention that Mr. Gupta has also pointed out that the petition is belated and on that count alone it should be dismissed.
Respondent No. 3 was promoted initially on ad hoc basis under a scheme as is clear from order, Annexure P1 dated October 12, 1974.
The contention of Mr. Gupta is that even though respondent No. 3 was so promoted in 1974, petitioner chose to file the present writ only in 1980.
Suffice it to mention that respondent No. 3 was promoted under the OAP scheme on ad hoc basis.
This adhoc promotion and that too under a scheme could not possibly adversely affect the petitioner and it is only when respondent No. 3 came to be promoted on regular basis in the year 1979 that the petitioner could agitate the matter.
As mentioned above, writ petition was filed in the year 1980 i.e. within less than a year from the date when respondent No. 3 came to be promoted on regular basis.
This petition, thus, cannot be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.