Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 1841994 passed by a learned single Judge of this court whereby and whereunder the said learned Judge directed implementation of award passed by Susanta Chatterji in terms of His Lordship's Judgment dated 2621990 in CO No. 1434(W) of 1983.
2.
The writ petitioners who are respondents in the present appeal, filed the writ application in the year 1993, inter alia, questioning the validity or otherwise of a panel formed in the year 1983.
According to the writ petitioners, the said panel was illegally prepared and consisted of candidates who were either over-qualified or under-qualified.
Before Chatterji, J a consent order was passed and as the appeal involves interpretation thereof, it is necessary to set out the same in extenso :  "Mr. Chakraborty, learned Advocate for the writ petitioners and Mr. Habibullah, learned Advocate for the State have jointly submitted that the matter has been sorted out and, in fact, there are five vacancies and against such five vacancies, five of the writ petitioners can be accommodated and will be entitled to such posts.
The petitioners will however file an affidavit to that effect.
Those five persons named in such affidavit will be considered for appointment as primary teachers along with the panel candidate and there will be no age bar for the same.
Other five candidates will be considered while the next vacancies will occur, in accordance with not stand in their appointment.
Recording such submissions and finding them as lawful, the matter is disposed of."
3.
As the said order was not implemented, the petitioners filed a writ petition which was marked as CO No. 12400(W) of 1993.
The relevant statements have been made in paragraphs 3, 8 and 9 of the said writ application which are to the following effect :  "3.
That some time in the year 1983 a large number of posts for appointment of Assistant Teachers (PE) fell vacant under Kalna Municipality in the district of Burdwan, as a result whereof the Chairman, Ad hoc Committee decided to prepare a panel for appointment of Primary Teachers (Municipal-wise) in the district of Burdwan.
8.
That the petitioners having requisite qualifications were not considered by the Selection Committee as against the candidates having over qualifications and not having requisite qualification were considered for appointment by the Selection Board; a panel for appointment of primary teachers having over qualifications and the less qualifications were prepared for appointment of primary teacher ignoring the petitioners' genuine claim for such appointment which were challenged by the writ petitioners in writ proceeding before Hon'ble Justice Monoj Kumar Mukherjee, as His Lordship then was, on 18th January, 1983 when in CR No. 1434 (w) of 1983 was issued by His Lordship with an interim order restraining the respondents from giving any appointment from the panel.
9.
Ultimately the said Rule came up for hearing after a long time i.e. on 26th February, 1990 in presence of the learned Advocate appearing for the State and on the joint prayer of both the learned Advocates appearing for the writ petitioners as well for the State respondents the Rule was disposed of by a consent order.
Out of all the writ petitioners five were directed to be absorbed immediately, inasmuch as five vacancies were existing at the relevant time and another five petitioners were directed to be accommodated who will be entitled to such appointment when the next vacancies will occur.
The age bar of all the writ petitioners will not stand in the way of their appointment.
A xerox copy of the said judgment and order passed by the Hon'ble Justice Susanta Chatterji on 26th February, 1990, is annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'D'."
4.
Mr. Sil, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Mr. Saktinath Mukherjee and Mr. Debaprasad Mukherjee appearing on behalf of the Chairman, Ad hoc Committee of Burdwan District Primary School Council submitted that the impugned order is based on misreading and/or misinterpretation of the order passed by Susanta Chatterji, J Learned counsel contended that keeping in view the language used by Susanta Chatterji, J, in his order dated 2621990, it would appear that the cases of the 5 writ petitioners were only to be considered along with other candidates and they were not to be absorbed.
Admittedly, contended the learned counsel, the writ petitioners did not appear at the interview, and as such, the question of consideration of their cases for appointment did not arise.
It has further been pointed out that the appointment of primary teachers in the school situate within the municipal limits are governed by the provisions of the Urban Primary Education Act, 1963, and the Counsel which was the appointing authority was not impleaded in the first writ petition, and thus, the consent order passed by Chatterji, J, was not valid in law.
It was further submitted that in any event, in view of the Division Bench decision of this court in the case of District School Board, Midnapore and others v. Paschimbanga Prathamik Sikshak Shikhan Prapta Bekar-O-Sikshak Samiti, West Bengal and others, reported in 1991(1) CLJ 479, the panels prepared in 1983 to 1985 having lost their force, the question of the petitioners deriving any right in terms of the panel prepared in 1983 did not arise.
5.
Mr. Neogi appearing on behalf of the respondent/writ petitioners, on the other hand, submitted that from a perusal of paragraph 8 of the writ application it would appear that the concession was made on behalf of the counsel for the State as the writ petitioners thereof could prove that the said panel prepared in the year 1983 was illegal.
According to the learned counsel, the State is bound by the said judgment, and in that view of the matter, it was not necessary for the 5 writ petitioners to appear at the interview.
Learned counsel contended that in terms of the said consent order, 5 persons were to be treated as empanelled candidates having the requisite qualification and having been empanelled in the year 1983, and thus, they should have been directed to be absorbed.
6.
The question which falls for consideration in this appeal is the interpretation of the order passed by Chatterji, J For the purpose of interpretation of the said order, it is also necessary to consider the factual background.
Admittedly, the petitioners appeared at the interview in the year 1983, but they were not empanelled.
However, they questioned the panel by filing the aforementioned writ application.
It is not in dispute that the matter relating to appointment of primary teachers at the relevant time used to be governed by the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973, which came into force on 2nd July 1990.
Prior thereto, the schools situated in the urban area were being governed by the provisions of Urban Primary Education Act, 1963.
From the judgment of the Division Bench in District School Board, Midnapore (supra), it appears that Rule 3E was inserted by a Notification dated 8th February, 1974, in terms whereof life of the panel was 12 months and the validity thereof could be extended only for a period not exceeding 6 months.
In view of the aforementioned Rule, the Division Bench held that all the panels prepared from 1983 to 1985 lost their force.
7.
Chatterji, J disposed of the matter on 2621990 without considering this aspect of the matter, nor there was any occasion for His Lordship to consider the same as the writ petition was disposed of on concession.
It, however, remains accepted that the District Primary School Council was not a party in the said writ application.
In this view of the matter there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the writ petitioners did not have any right to be empanelled nor did they derive any right to be absorbed in service.
The only relief which the writ petitioners got from Chatterji, J was that for considering their cases, their age bar shall not stand in their way.
The concession as regards accommodating 5 candidates in the situation evidently meant that the writ petitioners' case for appointment be considered and not their appointment straightaway.
8.
It is now well known by reason of various decisions of this court and other courts that regularisation or absorption cannot be a mode of appointment.
It is also well-settled that when an appointment is made in violation of the mandatory provisions of law, the same is a nullity and no right is derived therefrom.
Reference in this connection may be made to recent decisions of this court in the cases of Narendra Nath Palui v State of West Bengal, reported in 99 CWN 440 : 1995(3) SCT 584(Cal.
), Sk.
Kamaluddin v. State of West Bengal,reported in 1995 Labour and Industrial Cases 1853, Sudarshan Das v. State of Bihar, reported in 1995 Labour and Industrial Cases 2576, Ashok Kumar v. State of Bihar, reported in 1995 Labour and Industrial Cases 2501 and Ashok Kumar Pal v. State, reported in 1995 Labour and Industrial Cases (NOC) 319.
Reference in this connection may also be made to the decisions reported in 1995(2) CLJ 255 and 1995(2) SLR 670.
In the aforementioned decisions, a large number of Supreme Court decisions have been taken into consideration.
It is not necessary to multiply decisions on the aforementioned point, but it may be pointed out that Patna High Court and other High Courts have also taken a similar view.
9.
A judgment has thus to be interpreted keeping in view the legal position as propounded by this court vis-a-vis the legal right of the writ petitioners.
It is also a well settled principle of law that a judgment has to be read as a whole and reasonably.
It is true that the learned counsel for the State, inter alia, submitted that 5 out of the 10 writ petitioners can be accommodated, but such concession has to be considered in the light of the directive issued by the learned Judge wherein it had categorically been stated that the said 5 persons would be considered for appointment as primary teachers along with the panel candidates and there will be no age bar for the same.
Had the intention of the learned Judge been that the aforementioned 5 persons would be absorbed or would be appointed straightaway, the question of consideration for their appointment as primary teachers along with the panel candidates did not arise.
It is not disputed at the Bar that in terms of the 1963 Act and the Rules framed thereunder, before an appointment can be given to a candidate, his name must appear in the panel which was to be made after holding requisite examination and/or interview.
Evidently, the names of the writ petitioners were not in the panel.
In any event, the said panel had lost its force by reason of Rule 3E aforementioned.
In that view of the matter, we are of the considered view that the learned Judge did not direct the respondents to absorb the writ petitioners straightaway without considering the cases of other eligible candidates who had been empanelled the judgment as is well known is not to be read as a statute.
Reference in this connection may be made to the decisions reported in 1987(4) SCC 137, AIR 1993 SC Weekly 790 and 1994(1) BLJR 126.
Even from a perusal of the writ application and particularly the statements made in paragraphs 3 and 8 thereof, it is evident that the petitioners were also of the opinion that their cases were to be considered by the Selection Committee, and thus the question of their absorption straightaway did not arise.
In this view of the matter, the impugned judgment passed by Paritosh Kumar Mukherjee, J whereby and whereunder His Lordship directed the Chairman, Adhoc Committee, Burdwan District Primary School Council and the District Inspector of Schools (PE), Burdwan, to absorb the petitioners condoning their age bar before holding any interview or before absorbing any other candidate as primary teacher in the District, cannot be sustained.
We, with utmost respect to the learned Judge, are of the view that the said direction has been made upon misreading and/or misinterpretation of the judgment passed by Susanta Chatterji, J and in any event, the said judgment as noticed hereinbefore, is contrary to the statute and/or various decisions of this court as referred to hereinbefore.
10.
For the reasons aforementioned, this appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment and order dated 1841994 is set aside.
However, in the facts and circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
However, it goes without saying that this judgment shall not stand in the way of the petitioners' case being considered afresh while preparing the next panel and we have no doubt in our mind that while doing so, the respondents shall not refuse to consider their cases on the ground of their overage.
Appeal allowed.