Doabia, J - The demand created by the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board known as 'fuel adjustment charges' is being impugned in this petition preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Before noticing various contentions raised by the petitioner, facts in brief be noticed.
3.
The petitioner-concern is a consumer of electricity from the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as Board).
The respondent Board is supplying electric energy.
The petitioner-concern had entered into an agreement with the respondent-Board.
Besides normal charges which the consumer is supposed to pay, the petitioner is supposed to pay additional charges for the additional consumption.
In this regard, clause 20 of the agreement, for facility of reference be noticed.
This reads as under :-  "20.
(a) The tariff is subject to the fuel adjustment clause detailed therein.
(b) The includence of the fuel cost adjustment clause which shall be levied only on units consumed shall be in addition to any minimum charges prescribed under the tariff in clause 19 or any minimum or special guarantee referred to in clauses 21 and 22 hereof."
4.
The respondent-Board has now created a demand under the category 'fuel adjustment charges' for the years 1991-92 and 1992-93.
The amount which is said to be due comes to Rs. 8,54,57710.
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that this demand is totally without jurisdiction.
The arguments raised by him in support of the contention are :  (I) that, the respondent-Board is an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution and it is supposed to act in a reasonable and rational manner; (ii) that, the demand which is now being created would fasten retrospective liability on the petitioner and it is accordingly argued that this demand is arbitrary; (iii) that, the respondent-Board has been indicating the charges in separate bills which were issued form time to time.
Some of the bills have been placed on record.
This do indicate that 'fuel consumption adjustment charges' were made part of the bills; (iv) that, the demands created were not provisional, these being final, therefore, no additional demand can be created; (v) that, the demand raised would prejudice the petitioner inasmuch as in the matter of fixation of the products manufactured by them, it has to determine the cost price.
This is according to the petitioner, it had already been done on the basis of the bills already issued.
The demand now issued cannot be passed on to the customer; (vi) that, the Board must work-out cost of electric energy yearly and if they do not do so, they are estopped from doing do; and 6.
Reliance is being placed on sections 51 and 59 of the Electricity Act of 1959.
7.
Thus, the primary argument raised by the petitioner-concern is that it has already adjusted its affairs in terms of the demand already raised.
Any additional demand cannot now be passed on to the customer.
The plea of estoppel is the sheet anchor of the argument.
The argument that demand cannot be created retrospectively has also been highlighted.
8.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that public sector undertakings are supposed to act in a reasonable and rational manner.
In Kerala State Electricity Board v. SN Govinda Prabhu, AIR 1986 SC 1999, it was held that a public utility monopoly undertaking should not be driven by pure profit motive but service should inform its actions.
It was observed that the function of the Board is not to manage its affairs in a manner as to earn maximum profits.
This was a case which dealt with tariffs which were to be charged by the Electricity Board.
At page 2009 it was observed :  "The Board may not allow its character as a public utility undertaking to change into that of profit motivated private trading ... when that happens the court may strike down the revision of tariffs as plaintly arbitrary."
Similar concern was shown by the Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas (sic) Consumer Industries of Gujarat, 1991 AIR SCW 1900.
To the same extent would be found observations made in the case of Hindustan Zinc Ltd v. AP Electricity Board, 1991 AIR SCW 1329.
9.
As an abstract proposition of law, the above would be an ideal situation.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the Board is a profit making body and the demand raised would further add to its profits.
In the absence of any plea in the writ petition that the demand so raised by the respondent-Board would add to the profits it is making, it is not necessary to examine this aspect of the matter any further.
As a matter of fact, the demand raised by the Board is in terms of clause 20 of the agreement entered into by the petitioner which was reproduced above.
The only argument which is required to be taken note of is that as to whether this demand is in any other manner hit by any other statutory provision.
10.
The other arguments raised by learned counsel for the petitioner be examined.
11.
It be seen that the petitioner had agreed to meet its liability for fuel adjustment charges.
There is a specific provision in this regard.
This is contained in clause 20 of the agreement.
The petitioner-concern has agreed to abide by the same, and therefore, the question of the condition being arbitrary in nature is an argument which is totally without any basis.
However, the question with regard to retrospective demand be examined.
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that demand being retrospective cannot be enforced against the petitioner.
This argument was raised before a Division Bench of Patna High Court in the case reported as M/s Shriram Bearing Limited, Ranchi v. Bihar State Electricity Board, Patna and others, AIR 1982 Pat.
91.
The Division Bench was of the view that bill for fuel surcharge issued after the close of the financial year is not per se illegal.
The relevant observations read as under :  "From the abovesaid clause it is apparent that till actual calculation of the fuel surcharge for a financial year in the manner laid down in the tariff if made, the fuel surcharge during that financial year will be levied at a rate provisionally calculated.
This is an enabling provision under which the Board can issue a provisional bill in different, if any, with the final bill, can be adjusted later.
It also presupposes that such bills are submitted within the financial year in question.
To that extent there has been a breach of the said provision in the present case.
But, can such provisional bills be quashed or be declared to be invalid being in contravention of requirement of clause 16.7.4 ?"
It was further observed :  "In my view, from the language of clause 16.7.4 it cannot be held that if such bills are submitted after the financial year in question, they shall be per se invalid.
It cannot be disputed that the said clause read with section 81 of the Act enables the Board to issue provisional bill before the final rate of fuel surcharge has been determined, and in that sense it is for the benefit of the Board and exception to the general rule, that the bill must be a final one.
I am not able to appreciat as to how the petitioners can make grievance of submission of such bills after the expiry of the financial year ..... " The above Division Bench authority of the Patna High Court negatives the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
12.
The Supreme Court in M/s Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Limited and another v. State of Orissa and others, AIR 1987 SC 1727, held that order imposing restrictions of consumption on energy can be made with retrospective effect.
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that the demand raised by the respondent-Board is not in accordance with law.
13.
The argument that by creating a demand after the financial year, the petitioner-concern is being made to suffer as is cannot fasten and pass on the burden to its customers may also be examined.
14.
It be seen that it is a fact that the respondent Board was within its rights to claim fuel adjustment charges.
This was very well known to the petitioner-concern.
Merely because, this has been done after the financial year and merely because, the petitioner-concern would be unable to pass on the burden to its customer is a matter with which the respondent-Board is not concerned.
As a matter of fact, merely because, the petitioner-concern would be unable to pass on the burden to its consumers is not a factor which would stand in the way of the Board in effecting the recovery of fuel adjustment charges.
The position of law in this regard be noticed.
15.
In Hira Lal Rattan Lal v. Sales Tax Officer, Section III, Kanpur and another, 31 STC 178, the precise argument raised was that the recovery of tax should be declared illegal because the assessee would not be in a position of pass on the burden to the consumer.
This argument was noticed and specifically rejected.
Same is the view expressed by the Supreme Court in another case reported as Krishnamurthi and Co v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 31 STC 190.
The argument was noticed and again rejected by the Supreme Court.
Same is the opinion expressed by the Supreme Court in JK Jute Mills Co Ltd v. State of UP, 12 STC 429 (SC) and in Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd v. State of Bihar, 9 STC 267.
16.
In view of the above position of law, it is held :  (i) that, the petitioner-concern had entered into an agreement and this agreement does provide for payment of fuel adjustment charges; (ii) that, fuel adjustment charges can be determined even after the financial year; (iii) that, merely because, the petitioner is unable to fasten and pass on the burden to its customers is no ground to hold that the respondent- Board is not within its rights to recover the fuel adjustment charges; and  (iv) that, the respondent-Board has acted in a reasonable manner and in accordance with the terms of the agreement entered into.
17.
This petition in found to be without merit and is dismissed.