Lingaraj Rath, J - In this writ petition, challenge is made to an office order issued by respondent No. 1 on 691994 enhancing the working hours of the executive staff of the Police Transport Organisation, AP, Hyderabad from the Technical Assistants and below (Inspectors, Sub-Inspectors, HC Mechanics, HC Drivers, PC Mechanics & P.C.
Drivers) from 830 am to 500 pm on the ground that the order is contrary to the GOMs.
No. 88 dated 721991 fixing working hours between 10.30 a.m. to 500 pm with half-an- hour break for lunch between 100 pm and 200 pm  2.
An objection is raised by the learned Government pleader for Home that this Writ Petition is not maintainable in this Court as it relates to the service conditions of Government servants.
Refuting the submission, it is the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 only contemplates redressal of individual grievance, but that when the grievance relates to a group or mass of Government servants, it is outside the purview of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
3.
I am not persuaded to agree with the submissions of the learned counsel.
The entire scheme of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 framed in exercise of the powers under Article 323-A of the Constitution was to vest the powers of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution in specially created Administrative Tribunals.
It is travesty of logic that a cause of action which cannot be pursued before this Court under Art. 226 by a single individual, yet can be pursued before this Court if it is espoused by an association.
Through such an interpretation, there cannot be conferment of jurisdiction upon this Court.
Section 13 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 relating to General rules of construction mandates that words in the singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
That itself would show that Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 contemplates entertainment of grievance either of person or persons either individually or by a group in common.
4.
The enhancement of working hours of Government servants which the members of the petitioner-Association are challenging relates to their conditions of service and as such, is outside the purview of this Court being completely within the cognizance of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance upon an interim order passed by this Court while issuing notice in WPM.P.
No. 1292 of 1994 in WP No. 1070 of 1994 on 2811994 suspending the operation of GOMs.
No. 4 Finance & Planning (FW Admn.
I) Department dated 111994 pending further orders in the case.
The Writ Petition has been filed by the Pay and Accounts Office Employees Joint Action Committee, Hyderabad, represented by its Chairman.
The order passed was only an interim order and as such, has no precedent value.
There has been no adjudication as has been done now in the present case regarding the maintainability of the case.
The question never seems to have been canvassed before His Lordship.
6.
In view of the above, I do not find any merit in this application and it is dismissed as not maintainable.
Petition dismissed.