VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, petitioners are seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus, directing the respondents to grant pensionary benefits after counting their service rendered in the District Board Schools before the Schools were taken over by the respondents in view of law laid down in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1988 P&H 265.
2.
It has been averred that petitioners joined as Masters/Teachers/Headmasters in District Board Primary/ High Schools in the State of Punjab, which were run by the local bodies (District Board), Municipal Committee.
Later on, such schools were taken over by the respondents with effect from 1101957.
The service particulars of the petitioners i.e date of joining, place of posting and date of retirement are given in Annexure P-1 to the petition.
It has further been averred that on attainment of age of superannuation the petitioners were given pensionary benefits with effect from 1101957. i.e. the date of taking over of the Schools by the Education Department to the dates of their retirement.
Petitioners were not given the benefit of past service rendered by them in District Board Schools with effect from the date of joining to 3091957.
Petitioners thus have prayed that their past service be counted while determining their pension.
Opposed to this, respondents in their written statement have submitted that Kesar Chand's case (supra) has no application to the case of the petitioners as no instructions were ever issued by the State Government under which the petitioners can get this benefit.
3.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the matter is squarely covered by Full Bench decision of this Court in Kesar Chand's case (supra).
After this decision of Full Bench, many judgments on the subject have been rendered by this Court.
To quote a few, Civil Writ Petition No. 13348 of 1991 filed by one KL Pandhi for counting the entire service rendered by him in District Board Schools was allowed by this Court on 12111991.
Special Leave Petition filed by State of Punjab against that order came to be dismissed.
Likewise, Civil Writ Petition No. 5269 of 1982 filed by one Randhir Singh for counting his service rendered in District Board Schools towards pensionary benefits was allowed by this Court on 5121991. Letters Patent Appeal No. 860 of 1992 filed by State of Punjab in this Court was dismissed.
Whereafter Special Leave Petition No. 17181 of 1992 too came to be dismissed vide order dated 531993 of the Apex Court.
Thereafter in another writ petition namely C.W.P.
No. 9814 of 1993 filed by one Naurata Ram Singla, the Division Bench on 351994 gave a direction to the respondents therein to refix the pension of the petitioners therein, taking into consideration his entire period of service with the District Board.
No judgment taking a contrary view has been pointed out.
4.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed with a direction to the respondents to refix the pension of the petitioners, taking into consideration the entire period of service rendered by them with the District Board.
Necessary benefits shall be released to the petitioners within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy or order from this Court.
Payment of the amount shall be made to the petitioners with interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
No costs.