S Parvatha Rao, J. (Oral) - I am of the view that this Writ Petition is not maintainable.
The petitioner is Union Bank of India and it seeks a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ, order or direction, restraining the respondents (a) from in any manner obstructing any of the officers of the petitioner from entering or visiting any of the branches of the petitioner's bank in the State of Andhra Pradesh and to carry on their business, and (b) from acting in any manner calculated to prevent, or undermine the transaction of normal business by the petitioner, or (c) from acting in any manner calculated to undermine the confidence of the depositors in the banking company, and to issue such other order or direction to the respondents refraining them from carrying out or continuing the threats indicated in the fax letter dated 821994.
The respondents are various Unions of the Bank employees and officers.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioners relies on Section 36-AD of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which reads as follows :  "36-AD.
Punishment for certain activities in relation to banking companies : (1) No person shall -  (a) obstruct any person from lawfully entering or leaving any office or place of business of a banking company or from carrying on any business thereto, or  (b) hold, within the office or place of business of any banking company, any demonstration which is violent or which prevents, or is calculated to prevent, the transaction of normal business by the banking company, or  (c) act in any manner calculated to undermine the confidence of the depositors in the banking company.
(2) Whoever contravenes any provision of sub-section (1) without any reasonable excuse shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
(3)......
The learned counsel contends that this Section is similar to Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1946 and that if writs could be issued in favour of workmen against the managements for retrenching workmen in violation of the provisions of the said Section 25-F, there is no reason why writs cannot be issued to the respondents in the present case directing them to obey the mandate in sub-Section (1) of the said Section 36-AD of the Act.
The learned counsel also submits that a Writ of Mandamus can be directed against any person under a statutory obligation to do or not to do as per the mandate of the statutory provision.
3.
The respondents in the present Writ Petition are admittedly unions of workmen and officers working in the petitioner-bank.
It is stated that they have given a notice under the aegis of 'Forum of Employees and Officers of Andhra Pradesh', dated 821994 stating that if there was no positive response to their demands by 2521994, they would be compelled to implement the following action programme :  "Boycott of all Executives on their official visit to Andhra Pradesh.
Non-cooperation and non-submission of Data/Information to administrative offices, w.e.f.
01031994.
Dharna before Regional Office, Hyderabad on 03.03.1994.
Relay hunger strike in front of Regional Office, Hyderabad from 09.03.1994 onwards."
It is to direct the respondents not to resort to the aforesaid threatened action that the present Writ Petition is preferred by the petitioner-bank.
4.
Obviously what is threatened by the respondents is supposed to be in furtherance of their trade union activity.
I am not so sure whether the said threatened action on the part of the respondents would be covered by what is prohibited under sub-Section (1) of Section 36-AD of the Act.
5.
That apart, the object of Section 36-AD is to provide for punishment for certain activities which are prohibited.
The prohibition is with reference to all persons in general not with reference to any particular Section or category of persons.
Sub-Section (1) thus enumerates the various prohibited acts.
If any person does any act that is specified in sub-Section (1) of Section 36-AD of the Act, he will have to face prosecution under sub-Section (2) of Section 36-AD of the Act for the contravention of the provisions of sub-Section (1) of that Section.
Thus no positive right is conferred on the Banking Company which can be enforced by a Writ of Mandamus.
The Statute itself prohibits the acts specified in sub-Section (1) of Section 36-AD and sub-Section (2) of that Section also imposes punishment for violation.
There is no question of issuing a further directive by way of Writ of Mandamus by this Court directing the respondents not to violate the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 36-AD.
The case of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is altogether different.
That Section provides for the conditions precedent to be fulfilled for effecting retrenchment in a valid manner - non-observance of those invalidates the retrenchment, in which case the employee is entitled to be continued in service which relief he may seek by way of a Writ of Mandamus in appropriate cases.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relies on Railway Board, New Delhi v. N Singh, AIR 1969 Supreme Court 966.
But, there is nothing in that case which supports the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that a Writ of Mandamus would lie to enforce the provisions of sub-Section (1) of Section 36-AD.
In that case, the directions issued by the General Manager of Northern Railway prohibiting the Railway employees from holding meetings within the Railway premises including the open ground forming part of those premises, was questioned by the workmen.
The Supreme Court held that there was no fundamental right for anybody to hold meetings in Government premises, and that unless it was shown that either under law or because of some usage the railway servants had a right to hold meetings in railway premises, there could be no basis for objecting to the direction given by the General Manager.
In that view of the matter, the Supreme Court upheld the directions issued by the General Manager of the Northern Railway prohibiting the Railway employees from holding meetings etc., within the Railway premises.
7.
The learned counsel also seeks to rely on the decision of a learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in Indian Hotel Co Ltd v. Taj Mahal Karamchari Union & others, 1992 Labour Law Reporter 561 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
492.
But in this case, the Indian Hotel Co Ltd., filed a suit for permanent injunction against the Taj Mahal Karamchari Union & others and thus, the matter arose in a civil suit instituted by the management.
On an application filed by the plaintiff i.e., Indian Hotel Co Ltd., for restraining the defendants i.e., Taj Mahal Karamchari Union & others, from holding demonstrations, picketings, dharnas, gharaos etc., inside the plaintiff's premises, the Delhi High Court allowed the same.
But that case does not throw any light on the question whether a Writ of Mandamus can be issued for directing the respondents that they shall not violate the provisions of sub-Section (1) of Section 36AD of the Act.
8.
I need only to refer to the decision in Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru S.M.
V.S.J.M.S.
Trust v. VR Rudani, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1607, wherein the Supreme Court interpreted the words "any person or authority" in Article 226 as follows :  "The words 'Any person or authority' used in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant.
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed by the person or authority to the affected party.
No matter by what means the duty is imposed, if a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied."
In the present case, as I have already pointed out, the prohibition in sub-Section (1) of Section 36-AD of the Act is with reference to all persons and not to any particular category of persons.
The said prohibition is not like any duty imposed on any particular body.
The Section does not stop with the prohibition.
It provides also for punishment for contravention.
9.
In the circumstances, I am not inclined to admit this Writ Petition.
It is therefore, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.