BA Khan, J - The petitioner challenges the selection of respondent No. 4 for the post of Lecturer in music (vocal) and seeks a direction to the respondent-Public Service Commission to recommend his name for the post.
Both the petitioner and respondent No. 4 were candidates for the post applications for which were invited by the J&K Public Service Commission (the Commission, hereinafter for short) pursuant to notification No. 12-PSC of 1992 dated 2841992.
It transpires that in all 8 candidates appeared for the interview of which respondent No. 4 has been recommended for selection.
The petitioner's case is that he possessed better merit and suitability for the post and that the recommendation made in favour of respondent No. 4 is vitiated because the expert, one Mrs. Bhupinder Sheetal co-opted by the Commission for interviewing the candidates happened to be the teacher of respondent No. 4 when she was a student of M.A (Music) at the Panjab University and is also presently guiding her Ph.
D programme.
It is also alleged that the commission had allotted 100 marks for the interview out of which 70 were to be awarded by the expert, who it is averred, played a key role in the selection and whose opinion carried "a lot of weight".
The submission, in other words, is that being a teacher of respondent No. 4, the expert was biased in her favour because of their very relationship and against the petitioner.
In the other ancillary grounds taken, it is submitted that the interview conducted was as good as farce as the candidates were not given any opportunity to render any recital and was liable to be struck down because of the total weightage given to it as against 15% weightage recommended by the Supreme Court.
2.
Objections have been filed by the respondents No. 2, 3 and 4.
The respondent-Commission in its objections has submitted that the expert was not the only person to assess the suitability of the candidates as the selection committee comprised of two other members of the commission.
It is explained that the role of an expert is of an advisory nature and the selection is made by all members of the selection committee on the basis of overall performance, academic merit, experience and other relevant factors.
It is denied that any particular number of marks were allotted to the expert.
It is also asserted that all candidates were provided opportunity of practical demonstration on the instruments either brought by them or provided by the Commission.
It is further submitted that the commission appoints an expert from amongst a panel of experts furnished by the Universities and the decision to nominate such an expert is taken independently and at that time it is not known as to whether any candidate appearing for the interview happens to be or has ever happened to be the student of such an expert.
Respondent No. 3 was also nominated out of a panel of experts, being expert of the Hindustani Vocal Music.
It is refuted that the petitioner possessed better merit on any score.
On the contrary respondent No. 4 possessed better merit and suitability both on the academic side and also considering her performance in the interview.
3.
Respondent No. 3 in her communication to the Deputy Registrar of this Court, which has been treated as objections on her behalf, has denied that respondent No. 4 was ever her student in MA (Music) at Chandigarh.
It is, however, admitted that she is registered as a Ph.D student like many other students under her.
She submits that she has not been guided by any other consideration except merit in evaluating the performance of the candidates.
It is also pleaded that 95% of the questions asked related to the subject-matter of music - both practical and theory - and each candidate was allotted time to perform.
4.
Respondent No. 4 in her objections has thrown challenge to the maintainability of the writ petition which, according to her, is barred by the doctrine of estoppel and also the policy of the Apex Court discouraging interference in the selection made by expert bodies.
It is also pleaded that the petitioner was ineligible to be called for the interview as he had not graduated with music.
It is also claimed that she is admittedly superior in merit and has better teaching experience as against the petitioner.
It is denied that she was ever the student of respondent No. 3 in MA (Music) at Chandigarh which she qualified as a private student, though it is conceded that she has taken up a research project as a private candidate which necessitate her visit to respondent No. 3 squarely or half yearly."
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the record before me.
6.
The main burden of submissions made by Mr. Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner that it is not necessary for the petitioner to prove that respondent No. 3 was, in fact, biased against him or in favour of respondent No. 4.
It is enough if the relationship between respondents No. 3 and 4 created a reasonable apprehension that respondent No. 3 would be biased in favour of respondent No. 4.
It is submitted that closeness of any type was prone to generate bias and it could not be denied that the teacher-student relationship was as close a relationship as any other relationship.
The decree of closeness in the present case, can be gathered from the objections filed by the respondent-expert who had indicated an intimate relationship with respondent No. 4 in the averments made by her.
Mr Gupta contended that added to this is the factor that the expert had a pivotal role to play in the selection process inasmuch as she was authorised to allot as many as 70 out of 100 marks to a candidate.
According to him, no candidate could be selected without an O'kay from the expert and the same was true in the instant case also.
He did not urge other grounds taken in the writ petition and sought support from Ashok Yadav's case (AIR 1987 SC 454).
7.
Mr. Raina representing the respondent-commission challenged the very maintainability of the petition.
He contended that the commission had only made a recommendation in favour of respondent No. 4 which has yet to be accepted by the Government rendering the petition premature.
He also submitted that the petition was not liable to be entertained for the reasons that the petitioner had participated in the selection process and could not be allowed to turn round and challenge the mode or manner of selection.
On merit, he submitted, that a relationship of teacher and taught was a pious relationship and it cannot be imagined that a teacher to whom all candidates are equally near and dear, would be biased in favour of one and against the other.
He urged that the commission has made selection on the basis of overall performance of the competing candidates considering their academic merit and performance of the interview as also other factors like teaching experience etc. and the mere glance at the record of respondent No. 4 would show that she admittedly possessed far superior merit and suitability than the petitioner.
8.
All that falls for consideration is whether respondent No. 3 could be held to be biased in favour of respondent No. 4 and against the petitioner on the sole ground that respondent No. 4 stood registered as a Ph.D student under her guidance and whether she had tilted scales in favour of respondent No. 4 by awarding her more marks as against the other members of the selection committee.
9.
The bias is a state of mind and it is always difficult to prove the state of mind of a person.
That is why while alleging bias it is not necessary to prove whether a person was, in fact, biased for or against.
All that is required to be seen is whether there is a reasonable ground for believing that he was likely to be biased.
In other words, there must be a reasonable likelihood of bias which can be gathered by taking into consideration the human probabilities and ordinary course of human conduct.
10.
In a landmark judgment in AK Kripal's case (AIR 1970 SC 150), the Supreme Court observed that it was not necessary to establish bias but it was sufficient to invalidate the selection process if it could be shown that there was a reasonable likelihood of bias.
Likelihood of bias may arise on account of proprietary interest or on account of personal reason such as hostility to one party or personal friendship or family relationship with the other.
Where a reasonable likelihood of bias is alleged on the ground of relationship, the question would always be as to how close the degree of relationships is or in other words, is the nearness of the relationship so great as to give rise to reasonable apprehension of basis on the part of the authority making the selection.
11.
This position was consistently followed thereafter in DK.
Khanna's case (AIR 1973 HP 30), Arif Din's case (1973)2 SLR 119) and lately in Ashok Yadav's case (AIR 1987 SC 454).
In Ashok Yadav's case, the Apex Court, laid down :-  "....The question is not whether the judge is actually biased or in fact decides partially, but whether thee is a real likelihood of bias.
What is objectionable in such a case is not that the decision is actually tainted with bias but that the circumstances are such as to create a reasonable apprehension in the mind of others that there is a likelihood of bias affecting the decision.
The basic principle underlying this rule is that justice must not only be done but must also appear to be done.
It is also important to note that this rule is not confided to cases where judicial power stricto senso is exercised.
It is appropriately extended to all cases where an independent mind has to be applied to arrive at a fair and just decision between the rival claims of parties.
Justice is not the function of the courts alone; it is also the duty of all those who are expected to decide fairly between contending parties..."  Given regard to this position it all comes to the "closeness" and "nearness" in case where bias is alleged on the ground of relationship.
If the relationship is very close and near and is known which is likely to create an impression in the mind of other candidates, that the decision making authority was liable to be biased, in favour or against any one of the candidates and that there was a likelihood of such authority espousing the cause of his or her favorite it is enough to vitiate the selection and conversely if the alleged relationship is remote and distant the selection is not consequently liable to be upset.
12.
In the present case it is denied that respondent No. 3 happened to be the teacher of respondent No. 4 in her MA (Music) Course.
But it is admitted that respondent No. 4 has registered herself for research programme under the guidance of respondent No. 3 and is required to visit the latter quarterly or half yearly".
There is nothing on the record to gauge the nearness of the relationship between the two.
It is not alleged by the petitioner that they are on very intimate terms or in close friendship nor is it borne by the record that there is any such connection between them so as to create impression that respondent No. 3 could be biased in favour of respondent No. 4.
The foundation of the petitioner's case, proceeds on the premise that bias should be inferred merely because of the teacher taught relationship between the two irrespective of any factual closeness between them.
13.
The contention deserves to be rejected and I am afraid no such inference can be drawn merely because the relationship is that of a teacher-student.
It is hard to believe that a teacher in the very nature of his or her duty can be biased in favour of one or the other candidate unless circumstances exist which show a high degree of closeness between them on personal level.
A teacher-student relationship is a pious relationship and as submitted by Mr. Raina, all students or candidates are equally near and dear to a teacher who normally is not expected to discriminate or segregate between them on considerations other than the merit.
It is a different thing that some considerations or factors may creep in this relationship to turn it into a close friendship and to make it prone to the human probabilities and weaknesses.
But for that the degree of closeness and nearness is required to be shown so as to enable the court to infer bias in the circumstances.
The petitioner has failed to discharge this obligation in the instant case and as pointed out hereinbefore, there is nothing on record to show that any circumstances exist which point to the closeness of the relationship between respondents 3 and 4.
In that view it is difficult to infer that respondent No. 3 was biased in favour of respondent No. 4 culminating in the recommendation impugned.
I am fortified in this view by a judgment of the Supreme Court in Dalpatabba Sahib's case (AIR 1990 SC 434) and 1976 SCJ 670.
In the first case their Lordships observed, "we are unable to understand as to how the fact that respondents 4 and 5 who were his guides when the appellant was doing his M.Sc., would influence their decision in selecting him".
14.
Coming to the other submissions urged by Mr. Gupta that the expert had a dominant role to play in the matter of selection by the Commission, it appears to be more of a conjecture than anything else.
The Commission is the creation of the Constitution entrusted with the sacred task of making selection on the basis of merit.
It co-opts the services of an expert only to facilitate a fair assessment and evaluation of the performance of the candidates and for nothing else.
The Commission is not an ordinary selection committee where the expert can have his own way in the matters of selection.
It comprises of men of high standing who are expected not to let any selection be influenced by the likes or dislikes of any expert.
It is also not a fact borne by the record that any such expert is holding any dominant position in the matter of selections and has a final say or for that matter can act according to his or her likes and dislikes.
A selection made by the commission is the collective decision of the Commission irrespective of the fact whether selection committee comprises of all members of the commission or some members only.
Therefore, so long as the recommendation emanates from the Commission, based on the selection made by any of its selection committees, it cannot be said that the decision has been influenced one way or the other by any particular member or by any expert for that matter.
This position gets strengthened by the explanation relied.
offered by the respondent - commission in the objections denying that 70% marks are allotted to any expert or that the selection is made at the instance of such a expert.
15.
There is no way to accept petitioner's claim that he possessed better merit and suitability and yet was rejected.
There is nothing before me to adjudge the comparative merit of the rival candidates.
Nor do I deem it proper to do so.
The sacred task of making selection on merit is entrusted to expert bodies and it is their domain to discharge their duty fairly.
The courts have no need and should not encroach upon their field unless their decisions appear patently perverse and tainted with extraneous and mala fide considerations.
16.
Having said so there is no necessity to examine the other points raised in the petition, which have not been urged before me.
Nor do I feel any necessity to examine such points after having taken the view that the recommendation made in favour of respondent No. 4 could not be held to be vitiated on the two main grounds highlighted by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
17.
As a result I dismiss this petition and vacate the interim direction.
The matter has been finally decided with the agreement of learned counsel for the parties at this stage.
This also disposes of C.M.Ps.
344-45 of 1993.