Ashok Bhan, J. (Oral) - Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are widow and daughter respectively of late Sardar Swaran Singh who was working as Assistant in the Transport Department of Punjab Government at Jalandhar at the time of his death on 7121988.
The deceased was posted as Head Clerk/Assistant in the office of D.T.O.
Jalandhar at the time of his death.
Petitioner No. 2, Miss Amarjit Kaur applied to respondent No. 2 on 26.12.1988 for appointment as a Clerk in the respondent department on priority basis and on compassionate grounds.
She claimed appointment under Punjab Government Instructions contained in Memo No. 18/14/86-5PP dated 24th of April, 1986 (copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2).
2.
In response to this application, respondent department asked the petitioner to submit information in detail regarding dependents of the deceased and also to submit an affidavit that none of the dependents had obtained appointment under the provisions of said instructions.
She was further asked to pass a test in Punjabi typewriting as per Government instructions.
Petitioner supplied all the documents asked for.
She passed the requisite Punjabi typewriting test on 16h October, 1989.
In spite of that she was not given the appointment and was forced to file the present writ petition seeking mandamus, directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner as a Clerk in the respondent department with immediate effect.
3.
In the written statement, respondents have not denied the claim of the petitioner that she should be appointed on priority basis under Punjab government Instructions Annexure P-2 but Pleaded that appointment could not be given because there was no vacancy existing against which petitioner No. 2 could be given appointment.
It was further pleaded that as and when the vacancy becomes available the same shall be offered to her.
The difficulties faced by the respondents have been enumerated in para 5 of the written statement which is reproduced below :  "Admitted that the petitioner No. 2 supplied requisite information/documents asked for vide letter No. STC-E(AI) 2-214/3630 dated 31189 (Annexure P-1) as the same was required before initial action on the claim for the appointment as Clerk could be considered on compassionate grounds under priority No. 4 (read with its Annexures) contained in Govt. memo No. 18/14/86-5pp (1703)5964 dated 24486 (Annexure P-2).
The petitioner No. 2 was also required to pass test in Punjab typing as per Punjab Government instructions issued vide memo No. 4/17/79/1pp/9977 dated 2481983 (Annexure P-3).
She could not qualify test fixed for 30689.
However, she was offered good chances and to indicate when she would be able/ready for passing the test of typing vide letter dated 9889 (Annexure P-4).
She passed/cleared the test in Punjabi typing on 161089.
The Department has 4 vacancies of clerks to be filled on regular basis.
As per calculation made/checking of the Roster Register made by the Welfare Department a backlog of 5 posts of scheduled castes and 3 posts of backward classes has to be cleared.
At that time the claim of Sh. Gurbir Singh S/o Late Sh. Niranjan Singh Cheema Draftsman a deceased Govt. employee of this Department (who died on 141982 while in service) was pending to be considered under priority No. 4 of Govt. instructions dated 24486 (Annexure P-2).
The matter was referred to Government for advice as to whether the backlog of Scheduled Castes/Backward classes should first be completed and the applications of the dependents of the deceased employees should be kept pending vide letter No. STC-E(AI)1-100/36860 dated 261189 (Annexure P-5).
In response to this the Govt. advised/clarified vide memo No. 1/100/89/4(2)/6373 dated 18490 (Annexure P- 6) that the posts reserved for scheduled castes/Backward classes cannot be offered to general category even on priority basis.
While the claims of the dependents of deceased employees were under consideration in the Department, in the Civil Writ Petition No. 402 of 1990 has been filed by Mrs. Surinder Kaur Ex-adhoc Clerk, the Hon'ble High Court vide its order dated 15290 (Annexure P-7) has directed that respondent will not appoint a person from outside till the petitioner (Miss Surinder Kaur) is given post.
A similar order has been passed in the Civil Writ Petition No. 16280/89 filed by another ad hoc Clerk Miss Rajinder Kaur (A copy of decision is attached at (Annexure P-8).
Under the circumstances no appointment from outside could be made till both Miss Surinder Kaur and Rajinder Kaur Ex-ad hoc Clerks, whose services are terminated on reinstatement of regular employee are given posts.
In view of the judgment of Hon'ble High Court in the Writ Petition filed by them, it their appointments (Miss Surinder Kaur and Rajinder Kaur Ex-ad hoc Clerks) are considered/made against the regular vacancies, then the Department will have to offer appointments on regular basis to the following clerks working on purely temporary basis against the vacancies caused due to suspensions of regular employees who were senior most both of them and belong to reserve category.
Name of the Official appointed against suspension vacancies, Date of initial appointment  1.
Sh. Piara Singh Clerk (SC) 16.1.87 2.
Sh. Gurnam Singh Clerk (SC) 7.4.88.
3.
Miss Sarbjit Kaur (SC) 7.4.88 4.
Miss Usha Rani (BC) 7.4.88.
Since the appointments of both the terminated ad hoc Clerks namely Miss Surinder Kaur and Rajinder Kaur were of purely contract basis job for a period, as such they have no claim against the existing regular posts to be considered.
The Department filed Special Leave Petition No. 7511/1990, Civil Writ Petition No. 402 of 199G State v. Miss Surinder Kaur S.L.P.
No. 7234 of 1990, Civil Writ petition No. 16280 of 1989 State v. Miss Rajinder Kaur on the advise of Legal Remembrancer.
In the case of Miss Surinder Kaur, Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has granted stay whereas decision in the case of Miss Rajinder Kaur is still awaited.
In the absence of decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India no claim of the petitioner No. 2 as well as others can be considered even under the priority category No. 4 for the time being.
A copy of intimation received from Advocate on record in respect of both above said special leave petitions is attached at (annexures 9 and 10)".
Further clarifications are in para 8 of the written statement which is also reproduced below :  "The contents of para No. 8 are admitted to some extent.
The claim of the petitioner No. 2 for the appointment of Clerk on compassionate ground is still under consideration and will be finalised on receipt of final decision of Supreme Court of India.
The petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 (family member of the deceased late Sh. Swaran Singh Assistant) have occupied Govt. house at Jalandhar since the expiry of the deceased employee on 7121988.
Keeping in view their family circumstances the matter has already been referred to Government vide letter No. STC-E(AI)28-355 dated 2990 to accord necessary sanction for retention of Government house at Jalandhar by the family of decease employee for another six months or till his daughter (petitioner No. 2) is given employment in this Department after the cases pending before Hon'ble Supreme Court of India have been decided.
(A copy of letter dated 2.8.90 is at Annexure P12)".
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
Petitioner undoubtedly had a right to have the case considered for appointment on compassionate ground under the aforementioned government Instructions Annexure P2.
She has submitted all the requisite documents and passed the Punjabi type test as required.
She has been waiting for employment for the last more than three years.
The denial of appointment under the circumstances can be termed arbitrary, Supreme Court under similar circumstances in Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1989 SC 1976 observed as under :-  "We consider that it must be stated unequivocally that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate grounds is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such case pending for years.
If there is no suitable post for appointment supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant."
Following the law laid down by the Lordship of the Supreme Court in Sushma Gosain's case (supra), respondents are directed to give appointment to Miss Amarjit Kaur, petitioner No. 2 to the post to which she is entitled to.
The appointment be given within a period of three months.
Counsel appearing for the respondents says that if for some reasons the appointment could not be given by the respondent department then it would try and secure the appointment to the petitioner in some other Government Department by circulating the particulars of the petitioner to other departments.
Accordingly, I leave it open to the respondent department to get her appointed either in the respondent department or in any other Government Department but the same should be done within a period of three months.
The posting if possible be given at Jalandhar.
With these observations, this writ petition stands disposed of, with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.