Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - Petitioner in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is seeking writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release forthwith the pensionary benefits and gratuity for the period of service of 25 years rendered by him in the Indian Army and the Central Reserve Police Force, as the same had been denied to the petitioner.
2.
The undisputed facts of the case are that the petitioner was commissioned as 2nd Lt. in the Indian Army as regular Reserve Officer on 21.7.1960 and was released from the service of the Army on 15.4.1968 from the rank of Major.
The petitioner after release from the Army was re-employed as Assistant Commandant Central Reserve Police Force on 7.12.1968 in the Category of Released Army Officers under Rule 107(2) read with Rule 105(3)A(i) of Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955.
In terms of this Rule the petitioner was re-employed from year to year basis and his period of appointment was extended from time to time.
He was promoted to the rank of Commandant w.e.f.
3091974 and the period of reemployment came to an end on the afternoon of 27.6.1985 after the last term of extension from 7121984 to 27 6.1985.
The period of re-employment was not extended thereafter.
The petitioner while serving with the CRPF made some representations to the respondents, copies of which are on the record, but no decision in the matter was taken and the petitioner was informed that his case will be considered after the decision in Major RC D'Souza's case.
Petitioner's case was considered in the light of the Supreme Court Judgment in Union of India v. Major RC D'Souza, 1988(1) S.L.J.
19.
The ratio of the decision in the aforesaid case was not applicable to the case of the petitioner and his employment was terminated on 27.6.1985.
Aggrieved against the decision of the respondents, the petitioner has come to this Court.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that his case is squarely covered by the Supreme Court decision in RC D'Souza's case (supra) and the entire service rendered by him in the Military/CRPF has been ignored by the respondents in an arbitrary manner and he is entitted to pensionary benefits as well as gratuity.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner does not fall within the purview of the amended rule w.e.f.
12101985 for the reason that he was released from the CRPF w.e.f.
27.6.1985 and there was no scope for his absorption or making him permanent in the CRPF It was also urge on behalf of the respondents that the period of re-employment from 7.12.1968 to 27.6.1985 was not possible to be counted under any rule for the purpose of pension.
4.
I have considered the respective stand of the parties' counsel and have perused the aforesaid judgment.
5.
In RC D'Souza case (supra), the facts were that the petitioner Major RC D'Souza after premature retirement on compassionate ground at the age of 33 was offered appointment as Assistant Commandant in the Central Reserve Police Force and was initially given appointment for a period of three years, In 1970, he was promoted on temporary basis as Commandant on the basis of selection.
In October, 1970, the petitioner was allowed to continue for one year as Commandant.
Major RC D'Souza was asked to opt for absorption.
In June, 1970 he was informed by Director General of the CRPF that in view of the Rule 107 of the CRPF Rules, 1955, he was not entitled for absorption in the Force.
Petitioner filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the Andhra Pradesh High Court and sought a direction for his absorption.
The learned Single Judge referring to Rule 105 which deals with recruitment and Rule 107 dealing with tenure and on the basis that there was nothing in these Rules to disentitle a retired or released Army Officer from absorption, allowed the writ petition and directed the authorities to consider petitioner's permanent absorption.
The Division Bench of that Court upheld the direction and dismissed the appeal of Union of India.
Union of India filed SLP in the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court allowed the appeal of Union of India to the extent that the direction of the High Court to absorb the respondent from the date of his appointment was not valid and he was entitled for absorption from 2091985.
His seniority in the post of Commandant shall run from the date he was entitled to absorption i.e 2091985 and the petitioner was also entitled to credit of continuous service for the entire period of service as Assistant Commandant and Commandant for the limited purpose of pension.
6.
Rule 105 (3-A) which deals with recruitment, inter alia provides that the post of Assistant Commandant shall be filled :  (i) xx (ii) by re-employment of retired or released Army Officer or substantive Majors of the Territorial Army or Indian Police Service Officer (Senior Scale) or with four years of service as such or State Police Officers holding the posts of Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts preferably with experience of Armed Police duties or Assistant Commandants of the Central Reserve Police Force.
Rule 107(2) dealing with tenure then provided :  "In the case of retired/released Army Officers, they will be under re-employment for an initial period of one year, extendable by mutual consent for one year, at a time subject to premature termination, should administrative exigency, and/or unsuitability or any other unforeseen factors so demand.
The service shall be temporary subject to all rules and orders applicable to the Central Government employees in temporary service in general."
7.
Rule 107(2) made under the Central Reserve Police Act, 1949 prior to the amendment of 1985 clearly provided that the service shall be temporary and rules and orders applicable to Central Government employees in temporary service would apply.
8.
Since the petitioner all through remained a temporary employee and his service came to an end before the amended Act came into force on 2091985, there is no provisions in the Act which can be made applicable for grant of pension to the petitioner.
There is however, a provision in the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965, for the grant of terminal gratuity payable to temporary Government servants.
Rule 10(1) of the aforesaid Rules reads as under :-  "Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1-B) a temporary Government employee who retires on superannuation or is discharged from service or is declared invalid for further service shall be eligible for gratuity at the rate of  (a) one-half of a month's pay for each completed year of his service, if he had completed not less than-five years continuous service at the time of retirement, invalidment.
(b) one month's pay for each completed year of his service, subject to a maximum of 15 months pay or fifteen thousand rupees, whichever is less, if he had completed not less than 10 years continuous service at the time of retirement, discharge or invalidment; subject to the condition of service rendered by the Government servant concerned being held by authority competent to appoint him to be satisfactory."
A perusal of the aforesaid rule clearly indicates that the petitioner is entitled to terminal gratuity, as he has rendered more than 10 years continuous service,  9.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is disposed of with the direction to the respondents to release the terminal gratuity to the petitioner as per Rule 10(1) of the Central Service (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965 within a period of three months.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Ordered accordingly.