Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This petition relates to a question, of course, of high importance which already stands answered in various judicial pronouncements made from time to time.
It can be summarised in the following manner :  "On what facts and under what circumstances, a disciplinary authority can dispense with the provisions of Clauses (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India as well as Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1972 and proceed to take action against the delinquent official who stands honourably acquitted by a Court."
Though the earlier decision, some of them cited before me as well, concern to somewhat different set of facts, yet the ratio of those verdicts shall be applied to instant case and relevant portion culled out at a subsequent stage.
2.
The petitioner was a regular employee of Haryana Government.
He was working as driver in the Health Department since 1051980.
Undisputedly, he tried to molest two ladies Smt. Mewa and Smt. Santosh.
A criminal case vide FIR No. 130 dated 18121986 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him and one other person.
Both of them were tried on the said charge by Additional Sessions Judge, Jind and acquitted vide his order dated 1041987 (copy Annexure P-1).
It is clear from the acquittal order that both the ladies solemnly affirmed before the Court that they were not assaulted by the petitioner nor any attempt was made by him to commit rape.
The learned trial Judge observed : "It is a case of no evidence against the accused and they are acquitted of the charge framed."
After acquittal the petitioner who was under suspension on account of registration of criminal case, approached the authorities for his reinstatement, but the disciplinary authority took a deterrent decision and dismissed him from service vide order dated 451987 (Annexure P-2) without holding regular departmental enquiry or giving any opportunity of being heard.
The reasons therefore given in the dismissed order are as under :  "The act of Shri Ram Sarup Driver (under suspension) is unbecoming of a Government servant and hence required strict disciplinary action against him so that others may get lesson and do not repeat such an act in future.
Smt. Mewa and Smt. Santosh gave statements in this regard.
These statements are self-explanatory.
No lady can write or state which directly hits her own modesty without any base.
It is very sensitive matter relating to the honour of the ladies and as such they will hesitate to give statement at the time of regular enquiry.
On the basis of aforesaid reasons, it is not reasonably practicable to hold a regular departmental enquiry and afford reasonable opportunity in terms of Clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India read with Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1972."
3.
The petitioner's laments is that on his honourable acquittal by the criminal Court in the case for which he was placed under suspension, he should have been reinstated or if the authorities were to proceed to take departmental action, a regular enquiry should have been made in which he would have been able to explain his position.
According to him the order of dismissal is bad in law and has been passed for extraneous consideration.
The respondents have come with a plea that under the provision of sub-clause (b) of Clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India, the Director Health Services, Haryana has rightly exercised his power whilst dispensing with holding of a regular enquiry against the petitioner.
4.
The counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a Division Bench decision of the Allahabad High Court in Uttam Chand v. Deputy Inspector General Railway Protection Special Force, New Delhi and others, 1988(1) SLR 725 to show that where there is not totally or absolutely impracticable to hold a regular enquiry, it must be conducted and the person concerned must be given an opportunity to defend himself.
The learned Judges in the Uttam Chand's case (supra) after taking into consideration the landmark decision of the apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 576 and Satvir Singh v. Union of India, 1986(1) SLR 255, observed as under :  "We have, therefore, no hesitation in taking the view that the possibility of delay in the culmination of disciplinary proceedings is not germane to the reasonable practicability of following the procedure.
Such a consideration is irrelevant or extraneous.
We also hold that no reasonable person could take the view that on account of the possibility of delay in following of the procedure was not reasonably practicable."
In Uttam Chand's case (supra), the petitioner was a special force personnel and the reasons recorded by the disciplinary authority whilst proceeding to take departmental action against him were that he indulged in undesirable activities and if the prescribed procedure is followed, unavoidable delay will be caused and all this will cause further deterioration of discipline and morale of the force.
5.
At the cost of repetition, it must be said that in the instant case the crux of the reasons for dispensing with the holding of regular enquiry is that it is not reasonably practicable to hold the same, for, it is a very sensitive matter relating to the honour of the ladies and as such they will hesitate to give statement at the time of regular enquiry.
I am not convinced with the reasons given by the disciplinary authority for dispensing with the enquiry.
6.
A perusal of the judgment of the learned Additional Sessions Judge, reveals that prosecutrix Smt. Mewa and Smt. Santosh, the alleged victims of the petitioner did not support the prosecution allegations.
Statements of these two women were earlier recorded by the police on the basis of which a case was registered against the accused and their statements were recorded in Court (though at the time of trial in Court they resiled from their earlier statements).
These two women made statements on three occasions before different authorities.
These seems to be no reason to suggest that they would hesitate in giving statements if called to do so in the departmental enquiry proceedings.
It appears that the department had an apprehension that if the two women were sent for to make statements, they would not depose against the petitioner as they did in the Court.
7.
Under clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of ht Constitution of India, the conditions precedent, which must be satisfied before action under this clause is taken against a government servant, are :-  (1) There must exist a situation which makes the holding of an enquiry as contemplated by Article 311(2) not reasonably practicable; and (ii) where a civil servant, through or together with his associates, terrorises, threatens or intimidates witnesses who are likely to give evidence against him with fear of reprisal in order to prevent them from doing so, or where the civil servant by himself or with or through others threatens, intimidates and terrorises the officer who is the disciplinary authority or members or members of his family so that the officer is afraid to hold the enquiry or direct it to be held; or where an atmosphere of violence or of general indiscipline and insubordination prevails at the time the attempt to hold the inquiry is made.
It is not the case of the respondents that there was any threat to the witnesses which could frustrate the holding of regular inquiry or there was any apprehension in the mind of the disciplinary authority that the inquiry officer will be coerced by the petitioner.
If there could be an open trial why not the departmental inquiry.
I am of the opinion that the disciplinary authority is not expected to dispense with the departmental inquiry arbitrarily or out of ulterior motive or merely in order to avoid the holding of inquiry or because the department's case against the delinquent official is weak and is, therefore, bound to fail.
8.
For the foregoing discussion, the writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
The impugned order dated 451987 (Annexure P-2) is quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be reinstated from the date of his suspension.
He will also be given all the consequential benefits that might accrue on his reinstatement.
It will be in its own interest of the department to implement this order within four months.
Petition allowed.