Surya Kant, J - The correspondent-cum-Manager of Khalsa High Court, Mansa has sought quashing of the order dated 2712004, (Annexure P-10) passed by the Presiding Officer of the Punjab State School Tribunal (for short, `the Tribunal') whereby the appeal filed by respondent Nos. 4 to 6 has been accepted and a direction has been issued to the management of the School to allow these respondents to join their duties immediately and treat the period during which their services remained terminated, as on duty and pay them arrears of salary for the said period.
2.
Briefly, the facts are that Khalsa High School, Mansa is a Government aided School and receives 95% grant-in-aid from the State Government.
The employees of the School are, thus, governed by the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools' Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (for short, `the Act') read with the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools' Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 (for short, `the Rules').
3.
It appears that a dispute arose between two rival groups in relation to the management of the School and the Managing Committee, whose Manager was one Dalip Singh, Advocate, took over the same.
The said Managing Committee, on 3182001 and 1142002, appointed respondent Nos. 4 to 8 as Teachers on different posts.
According to these respondents, they were appointed on regular basis, against duly sanctioned and vacant posts.
Meanwhile, the office-bearers of the Managing Committee changed and a new Managing Committee comprising of the rival group and headed by the present office bearers took over the management of the School and appointed the petitioner (Baldev Singh Khiala) as the Correspondent-cum-Manager of the School.
The above named Manager terminated the services of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 vide orders dated 522003.
4.
Aggrieved at the above orders of termination of their services that respondent Nos. 4 to 8 filed an appeal before the Tribunal constituted under Section 8(1) of the Act, mainly contending that despite the work and conduct being satisfactory, their services were terminated without assigning any reason and without seeking approval of the Director, Public Instructions (Schools) and, thus, the orders terminating their services were directly in the teeth of Section 4(i) of the Act.
The Tribunal, vide impugned order dated 2712004 (Annexure P-10), after hearing the management of the School and having found that no prior approval of the Director, Public Instructions (Schools) was obtained before terminating the services of respondent Nos. 4 to 8, held as follows :-  "Both the Ld.
Counsel concluded their arguments.
Going through the foregoing judgments passed by the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court, I am of the opinion that the action of respondent management was illegal, arbitrary ab initio.
Mere change in Management should not end up in such a drastic action against newly appointed teachers of previous management.
In this particular case the new Management which took over on 622002, had acted in a very arbitrary manner.
Although seven teachers were terminated during probation period but two teachers, namely, Ms. Kiranjit Kaur Sidhu d/o S Gurbax Singh, JBT teacher and Ms. Kiranjit Kaur Sidhu d/o S Gurdev Singh, JBT teacher, were taken back and they rejoined on 252003 while their appeals were still pending before the Tribunal.
In this whole episode the new Management acted in whimsical manner and their action deserves to be condemned."
Consequently, the Tribunal directed the Management to allow respondent Nos. 4 to 8 to join back their duties and pay them the arrears within 30 days after treating the period during which their services remained terminated as on duty.
5.
When the matter came up for preliminary bearing, a contention was raised on behalf of the petitioner that "the Presiding Officer of the State School Tribunal has not been appointed in accordance with Section 8 of the Act."
In support of this contention, reliance was placed upon a Single Bench judgment of this Court in the Managing Committee, SD Higher Secondary School, Ludhiana v. State of Punjab and others, 1989(3) S.L.R.
619.
6.
Notice of motion was issued and in response thereto written statement has been filed by the District Education Officer (Schools), Mansa of behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3, inter alia, stating that respondent Nos. 4 to 8 were appointed as Teachers during the period when one Dalip Singh was Correspondent-cum-Manager of the School and that the Presiding officer of the Tribunal had been validly appointed in accordance with sub-section (3) of Section 8, as amended on November 18, 1986 by Ordinance No. 6 of 1986 which was later on replaced by Punjab Act No. 19 of 1986 and that the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner in relation to the improper constitution of the Tribunal being based upon un-amended Section 8(3) of the Act was totally misconceived and misleading.
7.
We have heard Shri Mukand Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri SS Behl, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 as also Shri VK Jindal, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 4 to 8 and have also perused the record.
8.
With a view to appreciate the contention regarding validity of appointment of the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal, it will be apposite to reproduce sub-sections (1), (2), and (3) of Section 8 of the Act which read as follows :-  "8(1) The State Government may, by notification, constitute one or more School Tribunals for the purpose of this Act for such area as may be specified in such notification.
(2) A School Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the Government.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Presiding Officer of a School Tribunal unless he is or has been a Judge of the High Court or an officer of the State Government not below the rank of a Commissioner of a Division."
9.
There can, thus, be no manner of doubt that an Officer of the State Government not below the rank of Commissioner of a Division can also be appointed as Presiding Officer of the Tribunal in terms of sub-section (3) of Section 8 of the Act.
10.
It is the conceded position that Shri Bikramjit Singh, IAS, who has been appointed as the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal, is an officer in the rank of Financial Commissioner which is higher than that of the Commissioner.
Thus, no legal infirmity is found in the appointment of the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal.
So far as the reliance placed on behalf of the petitioner upon the judgment of a learned Single Judge in the case of Managing Committee, SD Higher Secondary School (supra) is concerned, the same is totally misconceived.
In that case, the School employee had approached the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, who was the Prescribed Authority under sub- section (4) of Section 3 of the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969.
However, by the time the afore-mentioned authority passed the order dated January 30, 1981, the 1969 Act had been repealed by the Punjab Act No. 18 of 1979, which had come into force with effect from January 23, 1981.
Under the new Act, the Additional Deputy Commissioner had been divested of his jurisdiction to deal with the matter and all pending cases were required to be transferred and dealt with by the `Director' in terms of Repeal and Saving Clause contained in Section 16(1)(ii) of the new Act.
It was in this factual back-drop that the learned Single Judge, and rightly so, held that the order passed by the Additional Deputy Commissioner in purported exercise of his powers under the repealed Act, was void ab initio.
The factual matrix of the case in hand being altogether different, the ratio decidendi of the afore- mentioned judgment, lends no support to the case of the petitioner.
11.
It appears to us that services of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 were terminated as a punitive measure merely because the management of the School had changed.
Neither the procedure prescribed for terminating the services in a punitive manner was followed nor approval of he Director, Public Instructions (Schools) was obtained.
It further appears that the services of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 were terminated on pick and choose basis.
The Tribunal has, thus, rightly interfered thereby directing the management to re-instate respondent Nos. 4 to 8 with consequential benefits.
12.
We, therefore, do not find it a fit case for interference in exercise of our writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and accordingly dismiss this writ petition.
It will, however, be open for the management to take action against respondent Nos. 4 to 8 in accordance with the provisions of the Act and that Rules, if so permissible.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.