TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
Petition admitted.
With the consent of the parties, the petition is taken up for final disposal.
2.
By projecting the seniority, the petitioner who is working as Deputy General Manager with the Jammu and Kashmir Bank Ltd, is seeking promotion to the post of General Manager in the aforementioned bank.
He submits that he has merit also.
He has given details of his service profile and submits that he is a fit candidate to be promoted to the aforementioned post.
The service profile as given by him even though, not much relevant for the purpose of disposal of this petition, is being noticed in brief.
3.
The petitioner submits that he is the senior-most Deputy General Manager and therefore, he should be given promotion.
He came to be appointed as Deputy General Manager in June 1995.
He has 27 years of service to his credit.
He has during this period held varied assignments.
He submits that the management had been acting with prejudice and he had to struggle hard to earn earlier promotions which were due to him.
He submits that he had apprehension that he would be superseded in the matter of promotion to the post of General Manager.
He filed a petition in this Court.
This bore No. 353 of 1997.
This petition as per the petitioner was fixed for preliminary hearing for 1331997.
The respondent bank however passed order first promoting three and later on four Deputy General Managers as General Manager.
These orders were issued on 1031997.
4.
In the above circumstances, the aforementioned writ petition was withdrawn.
The present petition was filed challenging the order by which the aforementioned respondents were promoted.
5.
Respondents' Bank has filed the objections.
It is submitted that writ cannot be issued against the bank as the bank does not fall within the purview of the term `authority' as contemplated by Article 12 of the Constitution.
It is further submitted that the only right of the petitioner is that he should be considered for the higher assignment.
Merely because he is the senior- most Deputy General Manager, would not confer any right on him to claim the post of General Manager as a matter of right.
6.
It be seen that the case of the petitioner was considered by the Board of Directors.
This happened on 10th of March 1997.
All eligible officers were considered.
Taking into consideration the merit, suitability, service record, job knowledge and experience, respondents No. 6 to 9 were selected and promoted.
The petitioner was not given the promotion.
7.
There is no dispute that the post of General Manager is a Selection Post.
It is to be filled by taking into consideration the principle of merit cum seniority.
8.
What is meant by merit ?
The dictionary meaning of the term `merit' is "excellence that deserves honour or reward, worth, value, desert that which one deserves".
This again, can, by no means, be taken to be a complete definition of the term, `merit'.
For judging one's merit one may also take into account the time, and energy devoted and the quality of performance of a person in doing any job which he is required to do.
For judging the suitability of a person for a higher post, the requirements of such higher posts have also to be kept in view.
The recognition of merit, by and large, will depend on considerations which cannot all be put in a strait-jacket.
No doubt the term `merit' is not capable of easy definition but it can be safely said that `merit' is a sum total of various qualities and attributes of an employee, such as his academic qualifications, his distinction in the University, his character, integrity, devotion to duty and the manner in which he discharges his official duties.
Allied to this, may be various other matters, or factors such as his punctuality in work, the quality and outturn of the work done by him and the manner of his dealings with his superiors and subordinate officers and the general public and his rank in service.
9.
It may again be seen that there is a clear distinction between the concept of `merit-cum-seniority' and `merit cum fitness' or `seniority-cum- merit'.
Where the promotions are to be made on the basis of the seniority-cum-merit then all things equal, the person senior is to be given preference.
Where merit is the sole criteria then merit takes precedence over all other matters.
The distinction between these terms has been pointed out by a Full Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court in Hari Dutt Kainthla v. State of HP, 1974(1) SLR 208.
It was observed that the seniority-cum-fitness implies that the senior person unless fit should get the promotion.
The principle may not be found satisfactory, because it implies essentially that seniority be given prepondering weight.
Seniority-cum-merit is simply applied at the lower level.
It has also been applied in promotion from a junior scale to a senior scale within the same service.
But when the question arises of appointment to a higher service consisting of posts carrying superior responsibility, the emphasis shifts from seniority-cum-fitness to merit-cum-seniority.
Merit-cum-seniority principle implies that merit is the dominant factor.
The principle of merit determines that the most meritorious or the best qualified is selected for promotion.
When merit is the dominant principle, the rule of merit-cum-seniority is applied.
When the assessment of any particular officer has to be made by higher authorities, the assessment cannot be judged by applying any mechanical formula or mathematical calculation.
What has to be considered is whether the authority concerned has properly assessed the merits of the particular officer or not.
The judgment about this assessment on merits cannot be adjusted in the pigeon-holes of arithmatical calculations.
10.
It is again a settled law that when the selecting authority takes a decision then the High Court in the exercise of power of judicial purview is not to interfere with the decision of the departmental authorities.
See Union of India v. Durgadass and others, AIR 1978 SC 1132.
See also Gurdial Singh Fijji v. Union of India, AIR 1979 SC 1622 (1623).
To sum up, it can be said :  (i) As to what is meant by merit and as to who is meritorious is a matter which should be left to be decided to the Selecting Authority.
(ii) There is a clear distinction between the concept of `merit-cum- seniority' and `seniority-cum-merit'.
(iii) That in the case of `merit-cum-seniority', merit takes precedence over all other matters.
(iv) If decision taken by the selecting authority is reasonable then this court is not to exercise power of judicial purview.
It is not to act as Appellate Authority.
See Sri Kanwal Singh v. State of Haryana, JT 1997(3) SC 732.
It be seen that at the time of consideration, total marks were divided into sub-heads.
These heads were Service record, job knowledge, expression and thought, appearance and personality, general awareness, variety of experience, integrity and potential.
On the basis of the above break-up, marks were given.
The petitioner was unable to make the grade.
He was not selected for the post of General Manager.
11.
As indicated above, the petitioner had only one right.
This right was for being considered for appointment to the post of General Manager.
He was duly considered.
He could not come high up.
In this regard, it would be apt to mention that an exercise was undertaken by the Selection Committee.
A meeting was held on 6th Aug '96.
Respondents No. 6 and 7 were selected.
When the matter was placed before the Board to ratify the decision of the Selection Committee, a decision was taken with a view to create more posts.
The total strength of General Manager cadre was increased to five including one post from outside the cadre.
For filling these addition posts, fresh exercise was taken on 10th March '97.
Respondent No. 8 come to be selected as an in-service candidate and respondent No. 9 came to be selected as a candidate from outside the cadre.
In these circumstances, respondents No. 6 to 9 came to be selected as General Managers.
In both the selections the claim of the petitioner was duly taken note of.
He was judged as per the parameters indicated by the Bank.
These parameters have already been noticed above.
On both the occasions, the petitioner was unable to make a mark.
12.
Some suggestion of bias has been made in the petition.
The person who might have been biased has neither been named nor arrayed as a respondent.
These vague pleas as such are liable to be ignored.
It cannot be said that the non-selection of the petitioner was actuated by mala fide consideration.
13.
As such, no fault can be found with the selection by which respondents 6 to 8 came to be promoted and by which respondent No. 9 came to be appointed as General Manager.
14.
This petition as such is found without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.