Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the action of the respondents in dismissing the petitioner from the post of a Constable on account of eight months' absence from duty illegal ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on August 1, 1985.
On April 10, 1991, the petitioner left his place of posting.
He reported back for duty on December 13, 1991.
Departmental proceedings were initiated against him.
The charge having been proved, the Superintendent of Police, vide order dated August 31, 1992 imposed the penalty of dismissal from service.
The petitioner filed an appeal which was rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated March 31, 1994.
Even the revision petition filed by the petitioner met with the same fate.
It was rejected by the Director General of Police vide order dated April 24, 1995.
Copies of the orders have been produced as Annexures P2, P.4 and P.5 respectively with the writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that these orders are illegal and, should, therefore, be quashed.
3.
The respondents have controverted the petitioner's claim.
A written statement has been filed by Mr. Sudhir Mohan, IPS.
It has been averred that full opportunity had been given to the petitioner.
The orders are in conformity with the rules.
Consequently, no ground for interference is made out.
An additional written statement was also filed.
Certain facts regarding the petitioner's past conduct were mentioned.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Balhara contended that the impugned order is vitiated as the charge levelled against the petitioner was vague; the Enquiry Officer had himself cross-examined the witnesses; the provisions of Rule 162 had not been complied with; the petitioner's past record was taken into consideration without giving him any opportunity to show cause against it and that the appellate authority had not passed a speaking order.
Mr. Balhara also referred to certain decisions in support of his claim.
The claim on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
5.
The petitioner has not produced the specific charge served upon him.
However, learned counsel referred to the charge as reproduced in the enquiry report.
A perusal thereof shows that the charge against the petitioner was that he had left his duty without the grant of any leave etc. on April 10, 1991 at 1040 PM and had reported back on December 13, 1991.
Thus, he was absent for eight months.
Still further, it was alleged that he had left his rifle without entrusting it to any other person.
This was an act of gross carelessness and indiscipline.
This charge is not vague.
The petitioner understood it.
He has produced nothing to show that he had any difficulty in understanding the precise charge levelled against him.
There is nothing on record to suggest that the petitioner had ever objected to the charge as initially framed or expressed any difficulty at a later stage.
In spite of being asked, Mr. Balhara could not refer to anything on the record to suggest that the petitioner had ever complained about the charge being vague at any stage of the proceedings or even in his reply to the show cause notice.
6.
It is undoubtedly correct that an employee must know the precise charge.
Only then he can submit a proper reply and effectively exercise his right to defend himself.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, it cannot be said that the charge levelled against the petitioner was vague or that it was not possible for the petitioner to effectively defend himself.
Consequently, the contention raised by the counsel cannot be accepted.
7.
Mr. Balhara then contended that the Enquiry Officer had acted in violation of the principles of natural justice as he had himself cross- examined the witnesses.
He referred to the enquiry report in support of his submission.
8.
It is undoubtedly correct that an Enquiry Officer is charged with the duty of finding out the truth and making a report about it.
He is not a prosecutor.
Yet, it can't be disputed that the Enquiry Officer is entitled to do everything which would help him to determine the factual position.
He would be entitled to ask for the production of the record if he considers it relevant.
Equally, it would be permissible for the Enquiry Officer to ask a witness to clarify facts so as to remove his own doubts.
In doing so, the Enquiry Officer does not violate any rule or law.
He does not act in violation of the principles of natural justice.
And this appears to be the factual position even in the present case.
The Enquiry Officer had put certain questions to the witnesses produced by the petitioner.
He has recorded that fact in the enquiry report.
The questions were calculated to find out the truth.
This action of the Enquiry Officer is not in violation of any rule or principle of natural justice.
Consequently, the petitioner's contention that the proceedings are vitiated or that the impugned orders are liable to be set aside, cannot be accepted.
9.
Mr. Balhara referred to the decision in Abdul Wajeed v. State of Karnataka & Ors., 1981(1) SLR 454, in support of his contention.
In this case, the action of the Enquiry officer in treating a witness as hostile and then cross-examining him was held to be violative of the principles of natural justice.
Nothing of this kind has happened in the present case.
The view taken by the Karnataka High Court in the above-mentioned case cannot be said to be an authority for the proposition that an Enquiry Officer is precluded from asking questions for clarification of the issues from any witness during a departmental enquiry.
10.
Mr. Balhara then contended that absence from duty is not a grave act of misconduct so as to call for the extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
The authority while passing an order of dismissal has also to take into consideration the delinquent employee's length of service etc.
In the present case, the authorities have not noticed these facts and have awarded the extreme penalty without any justification.
11.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that the petitioner had remained absent for eight months without the grant of any leave or permission from the competent authority.
He had also not given charge of the gun which had been entrusted to him.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner had been posted on duty with Mr. Jai Singh Rana, MLA at his residence as a guard.
It is clear that the petitioner had been charged with the duty to protect Mr. Jai Singh Rana, MLA.
He had been given a gun for this purpose.
He did not even entrust the rifle to any one.
In this situation, it is not surprising that the authority has come to the conclusion that the petitioner was guilty of the "gravest acts of misconduct to prove complete unfitness...." for the job.
Added to this is the fact that it was not for the first time that the petitioner had absented himself from duty.
In the additional written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had remained absent in the years 1987 and 1988 also.
In the year 1987, the petitioner was absent for more than three days when he was let off without any punishment.
In the year 1988, he had remained absent for 63 days and eight hours, when he was awarded 15 days' punishment drill.
Even after having reported for duty on December 13, 1991, the petitioner had remained absent from February 27, 1992 to March 6, 1992 and from March 16, 1992 to August 6, 1992.
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner is not a responsible kind of person.
Disciplinary proceedings were being initiated against him for his absence during the year 1992.
However, the necessity to pursue those proceedings was obviated by the fact that the order of dismissal had been passed against the petitioner.
In the meantime, the proceedings were ordered to be kept pending.
12.
It is not disputed that the petitioner had joined service in the year 1985.
Till April 1991, the petitioner had served for more than six years.
However, no pension is admissible after a service of five years.
In any event, keeping in view the complete sequence of events and the petitioner's conduct, it cannot be said that the impugned order is vitiated merely because the authority has not noticed the total period of service put in by the petitioner prior to the date of his dismissal.
13.
Mr. Balhara had referred to certain decisions to contend that absence from duty cannot be considered to be a grave act of misconduct and that failure to notice the length of service would vitiate the order.
There is no quarrel with the proposition.
If an employee over-stays leave on account of good reasons, the extreme penalty of dismissal may not be awarded.
In the present case, it has been found that the petitioner had remained absent without informing the authorities and he had acted with gross carelessness by leaving his job without entrusting the rifle to any person.
The charge having been proved, it cannot be said that the respondents had acted illegally in ordering his dismissal from service.
14.
We may also notice that the petitioner was a member of the disciplined force.
The job demands a high sense of responsibility.
Leaving the rifle without entrusting it to even a colleague was a totally irresponsible act.
The petitioner had not even cared to submit an application before leaving the job.
Still further, no evidence was produced before the court to indicate that the petitioner had a good reason for being absent from duty.
In this situation, it cannot be said that authorities have erred in taking the view that the petitioner deserved the extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
15.
Mr. Balhara referred to the decisions in Union of India v. Giriraj Sharma, AIR 1994 SC 215, State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SLR 174 : 1992(1) SCT 123.
Bhim Singh v. Haryana State, 1991(2) PLR 190 : 1992(3) SCT 573 : 1991(1) SCT 621.
State of Punjab & anr v. Achhar Singh, 1991(2) PLR 475 : 1992(1) SCT 43.
State of Haryana v. Lakhan Lal, 1991(2) PLR 595 : 1991(2) SCT 718 and Mahipal v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) SLR 311.
It is not necessary to notice these decisions in detail as in State of UP v. Ashok Kumar and another, AIR 1996 SC 736 : 1996(2) SCT 139, it has been held that absence from duty would amount to a grave charge and that there was "no justification for the High Court to interfere with the punishment..."  16.
Mr. Balhara had undoubtedly raised the contention that the impugned order is vitiated as the petitioner's past record of service had been taken into consideration.
However, counsel was unable to refer to anything on the record to suggest that the disciplinary authority had considered his past record.
In fact, neither the show cause notice nor the petitioner's reply thereto has been produced.
The impugned order does not show that the order of punishment was based on the petitioner's past record of service.
Consequently, the contention is rejected.
17.
Lastly, it was contended that the appellate authority had not passed a speaking order.
18.
After a perusal of the order, we find that the appellate authority had agreed with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and the reasons given by the punishing authority.
It had specifically noticed that the misconduct of wilful absence from duty without any permission of the competent authority had not been disputed.
In this situation, it had found no ground to interfere with the impugned action.
We are unable to accept the contention that the authority had not applied its mind or that the petitioner's interest was in any way prejudiced.
In any event, we have heard the petitioner's counsel on merits at considerable length.
We have found no merit in any of the contentions.
In this situation, no useful purpose would be served by asking the appellate authority to decide the matter afresh.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.