Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Punjab Agricultural University Teachers' Association is the petitioner.
It alleges that Dr. AS Khehra, the Vice Chancellor of the University committed an 'open fraud' on the general public and the academic community when he claimed that a book titled 'Plant Breeding : Today and Tomorrow' was written by him alongwith two other persons and got it released on February 23, 1987 by the then Governor, Mr. SS Ray.
According to the petitioner, the book "has not seen the light of the day till date."
In spite of a representation having been submitted by the petitioner to the Prime Minister of India on October 31, 1995, no action has been taken.
Secondly, the petitioner alleges that a prime land "measuring 2 acres" belonging to the respondent-University worth crore of rupees "has been exchanged with the land belonging to Punjab Wakf Board."
The Board has in turn leased out a piece of land to a builder for Rs. 2 crores who in turn has decided to carve out plots in the said land and sell them for Rs. 12 crores.
The petitioner alleges that it has come to know "from reliable sources" that the Vice Chancellor "has received kick-backs for the said exchange".
This matter was reported in the magazine "University Today" on January 1, 1996.
According to the petitioner, it has "reliable information that a huge amount has exchanged hands in the said deal which is worth more than 12 crores".
The petitioner further alleges that "favouritism and nepotism is rampant in the respondent-University and the rules are not applicable for those who have links with the high and mighty.
One Veena Goyal, Assistant Economist (Marketing) employed in the respondent-University was allotted out of turn flat".
The petitioner represented to the Chancellor against the out of turn allotment.
Copy of the representation dated February 27, 1996 has been produced as Annexure P.5 with the writ petition.
It has been further alleged that there is rampant corruption in the Respondent-University.
Favourites are being given higher posts.
The details are given in the 'magazing issued by the petitioner-association".
Copy of the issue of January 1996 has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition.
On these premises, the petitioner prays for the issue of a direction to the State Government to "order an independent enquiry, preferably by CBI into the transfer/exchange of prime land adjoining Kitchlu Nagar, Ludhiana belonging to the Punjab Agricultural University with a piece of land belonging to Punjab Wakf Board; fraudulent claim of respondent No. 4 about the publication of book 'Plant Breeding : Today and Tomorrow' and its release by Mr. SS Ray, the then Governor of Punjab; out of turn allotment of houses to favourites in gross violation of the rules governing allotment of houses by the Vice Chancellor and other malfeasance and corruption by the present Vice Chancellor of the University".
The contents of the writ petition have been verified by Mr. RK Batra, the President of the Association.
Paras 1 to 8 have been verified as being true to his 'knowledge' and paras 9 and 10 are stated to be based on the advice of the counsel.
2.
This petition had come up for hearing before us on May 1, 1996.
Mr. Ranjan Lakhanpal, counsel for the petitioner had stated before us that Mr. RK Batra had personal information that the land was exchanged under the orders of the Vice Chancellor-respondent No. 3 in the year 1995.
He had further stated that he would disclose the 'reliable source' which had conveyed to the petitioner that the Vice Chancellor had received money in lieu of the exchange of land "in crores".
Learned counsel had also undertaken to furnish "details regarding the amount paid and also the person by whom it was paid..." Accordingly, we had adjourned the case to May 6, 1996, to enable the petitioner to file an affidavit.
On May 6, 1996,a request for adjournment was made.
The case was, accordingly, adjournment to May 17, 1996.
On this date, the counsel filed an affidavit jointly signed by Mr. RK Batra, President and Mr. IS Mangat, General Secretary of the Petitioner-Association.
In this affidavit, it has been inter alia stated by the deponents that the Vice Chancellor had admitted "in his clarification to the Board of Management of PAU" that the land had been exchanged in the year 1994-95.
A copy of the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Management has been produced as Annexure P.7 with the affidavit.
It has been further stated that even though the Vice Chancellor had stated that only two acres of land had been exchanged, yet in fact, more than four acres of land had been handed over to the Punjab Wakf Board.
This land has been leased out by the Board to "Virender Agro Industries for Rs. 16 crores".
The deponents go on to state that "it is in (sic) the talk of the town that money has played a big role for this deal and the present Vice Chancellor has received kick-backs".
According to the deponents, "providing any definite source who has seen the transaction of money would not be possible".
3.
The solitary submission raised by Mr. Lakhanpal is that the petitioner has filed the present petition in public interest and that the allegations against the Vice Chancellor need to be probed through an independent agency like the CBI  4.
In the normal course, keeping in view the seriousness of the allegations regarding the exchange of land and the publication of the book, we would have been inclined to ask the Vice Chancellor to give the factual position.
However, in the circumstances of this case, we have considered it unnecessary to do so in view of the fact that at least two documents out of the seven which have been placed on record contain his version in sufficient detail on both these matters.
The third issue regarding the out of turn allotment of a house to a member of the Faculty does not appear to be so serious.
The first of the above-mentioned two documents is a copy of the magazine "University Today; 1 January 1996".
It is on record as Annexure P.3.
The second document is the proceedings of the meeting of the Board of Management of the University held on January 18, 1996.
This has been produced as Annexure P.7 with the affidavit dated May 16, 1996 filed jointly by M/s RK Batra and IS Mangat.
5.
A perusal of the copy of the magazine as produced by the petitioner shows that Dr. RK Batra and Dr. RS Brar, the President and Secretary respectively had released a Press Note on December 11, 1995 alleging that respondent No. 3 "had exchanged a piece of prime land of the University measuring 16 kanals and 18 marlas (over 10,200 sq.
yds) lying on the periphery of Kitchlu Nagar locality in Ludhiana with a none-too-good and unproductive piece of land belonging to the Punjab Wakf Board, Ambala Cant."
Various other allegations regarding the value of the land and the fact that a business firm was planning to set up a residential colony there were also made.
It was also suggested that the land which lay on the boundary of Kitchlu Nagar "could be easily converted into a residential colony".
All the allegations made by the office-bearers of the Petitioner-Association were controverted by the Vice Chancellor through a letter.
It was stated that the charges were "completely baseless".
Dr. Khehra had pointed out that he had taken over as Vice Chancellor on January 1, 1994.
The proposal for exchange of land was initiated six years ago in 8ctober 1969 (it should be October 1989 - the error seems to be typographical).
After its examination, it was agreed that the University shall exchange its two acres of land with the three acres belonging to the Wakf Board.
The proposal was put up for the approval of the Board of Management but since the then Vice Chancellor was to relinquish office on January 1, 1990, it was left for his successor to process it further.
The then Vice Chancellor had placed the matter before the Board of Management in the meeting held on July 24, 1990 when the following decision was taken:-  "The Board of Management considered the proposal regarding exchange of university land with that of Wakf Board under the possession of the University and approved the exchange of 3 acres of Wakf Board land falling in Block 'C' with 2 acres of University land falling in Block 'D' and also approved to vacate the area falling in Block 'B' (measuring 2 acres) as mentioned in the plan attached with the agenda.
The Board desired that it must be ensured by framing due clauses in the agreement that the Wakf Board will construct the 6 ft. high wall all around the area and the public coming to the shrine will have no access to it through the University."
The Vice Chancellor had pointed out that he had no hand in the decision which had been taken almost three and a half years before his entering the office.
He further clarified that "the formalities about signing of the exchange deal had lingered on because the Wakf Board had to obtain the approval of the Central Government about the exchange".
It was pointed out that the Wakf Board wanted that instead of six feet high wall, only 3 feet high wall with barbed wire may be allowed to be constructed.
He had rejected this request of the Board and ordered in 1995 that possession of the land may be given "only after construction of wall pursuant to the decision of the Board of Management".
The wall was got constructed and then the exchange deed was signed by the Estate Officers of the University and the Walkf Board.
The Vice Chancellor maintained that the decision of the Board of Management was "meticulously followed" and the charge levelled by the Association was totally baseless.
6.
Now even the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Management held on January 18, 1996 may be briefly noticed.
The Vice Chancellor had pointed out that in October 1989, the then Vice Chancellor, Dr. Sukhdev Singh had agreed to the exchange of two acres of land belonging to the University with three acres of land owned by the Punjab Wakf Board.
The matter had been examined by the then Director of Research and the Estate Officer and the proposal was placed before the Board of Management for its approval.
In December 1989, a decision had been taken that Dr. Khem Singh Gill would take over as Vice Chancellor with effect from January 1, 1990.
Consequently, Dr. Sukhdev Singh had observed that papers be put up before Dr. Khem Singh Gill.
Dr. Gill had placed the matter before the Board of Management in the meeting held on July 24, 1990.
The decision taken by the Board in that meeting has already been noticed above.
It was further pointed out that the Wakf Board had to seek the approval of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Government of India.
After that, they came up with a plea that the Wakf Board had no means to construct a six feet high wall.
The matter remained under correspondence.
The Wakf Board finally sent a demand draft for a sum of Rs. 2 lacs to meet the cost of the construction of the wall to the Estate Officer of the University in December 1994.
The case was then put up to him for the first time in January 1995.
It was proposed that the request of the Wakf Board for constructing a three feet high wall with three feet barbed wire which was a deviation from the decision of the Board of Management be approved.
Dr. Khehra had not agreed to this deviation and had insisted that action should be taken strictly as per the decision of the Board of Management.
Then the Wakf Board informed the University that it had leased the land to a private party who would construct the wall and requested that the money paid by it be refunded.
The Estate Officer of the University was asked to adhere to the decision of the Board of Management for exchange and possession of the land and make refund only after construction of wall.
The Estate Officer was also asked to obtain the specifications for construction of wall from the Chief Engineer.
Accordingly, the wall was got constructed by the Estate Officer as per the specifications provided by the Chief Engineer and thereafter, the exchange deed was signed by him with the Estate Officer of the Punjab Walf Board and possession of the land was delivered.
The relevant papers dealing with the proposal and decision regarding exchange were shown in the meeting.
In this situation, "it was felt by the Board of Management that nothing irregular was done by the authorities".
7.
The issue of the release of the book regarding 'Plant Breeding' was also considered by the Board of Management in its meeting of January 18, 1996.
With regard to this matter, the Vice Chancellor had pointed out that "there could be a case of fraud if it had not been made known that it was a bound copy of chapters to be published or if it was not made known that it was a 'forthcoming volume' in bold letters in the leaflet distributed to the participants of the symposium or if it was claimed as a 'published book' in any of his bio-datas".
He had further pointed out that "it is customary that at the time of release of book by VVIPs/VIPs, the books are opened and presented to the authors etc.
The authors (editors) of the book were not oblivious of this fact and more so when some of the contributing authors of the chapters of the book are expected to participate in the Symposium, and in fact, a few were actually present, it was unthinkable to claim a bound copy of contributed chapters as a 'published book' in the presence of the VVIPs/VIPs and the scientists who had contributed the chapters".
He further pointed out that "it is not true that it was just a bunch of papers.
It was a bound copy of Xeroxed chapters.
The so-called jacket of the book as stated by PAUTA was in fact a pamphlet with a clear printing 'forthcoming volume'.
The purpose of distributing this pamphlet was to make the intention clearly known to the authors contributing the chapters as well as to other participants".
8.
Not only this.
The Vice Chancellor further explained the reasons for the book not being printed.
In the proceedings, it is recorded as under :-  "The presented 'volume' could not be got printed because Dr. Darshan Singh Brar (co-editor) went to International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) Manila, Philippines in 1987 itself and I got busy in the Directorate of Research with more administrative responsibilities.
Still, efforts were made for the printing of the book.
It was accepted for printing by M/s Tata Mc Graw-Hill Publishing Co, a reputed punishing concern in India in 1990.
Therefore, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was also signed in 1991 but the publishing concern wanted the printing material on a 'floppy'.
In the process of publication, delay had occurred and, therefore, updated references were required to be incorporated.
This became difficult because Dr. BS Dhillon (co-editor) went on foreign assignment/fellowship.
Dr. DS Brar was already on a foreign assignment with IRRI and I had to discharge the responsibilities of research administration in the Directorate of Research".
It has been further recorded that the various points raised by the members of the Board of Management were replied to their satisfaction by the Vice Chancellor.
9.
It is in the background of the above-noted factual position that the prayer made by the petitioner has to be examined.
10.
The issue is two-fold.
Firstly, Is the Vice Chancellor factually guilty of having committed any impropriety ?
Secondly, Is he even legally responsible ?
11.
The documents produced the petitioners themselves show that Respondent No. 3 had taken over as Vice Chancellor on January 1, 1994.
The decision to exchange the land had been taken by the Board of Management in its meeting held on July 24, 1990.
The Vice Chancellor had merely implemented that decision in letter and spirit without any modification.
On a petition having been submitted by the Association, the matter was again examined by the Board in the meeting held on January 18, 1996 and no exception to anything done by the third respondent was taken by the Board.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the Vice Chancellor had committed the least impropriety.
He had merely implemented the decision taken by an authority of the University.
12.
Mr. Lakhanpal submitted that the Vice Chancellor had received kick-backs.
We do not find even a semblance of evidence on record to support this submission.
Admittedly, the land had been exchanged with a statutory authority.
According to the petitioner's own case as pleaded in the writ petition, two acres of land belonging to the University had been given in exchange for three acres of land belonging to the Wakf Board.
After the land had been given to the Wakf Board, the University could not be concerned with what was done to it.
The Wakf Board may have given it on lease to any one for any price.
So far as the University is concerned, it had no connection left with the land.
Still further, nothing has been disclosed by the petitioner to show that any one shall have any occasion to pay any money to the Vice Chancellor.
In any event, even though in the writ petition, it was alleged that the petitioner had come to know from reliable sources that the Vice Chancellor had received kick-backs, no details whatsoever have been furnished in spite of the grant of an opportunity.
On the contrary, in the joint affidavit filed by the two deponents, it has been stated that providing any definite source would not be possible.
We can only say that it is easy to make allegations.
However, the Court cannot proceed against an authority unless some evidence is produced.
In the present case, no evidence whatsoever has been produced.
Accordingly, the bare allegations made by the Petitioner-Association cannot be accepted.
13.
Similar is the position with regard to the decision of the alleged 'academic fraud'.
The complete details as given by the Vice Chancellor in the meeting of the Board of Management have not been controverted.
It has not been shown that he had derived any personal advantage by the mere release of what was promised to be a 'forthcoming publication'.
It has not even been shown that he had included it in his bio-data.
In such a situation, even this allegation of 'academic fraud' is apparently ill-founded.
14.
As for the allotment of a house to Smt. Veena Goyal, we find that this solitary instance is not enough to hold that favouritism and nepotism is rampant in the University or that a probe into the matter is called for.
Even the rules relating to the allotment of houses have not been produced.
No person who may be senior to Smt. Goyal has filed a petition to challenge the allotment.
15.
In view of the above, we find that the material as placed by the petitioner on record is not such as may impel us to direct an enquiry into the allegations made by the petitioner.
16.
We may now examine the legal aspect of the matter.
The University was initially established by an act of the State Legislature viz. the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961.
After the re-organizatin of the State, the Parliament had enacted the Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act, 1970.
Under Section 13, it has been provided that the appropriate Government shall establish a Board for the Management of the University which shall consist of the Vice Chancellor, the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State of Punjab, the Secretaries to the Government in the Departments of Agriculture and Finance, the Director of Agriculture, the Director of Animal Husbandry, one nominee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, two nominees of the Government of Union Territory (now State) of Himachal Pradesh and eight persons from amongst the categories mentioned in Section 13(3)(h).
It has been further provided that the Chancellor viz. the Governor of the State shall be the Honorary Chairman of the Board.
The powers and duties of the Board have been prescribed in Section 14.
Clauses (b) and (c) authorise the Board "to hold and control the property and funds of the University and issue any general directive on behalf of the University;" and "to accept or transfer any property on behalf of the University."
Furthermore, the Board has also been authorised to "regulate and determine all matters concerning the University in accordance with this Act and the Statutes and to exercise such powers and to discharge such duties as may be conferred on or imposed upon the Board by this Act or the Statutes".
The Vice Chancellor is appointed by the Board and according to Section 16, he "shall be the Principal Executive and Academic Officer" of the University.
17.
On a perusal of these provisions, we find that the Board of Management is the Principal authority of the University.
It is established by the State Government.
Besides the Vice Chancellor, it has various senior officers of the State Government or persons nominated by it.
The power to control the property or to order its transfer vests only in the Board.
Even the Vice Chancellor is appointed by the Board.
Whenever any issue arises concerning the University, it has to be determined by the Board in accordance with the provisions of the Act and Statutes.
It is, thus, clear that the Vice Chancellor cannot on his own order the transfer of any property.
Still further, if any matter concerning the University which would include even the Vice Chancellor arises, the Board is competent to taken action in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Statutes.
18.
In the present case, the transfer of land could be and was actually ordered by the Board.
The power vested in the Board only.
The decision was actually taken by the Board in its meeting held on July 24, 1990.
Thereafter, the Vice Chancellor had merely carried out the implementation of the decision of the Board of Management.
When the Association raised the issue regarding the propriety of the action of the Vice Chancellor with regard to the exchange of land and the release of the book, the explanation furnished by him was apparently accepted by the Board.
In this situation, it is clear that legally, the Vice Chancellor could not have ordered the exchange of the land.
The power vested only in the Board.
Factually, the Vice Chancellor had merely carried out/implemented the decision of the Board.
By doing so, he committed no illegality or impropriety.
Still further, there being not even a suggestion that the members of the Board were actuated by any extraneous considerations in ordering the exchange of the land or in accepting the explanation of the Vice Chancellor with regard to the release of the book, we do not consider it necessary to order any further probe by the State Government or by the CBI.
19.
Accordingly, we hold that the allegations made by the petitioner with regard to the exchange of the land or the release of the book call for no probe either by the State Government or by the CBI.
As for the solitary instance of the allotment of a house to Smt. Veena Goyal, even if it is assumed that the allotment was made out of turn, we do not consider it necessary to order any probe.
20.
The University was established "for the proper development of agriculture in the country".
It was intended to "establish a close inter- relationship in search, teaching and extension education by bringing together the three most important functions of such an institution".
The aim was to train students and other personnel in modern agricultural technology and to provide for "a dynamic two-way flow of information between the University and the agricultural population".
The fact that the University has done well is known to all.
It is a matter of credit to the Faculty and the Scientists who have worked hard to bring about a green and white revolution in this country.
Let us not spoil everything by indulging in unnecessary criticism.
21.
Before parting with the case, we may observe that in the recent past, a new trend seems to be developing in our country.
Some of us seem to display their skills in destroying than in raising.
A new class of critics is coming up.
They seem like 'graminivorous animals'.
They try to 'gain subsistence by gorging upon buds and leaves of the young shrubs of the forest'.
However, while doing so, we forget the "progress to maturity" is retarded.
If we only know how to undervalue, we shall never be able to do anything that others may value.
We need skill to build.
Any fool can destroy.
We should not hunt only for blemishes.
22.
It is true as was said by Burke that "the temple of honour ought to be seated on an eminence".
Persons who occupy high positions must "pass through some sort of probation".
However, it is equally clear to us that we can go higher only be working hard.
Not by pulling others down.
To level up and not to level down is necessary for progress.
By hard work alone, we can raise this country and improve the Society.
Let our personal frustrations not lead us to the act of destroying others.
We say no more.
23.
As for this petition, we find no ground to interfere, Accordingly, we dismiss it in limine.