Indira Banerjee, J - In this writ application, the petitioner has inter alia challenged an order of the District Inspector of Schools, (SE), Murshidabad being Memo No. 1387/1(1)-G dated 18th March, 2004 rejecting the prayer of the petitioner, an Assistant Teacher of Sargachi Ramkrishna Mission High School, Sargachi, Murshidabad District, hereinafter referred to as the school for the higher post graduate scale of pay.
2.
The petitioner graduated with Honours in Geography in the 1996 securing the 1st Class.
In 2000 the petitioner obtained Master of Science degree in Geography from the University of Calcutta securing 1st Class marks.
The petitioner thereafter passed Bachelor of Education examination from Calcutta University in the year 2001 and was placed in the 1st Class.
3.
In view of retirement of one Sri Pradut Kr Saha, Assistant Teacher of the school with effect from 30th September, 2000 the respondent District Inspector of Schools by a Memo No. 02-G dated 15th September, 2000 granted permission to the school to fill up the post of Assistant Teacher of Geography from the general category.
The requisite qualifications for the post as fixed by the respondent District Inspector of Schools was BA, BSc (Hons.)
preferably trained.
4.
On the basis of permission as granted by the respondent District Inspector of Schools, the school issued advertisements in a leading Daily inviting applications for the post of Assistant Teacher of Geography.
A copy of the advertisement has been annexed to the petition.
5.
A Selection Committee was constituted and candidates were called for an interview.
Sixteen candidates appeared before the Selection Committee.
A panel of selected candidates was prepared in which the petitioner was placed in the 2nd position in order of merit.
The aforesaid panel was duly approved by the Managing Committee of the school and thereafter forwarded to the respondent District Inspector of Schools.
6.
By a Memo No.580 G dated 21st March, 2001 the respondent District Inspector of Schools approved the panel.
Thereafter a letter of appointment was issued to the first empanelled candidate.
The first empanelled candidate, however, declined the offer of appointment.
7.
Thereafter by a letter dated 7th April, 2001 the petitioner was appointed Assistant Teacher of the school in the Social Science group.
The petitioner joined the school on 11th April 2001.
The appointment of the petitioner was approved with effect from the date of his appointment by the Memo No. 1312-G dated 26th June, 2001 of the respondent District Inspector of Schools.
The petitioner was, however, granted the Honours Graduate scale to pay.
8.
By a letter dated 11th February, 2002 the petitioner appealed to the Secretary of the school for the post graduate scale of pay.
The Managing Committee of the school adopted a resolution on 9th March, 2002 to grant the petitioner post graduate scale of pay.
9.
The application of the petitioner for higher scale of pay was forwarded to the respondent District Inspector of Schools by the Secretary of the school by a letter dated 31st May, 2002.
10.
By the order of the District Inspector of Schools impugned, the petitioner has been refused the post graduate scale of pay.
The grounds cited in the order impugned are extracted hereinbelow for convenience :  "1. that as per Education Department's memo No670-SE(s) dated 04.09.98 he is not entitled to get the benefit of post graduate scale of pay.
2. that as per Education Department's Memo No. 155-SE(B) dated 130799, Para-3 post graduate scale cannot be accorded in favour of him.
3. that more over, as the qualification for the post was earmarked for Honours in Geography, his name was sponsored by the District Employment Exchange as Honours candidate.
If the qualification was earmarked for Master degree, his name could have been sponsored by National Employment Exchange, Kolkata."
By a Memorandum No25-SE(B)1M-102/98 dated Calcutta, the 12th February, 1999 the Government of West Bengal accepted the recommendation of the Fourth Pay Commission.
The said memorandum inter alia provides as follows :  "12(3) All teachers including physical education teachers and librarians of secondary schools who have improved/will improve their qualifications who were appointed with higher qualification in the subjects or groups relevant to their teaching/appointing shall get higher scale of pay appropriate to their qualifications, with effect from the 1st January, 1996 or the date of improving qualifications, whichever, is later."
From the memo dated 12th February, 1999 it is clear that an Assistant Teacher appointed with a post graduate degree in a relevant subject is entitled to the higher post graduate school of pay irrespective of the classes taught and irrespective of the minimum educational qualifications pertaining to the post as per the staff pattern of the school.
11.
A Circular, being No. 155-SE(B)/IOM-102/98 Pt.
I dated Calcutta, the 13th July, 1999, Government of West Bengal was issued amending Memorandum No. 25/SE/(B)/IM-102/98 dated 12th February, 1999 in the manner indicated hereinbelow :-  "(5) All teachers, including Physical Education teachers and Librarians of Secondary Schools who have improved/will improve their qualification or who are appointed with higher qualification in the subjects or group relevant to their teaching/appointment shall get higher scale of pay appropriate to their qualifications, with effect from the 1st January, 1996 or the date of improving qualification, whichever is later, provided that such higher qualified teachers in the relevant subjects or group is justified as per approved staff pattern of that school, if such teacher is appointed through West Bengal School Service Commission, his/her pay will be fixed in the scale of pay as per his/her qualification mentioned by the West Bengal School Service Commission."
The question in issue before this Court is whether a teacher who possesses the post gradate degree in a subject relevant to his/her teaching group can be denied the post graduate scale of pay on the basis of the amendment of the circular dated 12th February, 1999 as effected by the circular dated 13th July, 1999.
12.
When a statutory authority like a School Service Commission constituted under the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997 selects a candidate after perusing the certificates and documents provided by him and/or her and records the educational qualifications of the candidate in its recommendation there is a prima facie presumption that the educational qualifications have correctly been recorded.
13.
The School Service Commission being a statutory authority is bound to correctly record the educational qualifications of candidates, even though no credit may be given to candidates for higher educational qualifications than those required as per the requisition placed by the concerned school.
14.
A candidate who possesses a higher qualification in a relevant subject cannot be denied salary pertaining to the higher qualification must because the School Service Commission has not mentioned the higher educational qualification in its recommendation.
15.
In the instant case, of course, the school which enjoys special constitutions exempted from the provisions of the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997 the petitioner was not appointed on the recommendation of the School Service Commission.
16.
In the circumstances, there could be no question of rejecting the prayer of the petitioner for higher scale pertaining to his qualification on the ground of the post graduate qualification not having been recorded by the School Service Commission in its recommendation.
17.
The main issue in this writ application is whether the petitioner could have been denied the post graduate scale of pay on the ground that a post graduate degree was not necessary for appointment to the teaching post as per approved staff pattern of the school.
18.
In the impugned order reference has been made to Memo No. 670-SE(S) dated Calcutta the 4th September, 1998 which lays down the staff pattern of different schools.
The said memo has nothing to do with the scale of pay of teachers.
The staff pattern as laid down by the circular dated 4th September, 1998 is extracted hereinbelow :  "In continuation of this memo No. 772-Edn.
(S) dt. 8.7.74 and 730-Edn.
(S) dt. 20.7.90 and 670-Edn (S) dt. 4.9.90, the undersigned is directed to say that in non-government Jr. High , Jr. High Madrasah, High School and High Madrasha/Higher Secondary (Normal Section) the distribution of staff in different groups shall be followed henceforth in the following manner  1.
For Jr High School/Jr High Madrasah.
(a) Language Group-- Two posts (one pass degree and one Hons/Master degree).
(b) Science & Mathematics- Two posts (one pass degree & one Hons/Master degree).
(c) Social Science Group- Two posts (one pass degree & one Hons/Master degree).
(d) Headmaster/Headmistress will be in any of the groups.
He/She must be having qualifications mentioned in the procedure 14 SE(s) dt. 8.1.98.
2.
For High School/ High Madrasah/Higher Secondary (Normal Section) :- (a) Language group- Four posts (Two pass degree & two Hons/Master Degree).
(b) Science & Mathematics- Three posts (one pass degree & two Hons/Master degree).
(c) Social Science- Two posts (one pass degree & one Hons/Master degree)  (d) Work Education, Physical and Social Service- Two posts- They must be having qualifications as mentioned in the Procedure 14-SE(S) dt. 8.1.98.
(e) Headmaster/Headmistress : One.
He/She must be having qualifications mentioned in the procedure 14 SE(s) dt.8.1.98.
3.
For School having additional teaching posts in any group, distribution of teaching posts for Hons./Master degree holders shall be limited to 50% of that group.
In case of odd number of posts in any group the number of posts arrived may be rounded upto next figure for Hons/Master degree holders & and the shortfall for Pass degree holder in that group is to be adjusted subsequently.
4.
This cancels that Deptt.
G.O.No.642-SE(S) File No. IS- 14/98 dt. Calcutta 20h Aug 1998.
All concerned must be informed accordingly.
N.B.
Classes for V to X in H.S.
Schools are in normal."
From the approved staff pattern of schools, it is apparent that the minimum requisite qualification for a teaching post has nothing to do with the nature of the teaching duties required to be performed by the teacher.
For example, for a junior high school there are two approved sanctioned posts in the Language group, out of which the minimum requisite qualification for one post is Pass Course degree and for the other post Hons./Masters degree.
Similarly, for the Social Science group also there are two approved posts in a junior high school out of which the minimum requisite qualification for one post is a Pass Course degree and for the other post Hons./Masters degree.
19.
Similarly, in high schools and higher secondary schools also there are four teaching posts in the Language group of which the requisite educational qualification two posts is a Pass Course degree and for the two other posts Hons./Masters degree.
Similarly, out of three posts in the Science and Mathematics group the requisite qualification for one post is a Pass Course degree and for the other two posts Hons./Masters degree.
In the Social Science group there are two posts out of which the requisite qualification for one post is a Pass Course degree and for the other Hons/Master degree.
In the case of Work Education teachers, the minimum requisite qualification is Bachelor of Physical Education.
20.
When additional posts are sanctioned 50% of the posts are to be limited Hons.
Graduate/Post.
Graduates and the rest kept open for Pass Graduates irrespective of the subjects and irrespective of the classes required to be taught.
21.
The State has for reasons best known to itself chosen to fix different educational qualifications for the same teaching posts in the same school.
There could thus be two teaching posts in Geography for teaching the same classes in the same or different non-Government aided schools but the minimum requisite qualification for the teaching posts different, the qualifications being fixed percentage-wise and not on the basis of the teaching duties required to be performed by the concerned teachers.
22.
As per the Revision of Pay and Allowances framed from time to time including Revision of Pay and Allowance, 1998 the scales of pay of teachers are fixed on the basis of their educational qualifications.
23.
The fixing of different criteria for different teaching posts has no nexus whatsoever with the teaching job required to be performed.
A teacher who possesses the higher qualification can not, therefore be denied higher scale of pay pertaining to his/her qualification on the sole ground that as per the teacher pattern the minimum requisite qualification for the post is lower.
24.
Two teachers performing the same teaching job and possessing the same educational qualifications cannot be discriminated in the matter of payment of salary and allowances.
25.
Payment of different scales to different teachers with the same qualifications performing the same duties offends the principle of equal work for equal pay and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
26.
In any event, the Government Order No. 155-SE(B) dated 13th July, 1999 on the basis whereof the claim of the petitioner for higher post graduate scale of pay has been rejected has subsequently been amended by Government Order No.735-SE(S)/5P- 132/2002 dated 3rd June, 2002, the relevant portion whereof is extracted hereinbelow for convenience :-  "It is a fact that Hons.
Graduate candidates have to compete with the Post Graduate Candidates on the same set of syllabus and same set of question papers in the test held by the W.B.S.S.C for selection of teachers.
Moreover, the W.B.S.S.C.
prepares a single panel in a subject from amongst the selected Hons.
and Master degree holders.
Upon due consideration of the fact the Govt. in the School Education Department has decided that Hons.
Graduate teachers of Non-Govt. aided Secondary Schools including Madrasahs has appointed through W.B.S.S.C.
who have obtained post graduate degree in the subject relevant to their appointments prior to their date of joining in the school/Madrasahs or who have completed their course of studies at Post Graduate level in the subject relevant to their appointment or have appeared at the examination but result of that examination was not published till the of their joining may be allowed higher scale of pay with effect from the date of joining or the date of following the last date of examination (both theoretical and practical) whichever is later."
27.
In passing the impugned order which is dated 18th March, 2004, the respondent District Inspector of Schools has overlooked the amendment of the Government Order dated 13th July, 1999 by the Government Order dated 3rd June, 2002 referred to above.
If Honours Graduates appointed on the recommendation of the School Service Commission can be given the post graduate scale of pay if they possess the Post Graduate degree.
I see no reason why the same benefit should not be extended to Honours Graduate teachers of schools which are not required to recruit teachers on the recommendation of the School Service Commission who possess the post graduate degree.
The impugned order cannot, therefore, be sustained.
The petitioner is an Hons.
Graduate would be entitled to the post graduate scale of pay in view of the Government Order dated 3rd June, 2002.
28.
The impugned order is discriminatory, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and the same is set aside and quashed.
If the petitioner has post graduate degree in Geography as contended by the petitioner the petitioner shall be entitled to the higher post graduate scale of pay with effect from the date of his appointment.
29.
The respondent District Inspector of Schools shall in that case forthwith refix the salary of the petitioner in the post graduate scale of pay.
All arrears due and payable to the petitioner on account of such refixation shall be cleared within 3 months from the date of communication of this judgment and order.
30.
The writ application is disposed of without any order as to costs.
Order accordingly.