V K Bali, J - Arvinder Singh Atwal through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a direction to be issued to respondent-Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar to grant sanction to his admission in BDS First Year Course of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar as also to permit him to take examinations which are to be held on 1751993.
The facts on which the relief, as indicated above flows need to be enumerated first.
2.
Petitioner did his High School Graduation from Maple Heights City School District, Maple Heights, Ohio, USA It is stated that this education is equivalent to what is called in Indian terminology 10+2 and in fact it is little higher than the said qualification of the Indian standard.
He applied for admission in the First Year Course of BDS for the year 1992-93 in Shri Ram Das Institute of Dental Sciences & Research, Amritsar, under the category of foreign students.
It is stated that 15 seats are reserved for the category of foreign students in the First Year Course as is clear from the Prospectus for the year 1992-93.
The petitioner completed his course of the lectures of the First Year and it is stated that he is eligible to take his examination for the First Year to be started from May 17, 1993.
However, on 2941993, when he had studied for almost a year, a communication was received by him from the University informing him that he is not eligible to take his examination and that his candidature has not been approved by the University.
Pained at the action taken during the currency of his studies after about a year or so, he was constrained to make an application to the University informing it that he was eligible for the course.
The details of the subjects studied by him were enumerated in the representation aforesaid.
It was on 2941993 for the first time that the petitioner was intimated the reason for cancellation of his candidature for admission.
It was stated by the University that he had not taken up Chemistry as a subject in the 11th and 12th classes while doing High School Graduation.
It is this action of the University which has been challenged in this writ petition.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that the system of education in the High School of Maple Heights, Ohio, USA is that it is a four years course before the necessary certificate of High School Graduation is issued.
The students have to study in four years and standard in each subject is higher than prescribed for 10+2 in India.
It is, however, option of the student to complete the study of his specific subject in any class in four years.
That being the choice, the petitioner had completed his complete course of Chemistry which is meant for the High School Graduation in the USA and is considered equivalent to 10+2 in India.
The petitioner completed his syllabus in Chemistry in 10th Class of his High School with 70% marks and according to the system prevalent there, the petitioner was not to repeat Chemistry in his 11th and 12th classes as whatever study he had to make in 11th and 12th classes had already been made while doing 9th and 10th classes.
It is stated that because of this mistake made by the University, his admission was not approved and his candidature was cancelled.
However, before the petitioner filed the present writ petition, he had shown the letter issued by the Principal of Maple Heights High School, Ohio, USA wherein it is clearly stated that he had been graduate in June, 1992 in the subjects like Chemistry and various other subjects.
A copy of the letter aforesaid has been placed on the records of the petition is Annexure P4.
4.
With a view to strengthen the plea that various subjects if cleared once are not to be repeated, the petitioner has placed on record Annexure P5 which is a complete "Chart"showing the petitioner having qualified various subjects from time to time while studying in Maple Heights City School.
5.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 i.e. Guru Nanak Dev University, it has been pleaded that the University does not admit the petitioner's claim about his education in the American School mentioned therein nor his claim that his educational qualification is equivalent to 10+2.
The Maple Heights City School, District Maple Heights, Ohio, USA, it is pleaded, does not figure among the 68 Universities/bodies of USA which are recognised by the University in respect of their examinations being equivalent to the corresponding examination of the University or the Panjab University.
It is stated that it is doubtful whether the said Maple Heights School, USA was an Institution accredited by the US Accrediting Body.
The petitioner is stated to be not eligible to take the examination for the first year as he does not possess the basic qualifications for admission to BDS First Year as laid down in the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar, 1991, Volume II, Part II.
To be specific, it is stated that the petitioner has not passed examination in Chemistry in 11th and 12th classes at Mapla Heights City School.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the cause of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
Petitioner was admitted in the year 1992-93 from amongst the 15 seats that were reserved for the category of foreign students in the first year course.
The provision incorporated in the prospectus for the year 1992-93 reads thus :-  "e) Foreign Students Category :-  For candidates of Indian origin and settled abroad having qualification of +2 or equivalent examination of any foreign University/Board.
Note : If, however, any seat/seats remain or fall vacant under this category and candidates having qualified from a Foreign University/Board are not available, then such of the seats will be filled (on merit) from amongst the candidates having qualified 10+2 or any equivalent examination of any Indian University/Board and are willing to fulfil all other conditions applicable to this category."
It is for the first time on May 12, 1993 when the annual examinations were approaching that petitioner was informed vide letter, Annexure P-1, by the College that the University had not approved his admission in BDS 1st year course in the institute.
This order conveyed to the petitioner on the basis of some orders passed by the University, does not disclose any reason, whatsoever, as to why the University did not approve his admission in the BDS 1st year course.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent-University has brought to my notice the order Annexure R-1, dated May 6, 1993 which was also passed by the Principal of Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Dental Science & Research, Amritsar conveying the petitioner that Guru Nanak Dev University had not approved his admission to the BDS course in that institution.
This order as well contains no reasons disapproving the admission of petitioner.
Constrained, thus, father of the petitioner addressed a letter, Annexure P-2, on April 30, 1993 to the Registrar of the Guru Nanak Dev University-respondent wherein detailed history of his son having cleared English, Mathematics, Biology, Advanced Biology and Physics subjects were mentioned and a prayer was made that his son be admitted in the BDS course in respondent No. 2 Institute.
It is only in consequence of this letter that the Principal of the College in communication dated May 11, 1993 mentioned that petitioner was not eligible for admission to BDS 1st year as he had not studied Chemistry in 11th and 12th grade.
The ground for holding the petitioner ineligible, thus, having been disclosed for the first time, petitioner came here in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India so as to challenge the said order by pleading falacity in the grounds contained therein.
The case made out by him and as has also been mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment is that the system of education of Maple Heights City School, Ohio, USA is that it is a four years course before the necessary certificate of High School Graduation is issued and from the various subjects, the students have to study in those four years, the standard in each subject is higher than prescribed for 10+2 in India.
However, it is an option of the student to complete the study of his specific subject in any class in the four years that he likes to choose.
Petitioner had completed his complete course of Chemistry which is meant for the High School Graduation in the USA and is considered equivalent to 10+2 in India.
The subjects, it is pleaded in para 7 of the petition, are not to be repeated again in other years.
Petitioner completed his syllabus in Chemistry in 10th class of his High School with 70% marks.
The specific plea raised in para 7 has been generally denied in the written statement by +2 University by saying that the contents of para 7 of the writ petition were misconceived and as such they were denied.
It is mentioned in para 7 of the written statement that correct and relevant position has already been explained above and it is rather strange to note that nothing at all has been explained in the earlier part of the written statement.
In view of the fact that petitioner had done his 10th class in Chemistry, it could not be said that he had not offered Chemistry as one of his subjects while doing his High School Graduation from the said school.
The University also cannot take the plea that petitioner had done Chemistry only in 10th class which can not be equivalent to 10+2 in India as the specific case of petitioner is that the standard of Chemistry whether one clears in 10th class, in 11th or 12th classes would remain the same and it is an option of student to complete the study of his specific subject in any class as per the system of education in America as referred to above, has not been denied and, therefore, in view of Order 8 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, it shall be deemed that there is no denial to the same.
7.
The only other argument raised by learned counsel for respondent-University is that the school from which petitioner passed his graduation is not affiliated to any of the Universities in America that might have been recognised by the Panjab or Punjabi University.
Learned counsel has shown me "Equivalency Book" and the list of Universities and other colleges affiliated and these recognised in India and in particular by Panjab or Punjabi University.
I am afraid, I cannot go into the merits of this contention of the learned counsel for the respondent-University as the impugned order does not contain this ground for holding the petitioner ineligible for admission to the BDS 1st year course.
Petitioner, being aggrieved of letter Annexure P-1, challenged the same on the grounds that have been incorporated therein and cannot now be confronted with a ground which was not before the University when the impugned order was passed.
Learned counsel for the petitioner seems to be on solid ground to contend that if this had been the case of the University, petitioner would have explained the position that even the school from where he did his High School Graduation was recognised by the University approved by the Panjab or Punjabi University.
8.
That apart, it shall be seen from the narration of the facts that petitioner did not conceal anything while taking admission in BDS 1st year course.
It is true that he was to obtain an eligibility certificate and for not producing it, he was given only provisional admission but as stated by learned counsel for the respondent-University it was the duty of the College to inform the University and intimate to it the academic record or the certificate that petitioner had obtained from USA so that eligibility certificate could be issued to him but the college remained silent through out this period.
Petitioner was allowed to continue his studies for a period of one year without any objection having been raised by anyone and it would be too late for the University to make any objection to the candidature of petitioner regarding eligibility at the eve of annual examinations.
Had the petitioner been denied admission at the initial stage, he might have tried to secure admission else where but after having done his studies for a period of one year equity demands that his useful academic year should be saved.
The saving of career of the petitioner becomes all the more important when it is proved that he did not act stealthily or fed the College or University with any information which might have been later proved to be false.
9.
For the reasons stated above, I allow this petition.
The orders, Annexures P-1 and R-2 are quashed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Before I part with the judgment, I would like to observe that Civil Misc. application praying to declare the result of petitioner was filed and this Court while considering that miscellaneous application, had desired that matter be finally disposed of.
Since the matter has been decided in favour of petitioner, it is ordered that the result of the examination that had been taken by the petitioner in consequence of the order passed by the Motion Bench, be declared forthwith.
Dasti as well.