In the order passed by Director Public Instructions (S), Punjab, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `DPI(S)'), it has inter alia been observed as follows:-  "I have heard both the counsels and have also gone through the record and I am of the considered opinion that the Managing Committee has miserably failed to make a case out of the present application.
The only allegation made against Smt. Kulwinder is that of irregular withdrawal of House Allowance and the same is squarely covered under Instruction issued by my office as a policy dated 18.8.1988.
I am constrained to bring this on record that the committee while dealing with the case of Smt. Kulwinder has stopped (stepped ?)
out of this jurisdiction.
The callous manner with which the committee has conducted the enquiry proceedings does reflect that there are some facts/circumstances that do not meet the eyes.
Smt. Kulwinder has been terminated for an offence for which no punishment has been prescribed by the Government.
I am fully agreeable to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for Smt. Kulwinder as discussed above in paras 2, 3 and 4.
Due to the reasons recorded above, I order that the service of Smt. Kulwinder be reinstated with full back wages, and the payment of back wages be released to her within one month of the date of receipt of this order.
No grant-in-aid will be released by the Govt. for this purpose.
However, it is clarified that the amount drawn as HRA if in excess be recovered from her if not yet recovered of this order and compliance be reported to this Court.
2.
The aforesaid order has been upheld by the Tribunal.
3.
Mr. Saggar, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the DPI(S) has erred in law while giving direction to the State of Punjab that no grant-in- aid will be released for making the payment of the backwages to respondent No. 4.
4.
We have considered the submissions made by the counsel for the petitioner.
We are of the opinion that the backwages of respondent No. 4 have undoubtedly to be paid by the Petitioner-Society.
This proposition of law is no longer res integra in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Shri Anadi Mukta Sadgur Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust and others v. VR Rudani and others, AIR 1989 SC 1607, wherein, it has been categorically held that for payment of wages to the teachers, it is irrelevant to mention as to whether the post is covered by grant-in-aid or not.
The paramount responsibility for payment of wages is that of the Management.
We may here notice the observations of the Supreme Court :-  "Counsel for the appellants mercifully concedes the just right of the teachers to get salary for the period of two and a half months from April 1, 1974 to June 14, 1974.
He has also no objection to pay provident fund dues.
He, however, says that the trust is entitled to get reimbursement from the Government and that question must be determined in these appeals.
As regards the arrears of salary payable under the Chancellor's Award, the counsel contends that it is the liability of the Government and not of the management of the college.
As regards the closure compensation payable under the Ordinance, he repeats the contention taken before the High Court.
He also maintains that the trust is a private body and is not subject to the writ jurisdiction under Article 226.
Having heard the counsel for both parties, we are left with an impression that the appellants are really trying to side-track the issue and needlessly delaying the legitimate payments due to the respondents.
The question whether the State is liable to recompense the appellants in respect of the amount payable to the respondents was not considered by the High Court and indeed could not have been examined since the State was not a party to the proceedings.
However, by the persuasive powers of the counsel in this Court, the State has been impleaded as a party in these appeals.
Perhaps, this Court wanted to find out the reaction of the State on the appellants' assertion for reimbursement.
We heard counsel for the State.
He disputes the appellants' claim.
In fact, he challenges the claim on a number of grounds.
He says that the State is under no obligation to pay the appellants as against the sum due to the respondents.
We do not think that we need rule today on this controversy.
It is indeed wholly outside the scope of these appeals.
We are only concerned with the liability of the management of the college towards the employees.
Under the relationship of master and servant, the management is primarily responsible to pay salary and other benefits to the employees.
The management cannot say that unless and until the State compensates, it will not make full payment to the staff.
We cannot accept such a contention."
5.
In view of the above, the impugned orders dated 1172001 and 20.8.2002, Annexures P-5 and P-6, cannot be said to either arbitrary or illegal.
We, therefore, direct the Petition-Society to release the backwages of respondent No. 4 within a period of two months.
We, however, observe that whether or not the grant is to be released to the petitioner is decision which is within the jurisdiction of the State Government and ought to be taken by the State Government.
The DPI(S) or the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction to direct the State Government not to release the grant-in-aid to the Petitioner- Society.
Therefore, that part of the orders passed by the DPI(S) as well as the Tribunal cannot be sustained.
We, therefore, modify the order passed by the DPI(S) insofar as direction has been issued to the State of Punjab not to release grant-in-aid to the Petitioner-Society.
The matter is remanded back to the State Government to take a final decision as to whether the grant-in-aid is to be released to the Petitioner-Society.
The State Government is directed to take a decision with regard to the release of grant-in-aid to the Petitioner-Society within a period of three months from today.
We further direct the Petition-Society to release the amount due to respondent No. 4 within a period of one month from today.
Petition disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.