MM Kumar, J - The prayer made in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is for quashing memo dated 7112005 (Annexure P-2) issued by the respondent requisitioning the names of suitable persons on deputation for filling up 15 posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) from various other government departments.
The claim is based on the fact that the petitioners who have been working as Junior Engineers are eligible for appointment on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) by direct recruitment and by promotion.
It has further been prayed that a direction be issued to the respondents to fill up the vacant posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) from amongst the Junior Engineers of the respondent in HUDA preference to bringing the Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) on deputation from other government departments.
2.
Brief facts of the case necessary for disposal of the controversy raised in the instant petition are that the petitioners have been working as Junior Engineers with respondent-HUDA.
They are degree holders having the qualifications either of Bachelor of Engineering or equivalent qualification of AMIE.
They have acquired the afore-mentioned degree during their service.
The service conditions of the employees working in HUDA are governed by the Haryana Urban Development Service Regulations Act, 1989 (for brevity `the Regulations') and promotion is provided from the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil).
It is admitted case of the parties that according to Regulation 8 read with Appendix B of the Regulations, the quota for direct recruitment is 57% and by promotion 43%.
The promotees quota is full as has been filled up to the extent of 43%.
However, 31 posts falling to the share of direct recruits are vacant.
The case of the petitioners is that they are working as Junior Engineers and are fully eligible and qualified to be considered for being temporarily deployed against those posts which have been advertised on 30112005 on the ground that temporary charge of these posts was required to be given to the eligible persons, like the petitioners, working with HUDA.
The grievance made by the petitioners is that by issuance of impugned memo dated 7112005 (Annexure P- 2) such posts are sought to be filled up by bringing the degree holder Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) from other government departments.
A reference has been made to the old practice of giving Current Duty Charge of such like posts to the employees of HUDA by placing reliance on order dated 25.6.1999 (Annexure P-3).
The petitioners have also made representation in that regard.
3.
The stand of the respondents in the written statement is that out of 83 sanctioned posts of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil), 47 posts are allocated to the share of direct recruits @ 57% quota and 36 posts on the basis of 43% quota have been allocated to the promotees.
Out of 47 posts belonging to direct quota 13 posts have been filled up by direct recruitment and against 11 posts Current Duty Charge has been given to the Junior Engineers (Diploma/Degree holders) in order of their seniority.
It has further been indicated that on account of administrative exigencies the direct quota posts could not be filled up which have resulted into assigning of Current Duty Charge to 11 Junior Engineers on the basis of their seniority.
Accordingly, an advertisement for filling up of those 11 posts of the direct quota has been issued on 30112005 (Annexure P-1) and the respondent-HUDA is also in the process of releasing the advertisement in respect of 22 more posts.
It has also been asserted that in the exigency of service, the respondents have issued the impugned memo as the services of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) are required to execute various development works in HUDA which have been hampered due to shortage of Sub Divisional Engineers.
It is in the wake of the afore-mentioned exigency of service that respondent-HUDA has invited the names for filling up 15 posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) by taking such Engineers (Degree holders) on deputation from government departments on usual terms and conditions.
It has been clarified that such incumbents who are taken on deputation as temporary stop-gap arrangement are to be repatriated to their parent department as and when the direct recruitment is complete.
It has also been given out in para 1 of the written statement (the preliminary objection) that such like persons are not to be permanently absorbed against the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) in the respondent-HUDA.
In the concluding portion of the preliminary objection, the respondent-HUDA has made the following assertion :  "The respondent (HUDA) has a large number of development projects and implementation of which is being hampered because of non-availability of adequate manpower.
Already there is litigation pending in the High Court against HUDA in CWP No. 6792 of 2002-Society for Urban Regeneration of Gurgaon (surag India) v. State of Haryana and others for non-utilization of external development charges called for the purposes of infrastructural development and HUDA has given an undertaking in the High Court that amount collected on amount of external development charges will be expended for providing the infrastructure by speedily development of works in the reason (region ?).
Hence, it was decided by the respondent authority to fill up the direct recruitment posts of various categories on deputation from the government Deptt./Board and Corporations by taking suitable officers/officials as a stop-gap arrangement till the direct recruitments are made.
Accordingly, HUDA desires to fill up some vacant posts of SDE (Civil) by taking on deputation from other departments."
4.
It is also the stand of the respondents that the petitioners who are degree holders could always apply for direct appointment against advertised 11 posts.
The Current Duty Charge given to some Junior Engineers (degree holders) of the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) on 25.6.1999 vide Annexure P-3 has been admitted.
The practice of giving Current Duty Charge has been stopped on account of issuance of letter No. 62/30/2005/6GSI dated 962005 by the State Government.
It has also been asserted that the case of the petitioners in any case could not be considered for giving them current duty charge on the ground that there are other degree holder Junior Engineers senior to the petitioners in their cadre as per seniority list.
It has been clarified that even seniors of the petitioners who are working as Junior Engineers (degree holders) have also not been considered for assigning current duty charge of the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) on account of issuance of letter dated 962005.
In respect of reservation for scheduled caste category it has been submitted that no reservation in promotion in Class I and II gazetted posts in the State of Haryana is available and that the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) is a Class II gazetted post.
The promotion on the afore-mentioned post is made in accordance with the Regulations.
5.
Mr. DS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the petitioners have a better right in preference to the deputationists to be given the current duty charge of the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) as they are available within the department.
According to the learned counsel the petitioners fulfill all the qualifications required for appointment as Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) even by direct recruitment.
In support of his submission, he has placed reliance on a copy of the order dated 2562003 (Annexure P-3) which shows the past practice of giving current duty charge of the post of Sub Divisional Engineer to the degree holder Junior Engineers and submitted that on account of that past practice the petitioners deserved to be given current duty charge in preference to persons who are to be brought on deputation.
In support of his submission, he has placed reliance on a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Housing Board Engineers Association v. State of Gujarat, 1994(1) SCT 528 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 24 and argued that in the face of a suitable eligible candidate like the petitioners being available with the respondent-HUDA for current duty charge for the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) bringing of any other person from the other governmental departments is unfair and violates the provisions of Articles 14 and 16(i) of the Constitution.
Learned counsel has laid particular emphasis on paras 7 to 9 of the judgment.
He has then placed reliance on another judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of SS Sodhi v. State of Punjab, 1990(2) SCC 694 and argued that the respondent-HUDA could resort to appointment by deputation only if the eligible candidates are not available especially when the regulations do not leave any discretion to make appointment from any of the source.
6.
Mr. HS Hooda, learned Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondent has submitted that on the language of Regulation 8 read with Appendix B it cannot be concluded that the petitioners could claim as a matter of right appointment against a direct quota post merely because they are fully eligible to be considered.
Learned Advocate General has referred to the averments made in para 6 of the written statement to submit that there are number of other persons far senior to the petitioners having degree qualifications and they would be entitled for current duty charge as Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) in preference to the petitioners if such a course is open to the respondent-HUDA.
Placing reliance on the communication dated 962005 received from the government, learned Advocate General has submitted that the practice of giving current duty charge to the junior engineers (degree holders) in any case has been discontinued.
He has also submitted that application from those persons working in various government departments have been invited who are working on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) and are degree holders which is the mode provided by the Rules.
He has emphasised that in any case those who are brought on deputation are not likely to be absorbed in the respondent-HUDA and are to be repatriated to their parent department after the vacancies have been filled up by way of direct recruitment.
He has given out that 11 posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (degree holders) are likely to be filled up within a period of three months by way of direct recruitment for which advertisement has already been issued.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is no merit in the petition.
Regulation 8 along with Appendix B reads as under :  " "8.
Subject to the condition, as may be laid down under the Act and the regulations, recruitment to the various posts under the Authority shall be made by any one or more of the following methods :- (iv) By direct recruitment.
(v) By transfer/deputation of a government official already in the service of the Central Government or any State Government or any Board/Corporation constituted by the Central/State Government.
(vi) By promotion out of the existing employees.
These posts shall be filled up by direct recruitment and otherwise in the ratio, if any, as laid down in column 5 of Appendix "B" to these regulations."
Appendix "B" "For direct (i) Bachelor of Engineering/Bachelor of Science Engineering in Civil or equivalent from a recognised University.
(ii) Hindi upto Matric standard.
For Promotion (i) Junior Engineer with diploma in Civil Engineering or equivalent with 10 years experience as Junior Engineer.
(ii) 10 years experience as Assistant Draftsman/Head Draftsman Grade II/Head Draftsman Grade I.
(iii) Junior Engineer/Draftsman with degree in Civil Engineering or equivalent with two years experience as Junior Engineer/Draftsman.
Or (iv) Associate membership of Institute of Engineers (AMIE) degree in Civil Engineering with 5 years experience as Junior Engineer/Draftsman.
Remarks 57% posts will be filled up by direct recruitment and 43% by promotion.
The promotion quota of 43% has further bifurcated as under : (i) 25% from diploma holder.
(ii) 12% from degree holder.
(iii) 6% from draftsman cadre."
A perusal of the afore-mentioned Regulation read with Appendix B would make it explicit that by direct recruitment 57% posts are to be filled up and by promotion rest of the 43% posts are to be filled up.
The promotion quota of 43 per cent has been further bifurcated as 25 per cent from diploma holders; 12 per cent from degree holders and 6 per cent from draftsmen cadre.
It is undisputed that the quota of promotees is complete by filling up of 43% posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) whereas out of 47 posts which go to the share of direct recruit quota only 13 posts have been filled up.
In other words, 34 posts of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) are lying vacant for being filled up by way of direct recruitment quota.
There are 11 posts already advertised vide advertisement dated 30112005 (Annexure P- 1).
The regulation further reveals that appointment could also be made by transfer/deputation of a government official already in the service of Central or State Government or any board/corporation constituted by the Central/State Government.
After providing quota for all the posts, the Regulation permits induction of Sub Divisional Engineer by way of transfer/deputation.
On the principle of construction it has to be concluded that in the exigency of service temporary arrangement could be made by the respondent-HUDA in order to avoid any delay of development projects and their implementation which has been hampered because of non-availability of adequate man power.
The petitioners who are admittedly working as Junior Engineer (Civil) with degree qualification might be eligible for consideration either by promotion or by direct recruitment but they have not been working on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer and the requirement of respondent-HUDA is to requisition the services of such Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) who have the degree to their credit.
It is in these circumstances that the impugned communication dated 7112005 (Annexure P-2) inviting applications for filing up 15 posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) on deputation has to be considered.
The impugned communication indicates that various development works in respondent-HUDA have been hampered due to shortage of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) necessitating requisitioning the deputationists to fill up 15 posts of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) which are meant for direct recruits.
It has been clarified that the deputationists would be taken for a limited period and are to go back to their parent department when the direct recruits are made available in pursuance to the posts being filled up vide advertisement dated 30112005 and other advertisement which may be issued in the near future.
Therefore, there is no illegality in the mode adopted by the respondents especially when it is remembered that the quota of promotees to which the petitioners belong is complete and the petitioners are not even senior in the cadre of Junior Engineers (degree holder).
They cannot claim current duty charge against the post of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) as a matter of right because these posts admittedly belong to the direct quota for which advertisement has been issued.
The remaining posts are to be filled up by another advertisement which is likely to be issued.
8.
The argument of the learned counsel that his case is supported by the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Housing Board (supra) does not require any detailed consideration.
In that case their Lordships were considering Regulation 3 of the Gujarat Housing Board Services Classification of and Recruitment Regulation, 1981.
The regulation provided that the post of Superintending Engineer could be filled up either by promotion of employees working as Executive Engineer in Board's Higher Services on the basis of seniority-cum-merit or by calling Executive Engineer on deputation from the State Building and Communication Department or by direct selection from amongst the candidates called for the interview.
It further provided that an Executive Engineer from the State Building and Communication Department could be appointed on deputation on the post of Superintending Engineer only if a suitable eligible candidate is not eligible for appointment by promotion from amongst the Executive Engineers of the Housing Board.
The Regulation has been quoted in para 4 of the judgment.
The language of the aforesaid Regulation and the provision made thereunder are entirely different than the regulation 8 of the Regulations which are under consideration.
There is no provision in the Regulation framed by the respondent-HUDA stipulating that a person on deputation can only be brought if there is no person eligible available in the respondent-HUDA as was the situation in Gujarat Housing Board's case (supra).
The Regulation under consideration allocates quota of 57% to the direct recruits and 43% to the promotees and also provides the mode of recruitment by deputation or by transfer.
The only construction of such a Regulation could be that deputation and transfer has to be resorted to only when the exigency of service so requires.
Thirty four posts of direct recruits are lying vacant and 11 are sought to be filled up from the open market and 15 posts in the exigency of service are sought to be temporarily filled up by deputation in terms of condition indicated in the statement made by the learned Advocate General that they are to be repatriated to their parent department as and when direct recruits become available.
Therefore, the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court since dealt with entirely a different provision would have no application in the instant case.
9.
The position is not different in respect of the other judgment in the case of SS Sodhi (supra).
In that case also Hon'ble the Supreme Court had the opportunity to deal with Rule 8 of the Punjab State Agriculture Marketing Board (Class I) Services Rules, 1988 along with Appendix B Proviso to Rule 8(1) had categorically stipulated that appointment by direct recruitment or by transfer has to be resorted to only if no suitable candidate for appointment by promotion to the post of Manager (Marketing) was available.
It has been found that the appellant therein was found suitable for promotion and accordingly it was held that in the face of the aforementioned provision the claim of the promotees like the appellants therein could not be ignored.
Therefore, the aforementioned judgment also has no application as there is no provision in the Regulations under consideration to consider first the promotees Junior Engineers (degree holders), like the petitioners, against direct quota posts.
Therefore, we find no merit in the aforementioned contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
10.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
However, the respondents are directed to ensure that the direct recruitment in pursuance of the advertisement dated 30112005 is finalised within a period of three months from today and other process of filling up the posts meant for direct recruitment is initiated expeditiously.
If the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) under the direct recruitment in pursuance to the advertisement issued on 30112005 is not filled up within the period of three months then the writ petition be listed for hearing again in the last week of January, 2007.
By that time, the respondent-HUDA shall also issue advertisement to fill up as many other direct quota posts as are required in the exigencies of service and the deputationists should not be retained beyond that period.
Petition dismissed.