SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
As per the petitioner, he was promoted on the post of Mandi Supervisor on 28121999.
According to the counsel for the petitioner, the aforesaid order has been cancelled by the respondents by passing a one line order on 2792002.
The order is, therefore, liable to be quashed as having been passed in breach of principles of natural justice.
Even otherwise, the order is liable to be quashed as it is a non-speaking order.
3.
The respondents have filed written statement and pointed out that the petitioner is wrongly claiming that he had been promoted on 28121999.
The actual order of promotion is dated 132000.
In the order of promotion it has been made clear to the petitioner that his promotion is conditional and is liable to be reviewed after the decision of the cases of the employees, which are pending in the High Court.
4.
Mr. Sandhawalia, learned counsel for the respondents, has submitted that there were number of employees senior to the petitioner, who were embroiled in a seniority dispute inter se.
They were, undoubtedly, senior to the petitioner.
Therefore, after their seniority dispute was decided, the whole matter had to be re-considered.
Furthermore, one person was reverted from the post of Accountant to the post of Mandi Supervisor and, therefore, again the petitioner had to be reverted to the post of Auction Recorder.
5.
We have considered the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties.
6.
We are of the considered opinion that no injustice has been done to the petitioner.
In the order of promotion dated 132000, it is clearly stated as under :-  "Sub : Regarding promotion for the post of Mandi Supervisor.
You are hereby promoted from the post of Auction Recorder to Mandi Supervisor against the vacant post of Surinder Nath in view of the letter No. 53735-54202 dated 19111999 issued by Mandi Board by the Market Committee Lohian Khas vide its Resolution No. 7 dated 28121999.
But the only condition in this promotion order is like that after the decision of the case of the employees which is pending in the High Court, your promotion can be considered."
Therefore, the petitioner was well aware that his promotion is liable to be re-considered in case any senior became available to be promoted from the date he was promoted due to non-availability of any senior.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the rules of natural justice would have no role to play.
Once the appointment is made contrary to the statutory rules, the persons adversely affected by the decision were entitled to seek relief as and when the seniority dispute had been decided.
We find support for this view of ours from the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of The District Collector and Chairman, Vizianagaram and another v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi, 1990(4) S.L.R.
237.
Even otherwise, issuance of a writ in these circumstances, commanding the respondents to pass fresh orders after complying with rules of natural justice, would be a futile exercise.
Therefore, we would decline to issue any such direction.
For this, we find support from the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, 1986(*) RRR 341 : AIR 1981 Supreme Court 136.
The legal position was summed up by O Chinnappa Reddy, J as follows :-  "In our view, the principles of natural justice know of no exclusionary rule dependent on whether it would have made any difference if natural justice had been observed.
The non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any man and proof of prejudice independently of proof of denial of natural justice is unnecessary.
It ill comes from a person who has denied justice that the person who has been denied justice is not prejudiced.
As we said earlier, where on the admitted or indisputable facts only, one conclusion is possible and under the law only one penalty is permissible, the Court may not issue its writ to compel the observance of natural justice, not because it is not necessary to observe natural justice but because Courts do not issue futile writs."
(Emphasis supplied) In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the plea of the petitioner, would fall under the exception, noted in the emphasised portion of the extract reproduced above.
In view of the above, we would dismiss this petition.
Order accordingly.
Petition dismissed.