Manmohan Sarin, J - Petitioner by this writ petition impugns office order No. 3144/DEO/WZ dated 22-9-2003, Annexure P-5, by which the petitioner was retired with immediate effect.
The impugned order records that the date of birth of the petitioner as per record was 10-6-1942.
Upon attaining the age of 60 years on 30-6-2002, she should have normally retired, but she continued.
Hence, the impugned order dated 22-9-2003.
Respondents also have taken action departmentally against those who allowed her to continue.
2.
The contention of the petitioner in brief is that the petitioner had joined MCD as a "Paniwali" in temporary capacity as Class-IV employee.
3.
Petitioner was regularized in the year 1987.
The conditions of appointment dated 10-8-1987 bearing S. No. 647 carry the following in clause 9 :-  "9.
Date of age retirement shall be deemed as per the certificate issued by Medical Officer.
Probation period will be one year.
If work was not found satisfactory, the same may be extended."
4.
Petitioner in this case has failed to produce any authentic proof of her date of birth.
No birth certificate has been produced either from the Municipality or otherwise.
It appears that petitioner had filed an affidavit declaring her date of birth to be 15-10-1947.
In terms of clause 9 of the appointment letter dated 10-8-1987, the MCD considered it expedient to have a medical examination done to have the age of petitioner ascertained.
The petitioner was accordingly sent to the Medical Officer, who after examination ascertained the age of the petitioner then to be about 45 years which led to the determination of the petitioner's date of birth to be 10-6-1942.
This date of birth was incorporated in the service book of the petitioner.
5.
From the foregoing it would be reasonable to presume that in view of the affidavit filed earlier by the petitioner and her subsequently being sent for determination of age to the Medical Officer, in May 1987 petitioner was fully aware of the examination being done for the purpose of determination of her age.
Thus, it can safely be inferred that petitioner was aware of the Medical Officer having determined the date of birth as 10-6-1942.
Petitioner did not protest against the said date of birth for over 15 years and allowed the same to continue.
It is only on the eve of retirement that the petitioner has chosen to stake the claim of date of birth being 15-10-1947, so as to gain additional five years of service.
6.
Last minute changes in the date of birth in the absence of strong and irrefutable evidence in support thereof are to be frowned upon.
Reference in this connection may be made to the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of State of UP v. Gulaichi, 2003(3) SCT 1008 (SC) : (2003)6 SCC 483 : (2003 Lab IC 2641) wherein the Supreme Court while allowing the appeal of State of UP held as under (Paras 4 and 5 of Lab IC) :-  "Normally, in public service, with entering into the service, even the date of exit, which is said to be the date of superannuation or retirement, is also fixed.
That is why the date of birth is recorded in the relevant register or service-book, relating to the individual concerned.
This is the practice prevalent in all services, because every service having fixed the age of retirement, it is necessary to maintain the date of birth in the service records.
Most of the States have framed statutory rules or in absence thereof issued administrative instructions as to how a claim made by a public servant in respect of correction of his date of birth in the service record is to be dealt with and what procedure is to be followed.
In many such rules a period has been prescribed within which if any public servant makes any grievance in respect of error in the recording of his date of birth, the application for that purpose can be entertained.
The sole object of such rules being that any such claim regarding correction of the date of birth should not be made or entertained after decades, especially on the eve of superannuation of such public servant.
Of late a trend can be noticed, that many public servants, on the eve of their retirement raise a dispute about their records, by either invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution or by filing applications before the Administrative Tribunals concerned, or even filing suits for adjudication as to whether the dates of birth recorded were correct or not.
An application for correction of the date of birth should not be dealt with by the courts, Tribunals or the High Court keeping in view only the public servant concerned.
Any such direction for correction of the date of birth of the public servant concerned has a chain reaction, inasmuch as others waiting for years, below him for their respective promotions are affected in this process.
Some are likely to suffer irreparable injury.
This is certainly an important and relevant aspect, which cannot be lost sight of by the court or the Tribunal while examining the grievance of a public servant in respect of correction of his date of birth.
As such, unless a clear case on the basis of materials which can be held to be conclusive in nature, is made out by the respondent and that too within a reasonable time as provided in the rules governing the service, the court or the Tribunal should not issue a direction or make a declaration on the basis of materials which make such claim only plausible.
Before any such direction is issued or declaration made, the court or the Tribunal must be fully satisfied that there has been real injustice to the person concerned and his claim for correction of the date of birth has been made in accordance with the procedure prescribed and within the time fixed by any rule or, order.
If no rule or order has been framed or made, prescribing the period within which such application has to be filed, then such application must be within at least a reasonable time.
The applicant has to produce the evidence in support of such claim, which may amount to irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth.
Whenever any such question arises, the onus is on the applicant to prove about the wrong recording of his date of birth, in his service book."
7.
The grievance regarding correction of date of birth should not be made or entertained after over a decade and half, especially on the eve of superannuation.
There appears some uncertainty in the mind of petitioner herself about her date of birth.
During the course of arguments two photocopies of Employment Exchange identity card have been shown; one showing date of birth as 1950 and the other as 15-10-1947.
In view of the foregoing discussion, coupled with the petitioner having failed to tender any proof with regard to date of birth and seeking a change in the date of birth as recorded by the Corporation in 1987, belatedly in 2002, cannot be permitted.
The petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.