GS Singhvi, J - This appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against order dated 2371995 passed by the learned Single Judge whereby he dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant for directing respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to reinstate him in service and pay salary with effect from 141991.
2.
The appellant joined service as Instructor at Anganwari Workers' Training Centre (for short, `AWTC'), Sonepat on 18101983.
In the course of service, he was promoted as Principal.
He remained posted at AWTCs, Hisar, Rohtak, Bhiwani, Gurgaon, Karnal and Kurukshetra.
While he was posted as Principal, AWTC, Kurukshetra, Director, Social Welfare, Haryana (respondent No. 1), vide his letter dated 2031991, conveyed the decision of the State Government to close down AWTCs which were functioning at Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat.
On receipt of a copy of that letter, Haryana State Council for Child Welfare (for short, `the State Council') issued order dated 2531991 for termination of the appellant's service w.e.f.
3131991 (AN).
Similar orders were passed qua other officers/employees of three AWTCs.
On the next day ie 2631991, the appellant and four others filed C.W.P.
No. 4758 of 1991 questioning the legality and propriety of the decision of the State Government to close down three AWTCs by asserting that sufficient funds were available for running those centres.
They also questioned the legality of the termination of their services by asserting that junior persons had been retained and in this manner, they have been discriminated.
By an interim order dated 2731991, a Division Bench of this Court stayed the operation of the decision contained in letter dated 2031991 and order dated 2531991.
During the pendency of that petition, the Government of India, Ministry of Welfare, Department of Woman and Child Development Department, vide letter dated 351991, asked the appellant to clear the back-dog of training in respect of Anganwari Workers for the year 1991-92 by utilising the available infrastructure.
The relevant extracts of that letter are reproduced below :-  "In view of the large number of untrained AWWs in the country, it is necessary to clear the backlog as soon as possible by utilising the available infrastructure of AWRCs to the maximum.
As on 31391, the total backlog of Anganwadi Workers to be trained in so far as Haryana is concerned is 722.
Out of this backlog your institute is allotted the target of training 55 number of AWWs running one/two courses.
This target has been fixed after taking into account your available infrastructure.
In order to ensure adherence to this time schedule it will be necessary on your part to start one course by Ist week of June, 1991.
2.
In case you have achieved the target of training after completing one/two course(s) you may arrange refresher/orientation courses in consultation with State/UT Govt.
Please take necessary steps for nomination of trainees by the State Govt. and confirm the arrangement made immediately.
The schedule of training being suggested is given below :- Sr. No.
Course     Time Target Remarks 1.
Ist June to Aug, 91 55  Yours faithfully, Sd/-  (MPS Sethi)  Deputy Director."
3.
After ten days, letter dated 1351991 was sent to respondent No. 1 to nominate Anangwari Workers, who could be trained at AWTCs, Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat.
The relevant extracts of that letter are reproduced below :- "Please refer to your letter No. 16690/CD-4/CD/91 dated 20th March, 1991 regarding the closure of three Anganwadi Workers Training Centres at Kurukshetra, Karnal and Sonepat.
2.
Fresh training targets in respect of AWWs for the year 1991-92 have already been allotted to all the AWTCs in the State of Haryana including these three centres in question vide this Deptt.
's letter No. 1(13/91-TR) dated 3591.
Copies of the letters addressed to AWTCs have already been sent to you for information & necessary action.
3.
Under these circumstances this Deptt.
will appreciate if these three centres may be continued and the trainees are nominated to these centres, urgently, under intimation to this Department.
This issues with the approval of Joint Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development.
With regards, Yours sincerely, Sd/ -  (M.P.S.
Sethi)" The Indian Council for Child Welfare (for short, `the Indian Council') also sent letter dated 3051991 to the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Welfare, Department of Woman and Child Development, Government of India, New Delhi to ensure that sufficient number of Anangwari Workers are sent for training in three centres at Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat.
4.
By taking cognizance of the fact that the entire financial burden of running AWTCs was being borne by the Government of India, this Court disposed of C.W.P.
No. 4758 of 1991 in the following terms :-  "Admittedly, the entire financial burden is to be borne by the Union of India.
In view of this situation, the respondents are directed to continue with the functioning of Anganwadi Workers Training Centres, Karnal and Kurukshetra subject to the condition of release of funds from the Union of India.
If the funds are not made available to the centres within one month from today, the respondents will be at liberty to close the centres.
When the funds are released by the Central Government, the same will be paid in accordance with the scheme."
5.
Immediately thereafter, the appellant sent communications to the President of the Indian Council to release grant-in-aid for running AWTC at Kurukshetra.
The Secretary General of the Indian Council addressed letter dated 24101991 to the General Secretary of the State Council that first instalment of the grant for 1990-91 for AWTCs at Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat had been released vide letter dated 361991 and the next instalment would be released as soon as trainees are deputed to those centres.
It, however, appears that the effective steps were not taken for sending Anganwari Workers for training at the three centres and on that account, the Government of India, Ministry of Home Resources Development, Department of Woman and Child vide letter dated 3121991 sanctioned closure of three AWTCs.
6.
The appellant made representations dated 611992, 121992, 461992, 28101992, 27111992, 14121992 and 1811993 to the State Council for his adjustment on the post of Principal or any other post as was done in the cases of similarly situated persons.
He also requested for release of salary for the period commencing from 141991.
In his representation dated 121992, the appellant pointed out that the State Council had adjusted some of the junior- most employees, namely, Ram Dhan Singh Narwal as Principal, AWTC, Rewari, Ms. Indu Vij as Instructor at Faridabad and Shri Dharshan Singh.
He ultimately filed C.W.P.
No. 1814 of 1993 for issuance of a direction to the State Council to pay the salary and assign duty by contending that the action of respondent No. 1 and the State Council not to allow him to join duty was discriminatory and violative of his right to equality guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution of India and non-payment of salary was violative of the direction given by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 4758 of 1991.
7.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State Council, an objection was taken to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the Indian Council and the State Council do not fall within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
On merits, it was pleaded that closure of three AWTCs was necessitated due to financial constraints.
The appellant's plea that the junior persons had been retained was controverted by making an assertion that no seniority list of Principals was maintained and that other persons had been adjusted on the lower posts of Instructor.
8.
The appellant filed replication reiterating his plea regarding violation of his fundamental right to equality by asserting that persons junior to him had been retained and/or adjusted.
He also filed additional affidavit dated 8121993 along with CM No. 12099 of 1993 stating therein that Ram Dhan Singh and Mrs. Parveen, who were junior to him, had been re-appointed/adjusted without considering his case.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of that affidavit read as under :-  "2.
That I have already stated in para 19 of my writ that other principals and instructors of the closed Anganwadi Training Centres were adjusted or given fresh appointments.
This was not done in my case and I was never given chance of adjustment or reappointment.
The dates of adjustment/re-appointment was not mentioned and dates in two cases are given below :- 1.
Ram Dhan Singh who was Principal of closed Training Centre at Sonepat having only one year experience was reappointed on 27991 vide letter No. 648.
2.
Mrs. Parveen was adjusted through letter No. HSCCW/5303 dt. 14891.
These persons had also filed writs in this High Court against their termination.
3.
That after the admission of my writ for regular hearing, I was called for interview by Resp.
No. 2 for the post of Social Worker/Counsellor.
I appeared in the interview after protecting my claims in this CWP vide Annx.
P/22.
During the interview, I was falsely persuaded by the Interview Board consisting of Mr. JD Sharma, Hon.
Secretary, HSCCW Chandigarh, Deputy Director, Social Welfare, Haryana, Mrs. RV Singh (dealing hand) that if I withdraw my application for the post of Counsellor then they will accommodate me as Principal with arrears of wages from 30391.
Believing them I signed "I am not interested in this post".
However, immediately after my signatures the Board backed out from giving me any promised relief."
9.
In the counter-affidavit dated 20.12.1993 filed by Shri JD Sharma, Honorary Secretary of the State Council, the following averments were made :-  "1.
That para No. 2 of the application has wrongly been stated.
The two cases cited i.e. of Ram Dhan and Miss Parveen are not on the parallel footings as to that of the petitioner.
Shri Ram Dhan Singh who was Principal of a closed AWTC at Sonepat was adjusted on his request against the vacant post of Principal.
The post offered to Shri Ram Dhan Singh on 27.10.92 was a fresh appointment which he readily accepted.
Ms. Parveen was adjusted on a vacant post of Instructor as a fresh appointment.
The post of Instructor is junior post to that of a Principal and as such this post was not offered to the petitioner.
However, the petitioner's case can still be considered subject to the approval of Indian Council of Child Welfare.
It is pertinent to mention over here that there is no provision of giving retrospective appointment in the projects, like Anganwari Workers Training Centre for which course grant in aid is received from the Govt. of India through Indian Council for Child Welfare.
This is pertinent to mention over here that the amount of Rs. 5580555 has been received by draft No. 04/D-236195 dated 25.11.1993 which has been handed over to Shri SK Panchal, District Child Welfare Officer, Kurukshetra for making the payments/salaries to the concerned employees and the petitioner's amount has become due to the tune of Rs. 1285965 as total amount outstanding from April, 1991 to December, 1991.
The petitioner in this case can represent to the above named person for getting his amount released.
Thereafter, no instructions have been received by the Indian Council for Child Welfare."
10.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by observing that the writ petitioner (appellant) had not produced the order vide which he was promoted as Principal and without examining the contents thereof, it was not possible to entertain his plea of discrimination.
The learned Single Judge then referred to the additional affidavit of the appellant and counter- affidavit of Shri JD Sharma and held that the appellant's grievance regarding adjustment of junior persons cannot be entertained because he too had been appointed as Principal in January, 1994 and also because no material was produced on the record of the writ petition to show that his claim was superior than that of respondent No. 3-Ram Dhan Singh.
11.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
12.
At the out-set, we consider it necessary and proper to mention that even though, in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2, an objection was taken to the maintainability of the writ petition, no argument was made on that issue before the learned Single Judge and none has been advanced before us.
13.
Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned counsel for the appellant argued that the order of the learned Single Judge should be set aside because he did not consider the legality of the decision of the State Government to close down three AWTCs.
She referred to the contents of letters dated 2951991, 361991, and 24101991 sent by the Indian Council to show that sufficient funds were made available for running of AWTCs at Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat and argued that the failure of the learned Single Judge to deal with this important issue should be treated as sufficient to nullify his conclusion that the termination of the appellant's service was justified.
She further argued that even if, the decision of the State Government to close down three AWTCs is held to be legally correct and justified, the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge on the legality of the action taken by the State Council to terminate the appellant's service should be set aside because he overlooked the starking fact that persons junior to him had been retained on the post of the Principal and/or adjusted on the lower post.
Mrs. Rathore invited our attention to the averments contained in para 7 of the writ petition, the additional affidavit of the appellant filed with CM No. 12099 of 1993, the counter affidavit of Shri JD Sharma and the averments contained in the memo of appeal to show that Shri Ram Dhan Singh, who had only one year's service as Principal, was adjusted by way of re-appointment and argued that the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by rejecting the appellant's plea of discrimination ignoring the fact that he had not been considered for re-appointment despite the fact that he had served as Principal for eight years.
14.
Shri Tejinder Joshi, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 2 and 3 supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that the appellant's plea of discrimination was rightly rejected because Shri Ram Dhan Singh had been adjusted on the post of Principal by way of re-appointment in pursuance of the application made by him.
Shri Joshi submitted that the appellant's candidature was not considered for adjustment on the lower post or for re-appointment on the post of Principal because he had not applied for the same.
15.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments and carefully perused the record.
In our opinion, the appellant's challenge to the closure of AWTCs of Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat is liable to be negatived.
It is true that while disposing of C.W.P.
No. 4758 of 1991, the Division Bench had directed the continuance of three AWTCs subject to the condition of release of funds by the Government of India and the Indian Council had released the first instalment of funds with an assurance to release further instalments after deputation of sufficient number of Anganwari Workers to these centres, the fact of the matter is that the State Government/State Council did not depute the required number of Anganwari Workers for the purpose of training at three centres and on that account, the Government of India, vide its letter dated 3121991, approved the closure of three AWTCs.
A copy of that letter was placed on record as Annexure R2 with the written statement of respondent No. 2, but the appellant did not bother to challenge the decision taken by the Government of India.
Therefore, at this stage, we are not inclined to entertain the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant that the closure of the three AWTCs was not justified and was vitiated due to violation of the direction given by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 4758 of 1991.
16.
However, we find merit in the argument of Mrs. Abha Rathore that respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had discriminated the appellant in the matter of retention in service and/or adjustment/re-appointment.
Undisputedly, the appellant was appointed as Principal much before Nalini Yadav, Manjeet Khurana, Mrs. Mohini, Raj Rani Mittal, Lalita Mehtani, Sudesh Yadav, Vijender, Saroj Rana, Chander Mukhi, Parinita Goswami, Saroj Dhawan, Parvesh, Kushum Mehtani, Satwant and Santa Yadav, who were appointed as Principles/Instructors in AWTCs, Gurgaon, Panchkula, Bhiwani, Rohtak, Hisar, Faridabad, Sirsa and Rewari.
It is also not in dispute that while terminating the appellant's service, all of them were retained in service.
According to Shri Tejender Joshi, the appellant cannot complain of discrimination and seek nullification of the termination of his service on the ground of violation of Article 14 of the Constitution because each AWTC is an independent unit and there is no provision for preparing inter-se seniority of the Principals.
Prima facie, we do not find any substance in the argument of the learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and are inclined to take the view that the action of the State Council to dispense with the service of the appellant is discriminatory.
Even though, AWTCs established in various districts were independently functioning, the same were under the control of the State Council.
Therefore, before terminating the services of the appellant and others, who were working in AWTCs Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 should have drawn up an inter-se seniority of various cadres based on the length of service and dispensed with the service of junior-most persons.
However, we refrain from finally adjudicating on this issue because none of the above-named persons was impleaded as party respondent in the writ petition and without hearing them, no order adversely affecting their status can be passed by the Court.
17.
Shri Tajender Joshi also tried to justify re-appointment of Shri Ram Dhan Singh w.e.f.
27.9.1991 without considering the claim of the appellant by arguing that at the relevant time, interim order dated 2731991 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 475 of 1991 was operating and that the appellant had not applied for re-appointment/adjustment, but we have not felt persuaded to agree with him.
It is not the case of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 that the concerned authority of the State Council had issued any notice or advertisement inviting options from the Principals and other staff of three AWTCs which were sought to be closed for their re-appointment/adjustment and the candidature of only those were considered, who had opted for re- appointment/adjustment.
Therefore, there could be no justification to ignore the candidature of the appellant for the purpose of re-appointment at the time Ram Dhan Singh was so appointed.
18.
The respondents have not controverted the fact that the appellant was senior to Shri Ram Dhan Singh in the cadre of Principals, AWTCs and there was no valid reason to overlook his candidature for the purpose of re-appointment as Principal of AWTC.
Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had arbitrarily overlooked the candidature of the appellant and re-appointed a junior person and in this manner, his right to equality in the matter of employment was violated.
Unfortunately, the learned Single Judge overlooked the fact that soon after the decision of C.W.P.
No. 4758 of 1991, the appellant had represented to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 for his reinstatement and/or re-appointment/adjustment.
He also overlooked the fact that while directing re-appointment of Ram Dhan Singh, the concerned authority of the State Council did not consider the candidature of the appellant despite the fact that he was senior to him.
Therefore, the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge that the appellant had not been discriminated is liable to be upset.
19.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Since the appellant had been re-appointed in 1994, we feel that ends of justice would be met by directing respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to treat him as re-appointed on the post of Principal w.e.f.
27.9.1991 and give him all consequential benefits.
Ordered accordingly.
The needful be done within three months from the date of submission/receipt of a certified copy of this order.
20.
The Bench Secretary is directed to give an attested copy of this order to the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana and the counsel for respondent Nos. 2 and 3 for ensuring compliance of the direction contained in it.
Appeal allowed.