Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of Indian for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the orders dated April 17, 2000, April 24, 2000 and April 28, 2000 passed by the respondent-Punjab State Seeds Corporation Limited.
Copies of the aforesaid order have been appended as Annexures P/4, P/5, P/6, respectively, with the present petition.
2.
The petitioner was working as Superintendent Accounts with the respondent- Corporation in the year 1999.
The respondent-Corporation floated a voluntary retirement scheme for its employees during the month of December, 1999.
A copy of the aforesaid scheme has been appended as Annexure P/1 with the present petition.
3.
In response to the aforesaid scheme, the petitioner gave his option/consent seeking voluntary retirement from the Corporation.
The said application dated April 3, 2000 was received by the Corporation.
The petitioner claims that even before any decision could be taken upon the aforesaid application filed by him, he withdrew the said offer/consent through a communication dated April 17, 2000.
A copy of the aforesaid request for withdrawal of the consent has been appended as Annexure P/3 with the petition.
On that basis it is claimed by the petitioner that although he specifically withdrew his consent-option seeking voluntary retirement, still the earlier request of the petitioner was considered and the petitioner was ordered to be retired voluntarily by passing the order dated April 17, 2000.
A copy of the aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P/4 with the present petition.
Consequently the petitioner also received a communication dated April 24, 2000 rejecting his request for withdrawal.
A copy of the aforesaid communication has been appended as Annexure P/5 with the present petition.
The petitioner was subsequently ordered to be relieved from his duties on April 28, 2000.
A copy of the relieving report is appended as Annexure P/6 with the petition.
4.
The petitioner has approached this court now for quashing the aforesaid orders Annexures P/4, P/5 and P/6.
5.
At this stage itself, it may be noticed here that the present petition was filed on April 23, 2002.
6.
In pursuance of the notice to the writ petition, the respondent has put in appearance and a written statement has been filed.
A preliminary objection has been raised to the effect that the petitioner had received all the payments and benefits in pursuance to the voluntary retirement scheme in the month of April 2000 itself and as such was estopped to challenge the order of voluntary retirement passed by the competent authority.
With regard to the factum of withdrawal of consent/option exercised by the petitioner on April 17, 2000, the respondent has maintained that the aforesaid consent had been withdrawn by the petitioner subsequent to the order passed by the Managing Director and it was only the information with regard to the rejection of the said withdrawal letter which has been communicated to the petitioner on April 24, 2000.
7.
The respondent has specifically maintained that the petitioner had received an amount of Rs. 5,27,063/- from the respondent-Corporation in the month of April, 2000 itself and had remained silent for a period of two years and, therefore, the present petition filed by him was an after-thought.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
9.
Shri Sanjeev Walia, the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a Division bench judgment of this court in the case of Mohinder Pal Singh v. Punjab & Sind Bank and others, 2002(3) SCT 462 (P&H) : 2002 Service Law Reporter 716 to contend that once option exercised by the petitioner had been withdrawn then it was not open to the employer to accept the same.
10.
On the other hand, Shri SP Thukral, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Corporation has submitted that the petitioner had duly availed of all the benefits under the voluntary retirement scheme and had even encashed the cheque of Rs. 5,27,063/- in the month of April, 2000 itself, which shows that the filing of the present writ petition after the expiry of two years was merely an after-thought.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner was in fact estopped from making any grievance against his voluntary retirement.
Shri Thukral and also brought to our notice the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bank of India v. OP Swarnakar, 2003(4) S.C.T.
787 : AIR 2003 SC 858, wherein it was observed as follows :  "The appeals preferred by the Nationalised Banks arising from the High Courts are dismissed except the cases where the concerned employees have accepted a part of the benefit under the scheme.
However, in respect of such of the employees who despite acceptance of a part of the retirement benefit under the scheme had continued under the orders of the High Court and has retired on attaining the age of superannuation, this order shall not apply."
We have duly considered the rival submissions made by the parties.
From the perusal of the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in the case of Punjab & Sind Bank (supra) we find that it was the appeal of the bank against the Division Bank judgment of this Court in Mohinder Pal Singh's case (supra) and the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has specifically observed that the Division Bench judgment shall operate in all the cases except the cases where the concerned employee had accepted a part of the benefit under the scheme.
11.
As observed by us above, since the petitioner had already availed of the retiral benefits under the scheme in the month of April, 2000 itself and has now chosen to file the present petition after expiry of more than two years, therefore, the petitioner cannot be heard to make a grievance at this stage, against the retirement order Annexure A/4.
12.
In view of the above, finding no merit in the present petition, the same is hereby dismissed  No costs.
Petition dismissed.