Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioners were appointed as Water Carrier vide order dated 29101998 for a period of 89 days.
The petitioners were appointed for 89 days with further stipulation that this contract shall not entitle them to claim regularisation of services on regular pay scale and their services can be terminated in between without giving any notice in case their work and conduct is found unsatisfactory.
On 2511999, the contract was terminated.
However, the petitioners were reappointed on 121999 for another period of 89 days upto 31.3.1999.
After the expiry of such period, the petitioners were again reappointed on 1641999 for 89 days.
Their services were not renewed after the expiry of the period on 1371999.
The petitioners, have, thus, filed the present writ petition for quashing of orders Annexure P-12 and P-13 whereby their services were terminated on the expiry of the contractual period.
2.
The State in its written statement has asserted that after 1371999 their services were not required and, therefore, no fresh contract was given.
It is further stated that the petitioners were never appointed against posts rather they were given contract to work as Water Carrier periodically.
It is further mentioned that the contract is given as and when exigencies so require.
Since there was no necessity to give the contract to work as Water Carrier, the petitioners were not given the contract.
3.
No replication was filed by the petitioners.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has vehemently argued that the stand of the State in the written statement is incorrect.
It is mentioned that the Deputy Excise and Taxation commissioner, Panchkula, has sought the approval to appoint one Chowkidar, one Sweeper and two Water Carriers for the year 1999- 2000.
Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana, on 10.3.1999 has granted sanction under the Punjab Financial Rules to the creation of the posts during the year 1999-2000.
It was, thus, argued that there exist posts with the respondents but the services of the petitioners have been terminated.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the decisions in the cases of Miss Rajni Bala v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) Recent Services Judgments 329 : 1993(1) SCT 714 (P&H); Gordhan Singh Gulia v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(1) Recent Services Judgments 243 : 1996(3) SCT 412 (P&H); Balwan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) Recent Services Judgments 567 : 1996(4) SCT 653 (P&H); and Kerala Financial Corporation and another v. OK Muraleedharan and another, 2001(7) Services Law Reporter 972.
6.
In Miss Rajni Bala's case (supra), the appointment in dispute was to the post of Language Teacher.
The petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis even though request for regular recruitment had been sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The petitioner in the said case challenged the legality, propriety and the fairness of the conditions, incorporated in the letter of appointment on the ground that when regular posts are available and appointment on ad hoc basis has been made after due consideration of the candidate, there is no justification in making appointment for a limited period.
This case is clearly distinguishable.
It is the categorical stand of the respondents in the written statement that the appointment of the petitioners was not on regular posts.
Even the documents relied upon by the petitioners shows approval under the Punjab Financial Rules for a period of one year only.
Since regular posts are not available, the petitioners were appointed keeping in view the exigency of the work and no right is conferred on the petitioners to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court to continue in service as Water Carriers.
7.
In Gordhan Singh Gulia's case (supra) and Balwan Singh's case (supra), this Court has followed the view taken in Miss Rajni Bala's case (supra).
A perusal of the above judgments show that in these cases also the Court found no justification in limitating the term of appointment when the post is not abolished and a regularly selected person is not available.
8.
In Kerala Financial Corporation's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has issued directions to consider the case of the respondents while making any direct or ad hoc appointment in future.
In the said case, the respondents were appointed as Law Assistants for a period of six months purely on contractual basis.
However, the said respondents remained in service intermittently for a period of two and a half years.
Kerala High Court has issued directions that the respondents will continue in service till the regular appointments were made by the appellant.
In appeal, the Supreme Court set aside the directions issued by the Kerala High Court on the ground that the appointments of the respondents were purely ad hoc for six months which was intermittently extended, the services of the respondents cannot be thrust upon the appellants.
However, it was ordered that if the appellants advertise the vacancies for filling up the same by direct recruitment or ad hoc appointment, the case of the respondents shall also be considered.
9.
In view of the above, I do not find that there is any illegality in passing the order of termination of the services of the petitioners as the same was in terms of the letter of appointment.
However, the petitioners shall be considered along with other eligible candidates on their fulfilling of condition of appointment for ad hoc or regular appointment as and when situation so arise in accordance with rules.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.