RL Anand, J - Through this writ petition ASI Jaidev Singh has made a prayer for the quashment of the orders dated 631993 (Annexure P-5) and 891993 (Annexure P-8).
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled as a Constable on 28101967.
He was promoted as Head Constable in the year 1975.
He was made Asstt.
Sub-Inspector in the year 1984.
He had been working to the utmost satisfaction of his seniors and in the year 1991 when he was posted in District Sonipat at Police Stations Board, Kharkhota and Sonipat, his confidential report was adversely entered by the then Superintendent of Police for the reasons best known to him and it was conveyed to him vide letter dated 451992.
The petitioner filed a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak on 13.6.1992.
In his representation, the petitioner gave the detailed explanation regarding adverse remarks and specifically mentioned that the so-called complaint made by a person from Nooran Khera was nothing but one OP Kadian, the material uncle of Shri SS Deswal, IPS, wanted to get some alternations through the petitioner in the daily diary of the Police Station but the petitioner did not agree to the direction/dictation of the relation of said Mr. Deswal, who threatened the petitioner that he has to face dire consequences.
The complaint was made to Shri Deswal, who was then Superintendent of Police, Sonipat and the adverse A.C.R.
has been recorded by him.
The representation has been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police in a cryptic language by making a mention "considered and rejected".
The grouse of the petitioner is that the representation has been rejected in a machnical manner.
This is the result of vindictiveness on the part of the Superintendent of Police.
The petitioner filed another revision petition/mercy petition-cum-representation to the Director General of Police through proper channel which was rejected only on the ground that the second revision is not legally maintainable.
The grouse of the petitioner is that once it is written in the A.C.R.
that there was a complaint of corruption against a police officer, in such a situation it becomes the duty of the Superintendent of Police to institute an enquiry to deal such official departmentally.
There were no basis for the Recording Officer to record adverse A.C.R.
The petitioner has specifically alleged in his representation that Om Parkash Kadian of Nooran Khera is the material uncle of Shri SS Deswal and it was the duty of the Deputy Inspector General of Police to deal this point specifically.
Also it is the grouse of the petitioner that he has been condemned unheard and in these circumstances, the orders Annexure P-5 and P-8 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the representation submitted by the petitioner against the adverse remarks recorded in the A.C.R.
for the period from 171991 to 20.1.1992 was decided after giving careful consideration to the contentions raised by the petitioner in his representation and in view of the detailed comments offered by the Reporting Officer on the representation.
The petitioner was posted in Police Station, Kharkhoda while Sri SS Deswal was posted as Superintendent of Police, Sonipat.
He received information that the petitioner was indulging in unfair dealings with the public.
It was also known that the petitioner was accepting illegal gratification from the liquor vendors and the local satta gamblers.
As such the Reporting Officer summoned the petitioner and asked him to mend his ways, but to no avail.
Resultantly, the petitioner was transferred to Police Station City Sonipat, where too he kept continued his nefarious activities.
Inspector, Police Station City Sonipat was always critical of him and he did not assign him any important work to do.
There was a regular flow of complaints against the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner was transferred from Sonipat to a far flung rural police station i.e. Baroda.
Even at that police Station the petitioner did not mend his ways.
There were complaints against the petitioner that he indulges in extorting money to the tune of Rs. 10,000/- from the accused party in case FIR No. 122 of 1991 under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. registered at Police Station Baroda.
The accused party belonged to village Nooran Khera.
The matter was brought to the notice of the Reporting Officer, who immediately asked SHO, Gohana to verify the facts.
When the petitioner came to know that his conduct was being watched by the superiors, he returned the amount to the accused party on the same night.
He appeared before the Superintendent of Police, Sonipat and sought apology for his misdeeds.
In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot say that his misconduct was not established.
It was also pleaded by the respondents that the case of the petitioner was held up at efficiency bar w.e.f.
171992 on account of the adverse remarks regarding his doubtful honesty.
Justifying the action taken vide Annexures P-5 and P-8, the respondents finally prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, DAG, Haryana on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of this case.
5.
A reading of Annexure P-3 would show that the following adverse remarks were given to the petitioner:-  1.
Honesty : Suspected while being posted at Police Station Baroda.
There was complaint of accepting Rs. 10,000/- during the course of investigation on which he was warned.
2.
Moral courage and readiness to expose the malpractices of subordinates : Not good.
3.
Reputation for dealings with the public and assessibility by public : Below average.
4.
Communal partiality : Communal  5.
Power of control and organising ability : Below average 6.
Attitude towards subordinates and relations with fellow officers : Below average 7.
Power of command : Below average.
8.
Interest in modern methods of investigation in modern police methods : Less interest.
9.
Preventive and detective ability : So-so, has no knowledge of modern methods of investigation.
10.
Working experience of criminal law and procedure : No experience.
11.
Reliability : Cannot be depended.
12.
General remarks : He is below average officer indulges in Herapheri, is not competent to deal with public.
While posted at PS Baroda there was complaint of accepting Rs. 10,000/- from a person of Nooran Khera.
ASI Jai Dev No. 196-R, be got informed about these remarks and direct him to be careful and remove the defects as pointed out above.
The enclosed another copy be got signed from him and send the same to this office for record."
6.
The petitioner made representation Annexure P-4.
Let us read Annexure P- 5, which is an communication of the order.
It clearly spells out that the representation which was submitted by the petitioner against the adverse remarks recorded in his A.C.R.
for the period from 171991 to 20.1.1992 has been duly considered and rejected.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the order Annexure P-5 is a non-speaking order.
It is cryptic in nature.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is not correct.
In fact, it is not the order passing the rejection of the representation.
It is the communication of the order.
The order of rejection is in the file of the office and the reasons have been explained in the written statement.
There is nothing to suggest that the reporting officer was biased or inimical with the petitioner.
If the accused party had parted bribe of Rs. 10,000/- and has taken into confidence a relation of the reporting officer, it cannot be said that the reporting officer was biased.
It is the case of the respondents that when the petitioner came to know that his conduct has been watched, he returned the money to the accused party.
Recording of A.C.R.
is always based on the subjective satisfaction of the reporting officer.
The High Court in extra-ordinary jurisdiction will not interfere in the recording of A.C.R.
matters until or unless it is shown that is arbitrary or the reporting officer was biased.
The officer of the rank of Superintendent of Police has nothing to take from the petitioner.
The explanation offered by the petitioner that the Superintendent of Police is inimical to him is not prima facie established.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition.
7.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner has relied upon HC Ram Phal v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(2) SCT 703 (P&H)(DB) : 1995(4) SLR 155 and submitted that the order Annexure P-5 is not a speaking one.
This judgment is not helpful to the petitioner as I have already stated that in fact Annexure P-5 is only a communication of the order.
The detailed order is on the file of the department which has been mentioned in the written statement of the respondents.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner also relied upon Amrik Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 617 (P&H)(DB) : 1995(2) SLR 769.
In the opinion of this Court, this judgment is also not helpful to the petitioner.
Rather, it goes against him.
It has been observed by the Hon'ble Division Bench that in the case in hand the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not act as a court of appeal while adjudicating the administrative matters.
It will only interfere if there are mala fides or patent arbitrariness.
I have not been able to see anything from the conduct of the reporting officer.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.