ML Singhal, J - Both these appeals will be decided through this common judgment as they have arisen out of civil suit No. 77-1 of 711994 for declaration filed by Darshan Singh Sidhu against FCI in the Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division), Ferozepur.
2.
Darshan Singh Sidhu was Assistant Grade-II in the Food Corporation of India (FCI).
Vide order No. Vig-21/(FZR-1004)/92/3913 dated 30.11.1993 passed by Regional Manager FCI Ferozepur and endorsement No. A/2 (1006) Vig/91/209 dated 1.12.1993 made by District Manager, FCI, he was punished with the penalty of the recovery of one year basic pay in 36 instalments on account of the loss sustained by the FCI and further with the punishment of the stoppage of three increments without cumulative effect with effect from 111994.
By means of suit for declaration, he challenged the said order.
It was alleged in the plaint that the said order is illegal, null and void, inoperative, against the provisions of Staff Regulations, 1971 of the FCI and against the principles of natural justice and equity.
By way of consequential relief, he prayed for the grant of decree for permanent injunction restraining FCI from effecting any recovery from his pay or from withholding any increment.
It was alleged in the plaint that he was wrongly charge sheeted vide charge-sheet dated 2581993 by the Regional Manager, FCI.
Defendants failed to provide list of the witnesses and the documents alongwith the charge-sheet.
Charge-sheet was thus illegal and bad in law.
He filed reply to the charge-sheet on 1791993 whereby he denied the allegations set out in the charge-sheet.
He pleaded that he had taken charge of the stock of 1045 bags of damaged wheat only of M/s. Shah Rice Mills open cap from Ashok Malhotra, AG-II(D) on 3181985 on the basis of monthly stock account for the month ending 3181985.
He never took charge of 476 bags of damaged wheat any time.
Only 1045 bags of damaged wheat had been handed over to him by Ashok Malhotra AG-II(D).
He was not at all responsible for the loss of 476 bags of damaged wheat which had never been handed over to him.
It was alleged in the plaint that he was not allowed the assistance of a co-worker.
No enquiry was conducted so that the allegations set out in the charge-sheet could be said to have been proved.
He was also not allowed any opportunity to prove his innocence.
He was not supplied with the copies of the documents and statements of witnesses.
He was not supplied with the copy of the report of the enquiry committee, appointed by the District Manager, FCI, on the basis of which charge-sheet was framed against him.
He was condemned unheard.
It was a major penalty imposed upon him which could be imposed only after enquiry.
Reply to the charge-sheet, report of the enquiry committee and other documents were not taken into account.
Ashok Kumar was responsible for damage to wheat of 476 bags.
3.
Defendant-FCI contested the suit.
It was urged that the suit was not maintainable as he had field to pursue departmental remedies available under the FCI Staff Regulations, 1971.
He could file an appeal or review application under the FCI Staff Regulations, 1971.
He was rightly charge- sheeted.
Memorandum of charge-sheet alongwith statement of articles of charges were served upon him.
He was allowed to inspect the relevant documents before the submission of reply by him.
He submitted reply after inspecting the documents.
Plaintiff took over charge of the stock of 1045 bags of damaged wheat lying at open plinth of M/s. Shah Rice Mills at Talwandi Bhai from Ashok Malhotra AG-II.
The stock of 476 bags of damaged wheat was mentioned in the stock register at page 74 of the year, 1980-81.
This fact also finds, mentioned in the stock register at page 80 of the Master Ledger.
There was balance of stock of 476 bags of wheat.
According to the plaintiff, he took charge of 1045 bags of damaged wheat which was lying dumped and that the remaining 476 bags of wheat were not carried over in the subsequent years.
This fact was also within the knowledge of the plaintiff and he concealed the said fact from the department.
He has thus failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty.
476 bags of damaged wheat were not taken over in the master ledger for the year 1983-84.
Plaintiff in connivance with Ashok Malhotra mis-appropriated and caused a monetary loss of Rs. 7,28,000/- to the FCI.
It was urged that the impugned order was rightly passed punishing the plaintiff.
4.
On the pleading of the parties, the following issues were framed by the learned trial Court :-  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 30.11.1993 issued by defendant No. 1 is illegal, null and void and liable to be set aside as prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction prayed for ?
OPP 4.
Whether the suit is pre-mature ?
OPP 5.
Relief.
Vide order dated 1811997, Civil Judge (Senior Division), Ferozepur dismissed the plaintiff's suit, in view of his finding that the impugned order does not suffer from any illegality and that it was for the disciplinary authority to consider what punishment should be imposed upon a servant on the misconduct proved against him.
Court cannot go into the question whether punishment imposed is harsh and it should be slashed.
Court is not to act as a court of appeal on the punishment imposed or sufficiency or insufficiency of evidence led in the enquiry.
5.
Plaintiff went in appeal.
Vide order dated 161999, District Judge, Ferozepur partly allowed the appeal.
He found that two punishments could not be imposed by the FCI upon the delinquent.
He set aside the punishment of stoppage of increments without cumulative effect.
He maintained the order regarding the recovery of the amount equivalent to one year basic salary in 36 months from the plaintiff for the loss caused by him to the FCI.
6.
The order dated 161999 of learned District Judge, Ferozepur has given rise to two appeals namely RSA No. 4790 of 1999, titled Darshan Singh Sidhu v. FCI, 2002(1) SCT 314 (P&H)., whereby Darshan Singh Sidhu has prayed that the suit should have been decreed in its entirety and that both the punishments imposed upon him should have been set aside and RSA No. 3658 of 1999, titled "FCI v. Darshan Singh Sidhu", whereby FCI has prayed that the plaintiff's suit should have been dismissed in its entirety and no relief should have been given to him.
7.
Both the courts below have concurrently found that there was no infraction of any law or procedure so far as the conduct of the enquiry was concerned.
It was not a case of "no evidence".
If it were a case of "no evidence", disciplinary authority could not have imposed any penalty upon the delinquent.
Impugned order punishing the plaintiff with this punishment is based on evidence, which was taken into account by the disciplinary authority at the time when this order was passed.
8.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that it was a case of imposing two punishments on the delinquent-plaintiff for the same lapse.
It was a case of double jeopardy.
In support of this submission, he drew my attention to R Devadanam v. The Union of India and others, 1997(3) SLR 183.
9.
Learned counsel for the FCI on the other hand submitted that it is not a case of double jeopardy.
Plaintiff was found guilty of shortage and misappropriation of store.
He was punished with the recovery of the amount equivalent to one year basic salary so that the FCI should be compensated for the loss sustained by it at the hands of the plaintiff.
He was punished with the stoppage of three increments without cumulative effect for the mis- conduct.
10.
Regulation 54 of the FCI (Staff) Regulations, 1971 lays down the penalties which could be imposed on the employees of the Corporation :  Minor Penalties :  (i) Censure; (ii) Withholding of his promotion; (iii) Recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Corporation by negligence or breach of orders; (iv) withholding of increments of pay.
Major Penalties : (v) Reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the employee of the Corporation will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of post-poning the future increments of his pay; (vi) xxx xxx xxx (vii) to (ix) xxx xxx 11.
It was submitted that more than one punishment could be imposed on the delinquent official as if only one minor penalty could be imposed on the delinquent the words used would have been any of the following penalties and not the "following penalties".
It was submitted that use of the words "following penalties" suggests that more than one minor penalty could be imposed upon the delinquent.
12.
In Depot Manager, APSRTC, Jangaon v N Ramulu and another, 1996(6) SLR 407 an employee of the State Transport Corporation had caused pecuniary loss of Rs. 500/- by driving a vehicle in a rash and negligent manner.
In a domestic enquiry he was awarded a minor punishment to make the loss good.
Subsequently, in departmental enquiry, he was awarded a major punishment of removal from service on account of some facts.
Order was held to be illegal as no one could be subjected to two punishments for the same misconduct/offence.
13.
In Commissioner of Rural Development and others v. AS Jagannathan, 1999(2) SCC 313, respondent was found guilty of shortage and misappropriation of stores.
The disciplinary authority keeping in view that respondent was to retire in near future, took a lenient view and imposed punishment of stoppage of increments for two years without cumulative effect.
Suspension was directed to be treated as service period but without pay.
In addition, loss of Rs. 51,300/- caused by respondent was also ordered to be recovered from him.
It was held that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to interfere with the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority.
The Tribunal has purported to interfere on the ground that three punishments cannot be imposed for the same charge.
This view cannot be sustained.
The order of recovery of loss caused on account of respondent's negligence and misconduct, is permissible under the Tamil Nadu Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules and under the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules and also under the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules, the former permitting recovery from pay and the latter permitting recovery from pensionary benefits after retirement.
The Tribunal was wrong in holding that if an order is passed for recovery of the amount from the employee, no punishment can be imposed on him.
The disciplinary authority, in the present, was entitled to impose punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
The disciplinary authority was also right in ordering that suspension should be treated as service period but without pay.
The order must be read as a whole.
The disciplinary authority has passed the order looking to the nature of proved charges.
The Tribunal was not right in interfering with the punishment.
14.
In Depot Manager, APSRT Corporation v. N Ramulu and another, 1997(II) SCC 319 it was held that it is true that reimbursement of the loss caused to appellant AP State Road Transport Corporation has been shown to be a penalty under Regulation 8(v) of the Regulations.
But the penalty for the act of negligence was removal from service.
The explanation to Regulation 8, however, enumerates various penalties which are not to be treated as penalties and one of them is as cause (5) thereof says : "The penalty of recovery from pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Corporation by an employee's negligence or breach of orders, may be imposed in addition to any other penalty which may be inflicted in respect of the same act of negligence or breach of orders".
This clause clearly says that the penalty for recovering loss caused to the management under Regulation (1)(v) shall not preclude the management from imposing any other penalty.
The High Court was, therefore, wrong in thinking that this was a case of double jeopardy.
The order passed by the learned Single Judge was eminently just and fair and the Division Bench of the High Court should not have interfered with that order.
15.
In this case also the imposition of the recovery of one year basic pay cannot be viewed as penalty as the recovery was foisted upon him for the loss caused to FCI by his misconduct.
For misconduct attributed to him punishment of stoppage of three increments without cumulative effect was imposed upon him.
16.
In State of UP v. Girja Dayal Srivastava and another, 1988(3) SLR 359 it was held that two punishments can be awarded i.e. one for the loss caused and the second for the mis-conduct.
17.
In this case, the punishment of stoppage of three increments without cumulative effect has to be viewed as penalty for the misconduct attributed to him.
Recovery from his pay in lieu of the pecuniary loss caused to the Corporation by him cannot be viewed as penalty as he caused loss to the Corporation and the Corporation sought to compensate itself by imposing upon him this recovery.
It is not double jeopardy as there was no vexation of him twice over for the same misconduct.
For the reasons given above, R.S.A.
No. 3658 of 1999 titled FCI v. Darshan Singh Sidhu is allowed while RSA No. 4790 of 1999 titled Darshan Singh Sidhu v. FCI dismissed.
In consequence, the judgment and decree dated 161999 of learned District Judge, Ferozepur are set aside and those passed by Civil Judge (Senior Division), Ferozepur dated 1811997 dismissing the plaintiff's suit are restored.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.