M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The petitioner in the instant case seeks direction inter alia, the following reliefs :-  "A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents, their men, agents or subordinates to accord approval of appointment of the petitioner in the vacant sanctioned post of Assistant Teacher of Bishnupur High School, P.O.B.
Kulkuri, District Birbhum, forthwith."
The case of the petitioner is that Bishnupur High School was recognised as X Class High School by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education with the effect from 1st January, 1964.
The school authorities concerned opened some new sections and to accommodate the students due to increase of students strength in the school, the school authorities also requested for sanction of 7 (seven) additional posts of teaching and two (2) posts of non-teaching staff.
The school has 13 existing approved teaching staff whereas it is entitled to 20 (twenty) teaching staff.
2.
The petitioner was appointed by an appointment letter dated 12th July, 1995 as an Assistant Teacher in English purely on temporarily ad hoc basis.
The school authorities requested the Director of School Education on 1971995 for sanction of additional posts and for approval of appointment of petitioner as Assistant Teacher in English of the said school.
Despite several representations made by the school authorities, no action was taken by the concerned authorities.
Thereafter a writ application was moved which was disposed of by an order dated 2991997 by His Lordship N.K.
Mitra (as His Lordship then was) with a direction to the Director of School Education to dispose of the petitioner's representation for grant of additional posts within the time framed therein.
3.
In pursuance thereof, the Director of School Education by his Memo dated 19111998 being Memo No. 1231/1(494-GA) sanctioned one additional post of Assistant Teacher and also directed that the post should be filled up on the recommendation of the concerned School Service Commission.
4.
The contention of the petitioner is that he is entitled to be approved in the said sanctioned additional post and direction is sought for grant of approval to his appointment.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner having been duly appointed by the school authorities and has been serving the school in question is entitled to be approved in the said sanctioned post.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Arun Kumar Rauth v. State of Bihar and others, reported in 1998(1) SCT 331 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 1477.
Reliance has also been placed upon an unreported order dated 30th August, 1999 in the matter of Abdul Kalam Ajad v. State of West Bengal and others, wherein directions were issued that the petitioner in that case who was working as Assistant Teacher in the concerned Madrasah from 1988 should be given necessary approval as assistant teacher in the concerned post in the Madrasah in question without any delay.
6.
In Smt. Puspa Singh and another v. State of West Bengal, reported in Calcutta Law Times, 1999(1) HC 393, Ruma Pal J (As Lordship then was) considered the question of regularisation and culled out the principles from the judgments of the Supreme Court relating to the question of regularisation as under :-  "Briefly stated, the Supreme Court said that the question of regularisation would arise when :(a) The appointment is made against an `available named vacancy'.
(b) The appointment against such vacancy is made following the rules and regulations governing such appointment.
(c) The incumbent has been employed for a long period of time against such vacancy.
If any one of the factors were missing, regularisation cannot be granted.
This is the present law.
See also LN Ghosh v. State of West Bengal, 1993(1) CHN 382."
In paragraph 16 of the said judgment, it was further held as follows :  "Assuming the school roll did have the number of students warranting the appointment of two additional teachers, but the justification for creation of a post, does not authorise the Managing Committee to create a post without the approval of the competent authority.
There was thus no sanctioned post against which the petitioners claim to have been appointed."
Further in paragraph 20 of the said judgment, it was held as follows :  "Whoever the appointing authority may be, the appointing authority can only appoint against a sanctioned vacancy and in accordance with the procedure prescribed."
The learned Judge, in that case, has also considered the decision in Arum Kumar Routh's case (supra), and observed as under :-  "The last decision cited by the petitioners was Arun Kumar Raut v. State of Bihar, AIR 1998 SC 1477 (supra).
In that case the Supreme Court directed regularisation of employees who had been appointed against the sanctioned post but their method of appointment was irregular.
In the case before me it is in dispute that the appointment of the petitioners were made against sanctioned post as well.
Besides, the Supreme Court while directing regularisation repeatedly made it clear that the decision was limited to the special facts of the appeal and the decision was not to be treated as precedent."
Applying the said principles to the instant case, it will be seen that the petitioner's appointment was made against a non-existing post.
There existed no sanctioned post to which the petitioner could have been appointed.
The post as noticed supra, was sanctioned by the Director of School Education in his memo dated 19111998.
The petitioner is said to have been appointed on 1271995.
7.
In the circumstances, it must be held that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief as prayed for.
The writ application is accordingly dismissed, however, without any order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order be supplied to the learned Counsel appearing for the parties if the same is applied for.
Petition dismissed.