JS Narang, J - The petitioners were appointed as Well Supervisors in the Tubewell Section of the Department of Agriculture, Punjab in the pay scale of Rs. 200-450 on the respective dates which need not be mentioned for the purpose of decision of this case.
The qualification required for the purpose of being appointed as Well Supervisors is not in dispute, i.e., a person with three years diploma in Mechanical Engineering after passing matriculation would make a person eligible to be appointed as Well Supervisor as the said fact has been admitted by the respondents.
2.
It is the case of the petitioners that the Well Supervisors were equated with the Upper Subordinates of PWD if the Well Supervisors possess the proper qualifications which were prescribed for the post of Upper Subordinates of PWD.
The accusation was made as far back as in 1928 vide communication dated 3171928 (copy Annexure P-1).
This equation was further maintained by the Pay Revision Board of 1958, First Pay Commission of 1967 and Second Pay Commission of 1978.
This fact has again not been disputed by the Government, as the fact averred in para No. 4 of the writ petition has been categorically admitted by the State in its written statement.
It has also been further admitted that the pay scale of Well Supervisors and that of Sectional Officers remained the same upto 31.12.1977.
The pay scale of both the posts, upon revision from time to time remained the same and in 1978, the pay scale was Rs. 570-1080.
It is averred that the Sectional Officers of the Public Works Department made a representation to the Government that their scales be fixed at Rs. 700-1200 with a Selection Grade of Rs. 800-1400 and they had further represented that their matter should be placed before the anomalies Committee constituted by the Government.
Similarly, the petitioners had also represented for the same relief.
It shall be appropriate to mention here that cases of the petitioners were recommended by the Administrative Department.
However, the Anomalies Committee accepted the recommendation of the Sectional Officers serving in various departments and as a sequel thereto, their pay scales stood revised from Rs. 570-1080 to Rs. 700-1200 with a selection grade of Rs. 800-1400 with effect from 111978.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners is that inspite of the fact that by virtue of previous recommendations made by the Pay Commissions, the pay scales of both the posts had been at par but the Government accepted the representation of the Sectional Officers whereas declined the representation of the Well Supervisors, such act is tainted with discrimination and arbitrariness.
Feeling aggrieved, the present writ petition has been filed.
4.
The State has not disputed the pay parity of both the posts right upto 1978 but thereafter has taken the stand that the duties of the two posts are different, therefore, revising the pay scales of Sectional Officers was justified and not giving the same treatment to the Well Supervisors is correct.
State Government communicated its inability to agree to the proposal of the petitioners for revising their pay scales treating them equivalent to those of Sectional Officers.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the stand of the Government is not justified and the rejection of the proposal of the petitioners by the Government is not sustainable.
In this regard, reliance has been placed upon various judicial pronouncements of this Court and the apex Court whereby the dicta has been laid down that if a post is equated with another post, subsequently, if no cogent reasons can be spelt out for spelling out the post being at variance, in that situation, the sufferers be entitled to seek the pay parity to the post which had been equated earlier.
The distinction can only be drawn if the duties and functions of the employees concerned are changed and the said change is spelt out by way of proper application of mind and notifying the specific plausible reasons in respect thereof.
In the case at hand, the change of duties though have been referred to by the State but no plausible reason for application of mind has been shown to be applied in respect thereof.
The citations which have been referred to are cited as Employees of Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd and another v. Union of India and others, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1367 : 1991(2) SCT 339 (SC), and in the Head note, it has been stated as under :-  "Constitution of India, Article 39(d) - Equal pay for equal work - Employees in unionised cadre in `A' Corporation of Govt. - Having same pay-scale in 1970 as that of employees working in same posts in `B' Corporation - Level of posts in question in both Corporations also same - No subsequent change in duties and functions of employees in both corporations - Revision of pay-scales of employees of `B' Corporation only - Govt. authorities directed to revise pay- scale of employee of `A' Corporation at par with pay-scale enjoyed by employees of `B' Corporation."
In The State of Punjab v. Dr. Gautam Mahajan, Senior Hydrogeologist, Water Resources Directorate, 1994(1) Services Cases Today 776, the Division Bench of this High Court observed as under :-  "A.
Constitution of India, Article 39(d) - Equation of posts - Pay scales - Specialised agencies and Executive Authorities to determine the equation of posts and parity of pay-scales - Once posts have been equated and the equation still existed - Then such posts must continue to have a parity of pay scales.
B.
Constitution of India, Article 39(d) - Equation of posts - Pay scale - Equation could and if there was a change in duties or functions of equated posts - If any equation is to discontinue, it must be after due application of mind and after according plausible reasons."
In Haryana State Biologists Association v. The State of Haryana, 1994(4) Recent Services Judgments 444 : 1994(3) SCT 198 (P&H)(DB), their Lordships of this High Court in para 4 observed as under :-  "4.
Reliance of the learned counsel appearing for the respondents upon the judgment reported as Narendra Kumar v. Dharam Dutt and another, 1993(3) RSJ 81 : 1993(3) SCT 174 (SC), is misplaced as the present case of the petitioners is not based upon the plea of equal pay for equal work but pertains to parity of pay-scales granted and followed for a pretty long time which has been disturbed without the authority of law."
Similarly in LJ Bhutani v. State of Haryana and another, 1997(4) RSJ 29, and the head note of which reads as under :-  "Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Pay-scales - Revision of - From different date - Two posts equated throughout - Carried same status, duties and responsibilities - Held State cannot arbitrarily fix different dates of revision of scales of pay for different employees who are similarly situated - Same would be arbitrary and unfair."
A similar view has been taken by Hon'ble Mr. Justice HS Bedi in Surinder Paul Bhatti and others v. The Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited and another, 1998(3) RSJ 340 : 1998(3) SCT 747 (P&H).
The observations made in the had note are as under :-  "Constitution of India, Articles 226/227 - Pay Scale - Parity - Post of Accounts Assistant in Markfed - Parity in pay-scale prior to 1178 with Assistants - Disparity in pay-scale w.e.f.
1178 - No cogent reasons have been spelt out as to why this has been done - Petitioners granted the pay- scale of Rs. 570-1080 w.e.f.
1178 and to Rs. 1500-2640 w.e.f.
1186."
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents has laid emphasis by projecting four reasons :-  (i) The scales of Sectional Officer in Public Works Department (B&R Branch) had been subsequently agreed to be revised from Rs. 570-1080 to Rs. 700-12000 keeping in view the technical nature of duties and responsibilities and that while revising the pay scales, the Government had decided that this revision of pay scales shall not be made the ground for revising the scales of other categories, enjoying the same un-revised scales; (ii) The posts of Well Supervisors were really equated though both the posts were not provided the same pay scale; (iii) The duties and responsibilties provided for both the posts are not similar; (iv) By accepting the same scales of Well Supervisors would have a wide repercussion as there are other similar categories which would also raise similar demands.
I am afraid none of the reasons put forth by the learned counsel for the respondents are justifiable and in fact are devoid of merit.
The Government cannot lose sight of the fact that right up to 1978, the Government had equated these posts and same pay scales have been given to both the posts after the revision suffered on account of the recommendations made by the Pay Commission.
No difference or reasons have been spelt out as to in what manner the duties are different and so far as the qualifications are concerned, they remain the same and the Government has admitted itself while submitting reply to para No. 4 that these two posts had been equated way back in 1928 and the copy Annexure P-1, i.e., letter issued by the Government of Punjab has also been admitted.
Nothing has been brought on record that after this communication, any other communication had been issued to the effect that these two posts are not equated or equitable on any other ground.
In fact on the basis of this communication, the pay revision was made in respect of both the posts right upto 31.12.1977.
A very weak defence has been put up by stating that the duties and responsibilties attached to these posts are different and that by revising the pay scales of Supervisors, the repercussions would be very wide as if the revised pay scales of Sectional Officers have not created any kind of repercussion.
I am not impressed by this argument, as the duties remained the same when pay parity was maintained upto 1978.
The duties are not at variance except that `buts' and `ifs' may have been added to give that colour.
But in that also the State has miserably failed.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents has further argued that the Sixth Report submitted by the Committee for removal of anomalies in revised scales of pay has not taken into consideration the principle of equation of these posts.
In this regard, the report dated 13101989 has been referred to.
It may be noted that this petition had been filed in the year 1986 when the impugned order (copy Annexure P-4) had been passed by the Government.
Though the said report of the anomaly Committee has not been challenged by the petitioners by way of amending the petition or otherwise.
In any case, the principle has to be decided, by analysing the stand of the Government in the year 1986 when the representation made by the petitioners had been rejected.
I am not satisfied with the stand of the Government by not equating the pay scales of the petitioners with those of Sectional Officers, especially in the light of the fact that the pay scale was being revised from time to time upon the recommendations of various pay Commissions for both the posts treating them equal on the basis of the decision of the Government which was taken way back in 1928.
8.
In view of the above, I allow this petition and direct the State Government for equating the pay-scales of the petitioners with that of the Sectional Officers and making them effective with effect from 111978 i.e., the date granted to the Sectional Officers.
It may be observed that the decisions of the Anomaly Committee rendered on 13101989 has not been challenged but the Government shall decide the case of the petitioners in the light of the above observations made by this Court vis-a-vis equation of the pay scale of the petitioners with that of the Sectional Officers.
9.
It is further directed that for the purpose of pay fixation, the revised pay scales of the petitioners shall be taken as effective from 111978.
However, the arrears shall be restricted to three years and two months prior to the date of filing of the present petition which was filed on 541986.
So far as future effect is concerned where reliance has been placed by the Government on the sixth report of the Anomaly Committee, the same shall be decided in view of the above observations.
The above directions be carried out within six months from the date of receipt of the certified copy of this order from this Court or from the petitioner whichever is earlier.
Petition allowed.