Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This petition was originally filed by Mr. TK Basu.
He having passed away during the pendency of this petition, Smt. Prativa Basu, the widow, has been impleaded as the petitioner.
2.
Mr. TK Basu (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) had joined service as an Assistant Agricultural Engineer (Plant Protection) in the Punjab Agricultural Service-II, on October 29, 1965.
The post was in the scale of Rs. 250-750.
With effect from February 1, 1969 the pay-scale was revised to Rs. 350-25-500-EB-30-590-30-830-35-900.
The petitioner's pay was fixed in the revised scale.
However, he was not permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar at the stage of Rs. 500/- when it had fallen due on February 24, 1969.
The case was periodically examined.
Ultimately, on February 27, 1989, the Director of Agriculture passed an order permitting the petitioner to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from November 23, 1986.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P14 with the writ petition.
On August 23, 1990 the petitioner was even promoted to the post of Agricultural Engineer.
He retired on January 31, 1993.
3.
After his retirement the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition in August 1993.
He primarily claimed that with the passing of the order dated February 27, 1989, all the increments from February 1969 to November 1986 had to be given to him.
In a nutshell, the argument was that once the petitioner was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar, the release of increments even for the period during which he was not found suitable for being allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar, was automatic.
4.
This petition was listed before me in October 1995.
One of the questions raised for consideration was :-  "Is the petitioner entitled to the release of all the increments that had fallen due from February 24, 1969 to November 23, 1986, when he was permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar ?"
Learned Counsel for the petitioner had placed a firm reliance on the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Dr. RN Arora v. State of Haryana and others, 1990(1) S.L.R.
703, to support his submission.
I had certain reservation about the view taken by the learned Judge in Dr. Arora's case.
Consequently, I had referred the matter to a Division Bench.
Vide order dated September 8, 1997 the Division Bench overruled the judgment in Dr. Arora's case and held that the petitioner "would not be entitled to the automatic release of all the increments that had fallen due from 24.2.1969 to 23.11.1986....." The matter was then remitted to the Single Judge.
It has now been placed before me.
5.
Mr. Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the action of the respondents in stopping the petitioner at the Efficiency Bar, was violative of the principles of natural justice.
No opportunity having been given to the petitioner, he is entitled to the release of all the increments with effect from February 1969.
The order dated February 27, 1989, having been passed without giving any notice to the petitioner, should be quashed.
He has further contended that the order assigns no reason for depriving the petitioner of 17 increments, which had fallen due from the year 1969 till 1986.
There is nothing to indicate that the Authority had taken a conscious decision in accordance with the requirements of Note 1 to Rule 48 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part-I.
The counsel has made another grievance also.
It has been submitted that the petitioner was initially working in the scale of Rs. 250-750.
With effect from February 1, 1969 the pay scale was revised and raised to Rs. 350-900.
In the year 1980 the Government had revised the pay-scale of the post held by the petitioner with retrospective effect from April 1, 1979.
The pay scale of Rs. 350-900 had been raised to Rs. 800-1600.
Whereafter on January 1, 1986 there was a further revision and the scale was raised to Rs. 2000-3200.
Ultimately on May, 1990 the pay scale had been raised to Rs. 2000-3500.
Learned Counsel submits that after allowing the petitioner to cross the Efficiency Bar, his pay was fixed in the scale of Rs. 2000-3200 and the benefit of revision in so far as the scale of Rs. 800-1600 is concerned, was not given to him.
Lastly it has been contended that the action of the Department is not in conformity with the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated December 29, 1982, a copy of whcih has been produced as Annexure P11 with the writ petition.
6.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, it appears that the following questions arise for consideration :-  1.
Is the action of the respondents liable to be quashed on the ground that it violates the principles of natural justice ?
2.
Is the action to in conformity with the provisions of Rule 48 (Note 1) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol-I, Part-I ?
3.
Has the petitioner been deprived of the benefit of the revision of pay scales ?
Regarding 1 :  8.
Normally all the civil posts carry specific scales of pay.
These scales provide for the grant of an annual increment.
These annual increments are normally released.
Whenever the Authority feels that the employee is guilty of some misconduct, it has the power to withhold the increment with or without cumulative effect.
A provision in this behalf has been made in the relevant Punishment and Appeal Rules.
Whenever the increment is sought to be withheld on account of some misconduct, the prescribed procedure, which envisages the grant of an opportunity, has to be followed.
9.
The scales of pay also provide for the Efficiency Bar.
For releasing an increment at the stage of the Efficiency Bar, a specified provision has been made.
In Rule 48 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part-I, it has been categorically provided that :-  "Where an efficiency bar is prescribed in a time-scale the increment next above the bar shall not be given to a Government employee without the specific sanction of the authority empowered to withhold increments under rule 47 or the relevant disciplinary rules applicable to the Government employee or of any authority whom the Governor may, by general or special order, authorise in this behalf."
The clear purport of this rule is that the increment after the Efficiency Bar is not automatically released.
The competent authority has to consider and pass an order.
It has to determine the suitability of the employee to cross the Efficiency Bar.
The release of the increment is not as a matter of course.
It is dependent upon the Authority being satisfied that the employee is fit to cross the Bar.
10.
It is the admitted position that the State Government has issued instructions.
At the relevant time it had been laid down that the employee should have at least 50 per cent `Good' reports so as to entitle him to cross the Efficiency Bar.
If he did not meet the measure, he was not considered fit to earn the increment.
In this process no penalty of stoppage of increment is being imposed.
The employee is not being accused of any misconduct.
Only his suitability for crossing the Efficiency Bar is to be assessed.
He is not sought to be deprived of something to which he may have become entitled as a matter of course.
On the contrary, the Authority has to assess his past performance and to determine whether he is fit for the release of the increment.
11.
Can it be said that the employee is entitled to an opportunity of hearing before he is held up at the Efficiency Bar ?
In my view the answer has to be in the negative.
Firstly, the employee is not being deprived of any benefit which may have accrued to him.
He is not being awarded any penalty.
He is not being deprived of any right.
Only his suitability is being assessed.
The situation is, in a limited sense, akin to the consideration of a claim for promotion.
No employee has a right to be heard before he is considered fit or unfit for promotion.
Similarly, the employee should not be entitled to the opportunity of hearing when his suitability to cross the Efficiency Bar is being assessed by the Authority.
12.
It is relevant to note that the decision has to be taken by the Authority on the basis of the annual confidential reports.
It depends upon the employee's record of service.
It is not the decision is taken on the basis of any material, which is not known to the employee.
In fact, according to the instructions issued by the Government, all adverse confidential reports are communicated.
The employee has the right to represent.
The presentations are considered and decided.
The decision regarding the fitness or otherwise of the employee to cross the Efficiency Bar is dependent solely on the assessment of these reports.
Just as an employee has no right to be heard when his suitability for promotion is assessed, he should, in my view, have no right to claim an opportunity of hearing when his case for crossing the Efficiency Bar is being examined.
13.
Mr. Malik has placed reliance on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in OP Gupta v. Union of India and others, 1987(5) S.L.R.
288, to contend that an employee has a right to be heard before he is held up at the Efficiency Bar.
14.
Mr. OP Gupta had been placed under suspension on September 3, 1959.
Adverse remarks had been conveyed to him.
He had been ordered to be dismissed from service on March 12, 1964.
By order dated October 4, 1966, his appeal was accepted.
A direction for the holding of a fresh departmental inquiry was given.
It was also directed that he will continue to remain under suspension.
After almost 11 years, the Chief Engineer had passed an order dated May 25, 1970, by which he was reinstated in service.
On his reinstatement, the employee had made a representation for the payment of full pay and allowances for the period of suspension.
The claim was declined on the ground that the departmental inquiry was pending.
The proceedings made no progress.
On April 25, 1972 the petitioner was retired under Fundamental Rule 56(j).
He challenged the order of retirement.
The learned Single Judge accepted the claim.
The Union of India filed an appeal.
On March 24, 1982 the Division Bench dismissed it.
The employee was paid Rs. 86,000/- under the threat of `contempt'.
Thereafter on September 17, 1982 an order was passed, by which Mr. OP Gupta was informed that his case for crossing the Efficiency Bar had been considered and that he was found "unfit to cross the Efficiency Bar w.e.f.
5.10.1966 or from any subsequent date upto 5101971."
It was in the context of this factual position that their Lordships, while examining the matter, were pleased to, inter alia, observe that :-  "Undoubtedly, the High Court gave a direction in terms of FR 54(2) that the appellant would be entitled to his full pay and allowances as also to his increments etc.
But this would be the normal increment (incident ?)
prior to the crossing of the efficiency bar for purposes of FR 54(2).
There has to be a specific order in terms of FR 25 before a Government servant can be allowed to draw his increments above the efficiency bar.
The Government was justified in withholding increments under FR 25 pending the departmental inquiry but after the High Court had quashed the department inquiry, the question whether the appellant could be deprived of his increments under FR 25 was a live issue till the controversy was settled by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance decision dated September 21, 1967."
Thereafter their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :  "We have set out facts in sufficient detail to show that there is a presumption that the Government always acts in a manner which is just and fair.
There was no occasion whatever to protract the departmental enquiry for a period of 20 years and keeping the appellant under suspension for a period of nearly 11 years unless it was actuated with the mala fide intention of subjecting him to harassment......" It is in the background of the facts that it was held that the employee was entitled to an opportunity of hearing.
With respect, it appears that their Lordships were not laying down a general rule that even when the record of the employee is such that he cannot be declared fit to cross the Efficiency Bar, he would be entitled to an opportunity of hearing.
15.
It is the admitted position in the present case that the petitioner had not obtained 50 per cent `Good' reports till the year 1986.
Thus, he was not considered suitable to cross the Efficiency Bar.
The instructions issued by the Government laid down a uniform yardstick, which is followed in all cases.
Nothing new was being done.
No punishment was being awarded.
No hearing was required to be given.
16.
Mr. Malik has also referred to the Division Bench judgment of this court in Gopi Ram v. The Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana and another, 1992(5) S.L.R.
550.
Their Lordships were examining the conflict in judicial opinion regarding the grant of an opportunity to an employee whose claim for crossing the Efficiency Bar was being considered.
Sitting singly, I am bound by this decision.
The matter should normally be referred to a larger Bench.
17.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has made a very forthright submission.
Mr. TK Basu having expired, the question of granting an opportunity of hearing at this stage does not arise.
Irrespective of this fact, there is another stumbling block in the petitioner's path.
Admittedly, he had been stopped at the Efficiency Bar in the year 1969.
This had continued year after year till 1989, when he was permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from November 1986.
Even thereafter the writ petition was filed in August 1993.
In my view the cause of action had really accrued to the petitioner in the year 1969 when he was for the first time stopped at the Efficiency Bar.
From that day onwards, the cause of action had persisted and he had failed to raise his little finger till the year 1993.
There was an inordinately long delay.
Even after the passing of the final order on February 27, 1989, the petitioner had waited for more than four years.
18.
Mr. Malik submits that the petitioner had represented.
It is undoubtedly so.
However, the first representation, placed by the petitioner on the record after the passing of the order dated February 27, 1989, is at Annexure P15.
It is dated February 22, 1990.
Thereafter, on April 27, 1991 a notice was sent through counsel under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It is at Annexure P16.
Still he waited for more than two years and presented the petition to this Court on August 20, 1993.
Thus, there was a delay of almost four years and six months from the date of the passing of the order impugned in this petition.
19.
Taking the fact of delay into consideration, I think the petitioner has disentitled himself to the claim, as made in this petition.
This situation, in my view, obviates the necessity of referring the matter to a larger Bench.
It is held that the petitioner's claim that the action was violative of the principles of natural justice, is liable to be rejected on the ground of delay.
Regarding No. 2 :  20.
Mr. Malik contended that the order passed by the Authority was not in conformity with the provisions of Note 1 under Rule 48 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. 1, Part-I.
Learned Counsel submits that the Authority is bound to determine the stage from which the employee is being allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar.
Note 1 reads as under ;  "When a Government employee is allowed to pass an efficiency bar which had previously been enforced against him, he should come on to the time-scale at such stage as the authority competent to declare the bar removed may fix for him, subject, of course, to the pay admissible according to his length of service."
A perusal of the above provisions shows that the Authority has to determine the stage at which the employee's pay has to be fixed.
In the present case the competent authority has done so.
A perusal of the order shows that the petitioner was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar vide order dated February 27, 1989.
His pay was fixed at Rs. 530/- with effect from November 23, 1986.
21.
Mr. Malik submits that the petitioner was entitled to an opportunity at this age also to show that he was entitled to the release of all the increments with effect from February 1969.
22.
As noticed above, it is the admitted position that the State Government has issued instructions relating to the crossing of Efficiency Bar.
One of the provisions is that the employee should have at least 50 per cent `Good' reports.
The petitioner was aware of this factual position.
A persual of the notice dated April 27, 1991 (Annexure P16 to the writ petition) served by the counsel for the petitioner on the respondents, specifically makes mentione of the fact that the petitioner was not allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar on the ground taht "my client Shri TK Basu had failed to earn more than 50 per cent good reports from the year 1966-67....." Even today at the hearing it has not been suggested that the petitioner had earned more than 50 per cent good reports.
It appears that the petitioner was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from the date he satisfied the prescribed test.
In my view the action was in conformity with the requirements of the rule.
The principles of natural justice are not attracted.
Regarding 3 :  23.
It was contended that the benefit of the revised scale of pay had not been given to the petitioner.
24.
Full details in this behalf are not contained in the petition.
It has not been shown that the pay, as actually disbursed to the petitioner, was less than what was really due to him.
Irrespective of that, it is clarified that if a representation is submitted to the Department by the present petitioner (Mrs. Prativa Basu), the competent Authority shall decided it within two months from the date of its receipt.
If it is found that the petitioner was entitled to a pay higher than what was actually paid to him, the arrears, which may due, shall be paid within one month after the decision.
In case of failure to make the payment as aforesaid, the petitioner (Mrs. Basu) shall be entitled to the release of all the arrears along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date the higher pay had fallen due till the date of payment.
Even the retiral benefits shall be revised and released accordingly.
25.
Lastly, it was contended that the action of the authorities was not in conformity with the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated December 29, 1982.
26.
I have perused these instructions.
These relate to a situation where the pay scale provides for a jump.
That is not the situation in the present case.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not withheld at the stage of any jump.
The instructions have no application.
27.
No other point has been raised.
28.
In view of the above, the petitioner's challenge to the order dated February 27, 1989 (a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P14 with the writ petition) is negatived.
It is, however, held that in case the petitioner has not been given the benefit of the revised scale of pay, the needful shall be done, and whatever is found due, shall be determined and paid.
29.
In other respects, no ground for interference is made out.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.
Order accordingly.