RL Anand, J - The petitioner has filed the present writ under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India claiming disability pension from the respondent-authorities and the case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Indian Army as a Commissioned Officer on 11121962.
He was discharged from the Army on 29111978 as he was declared unfit for army service by the medical board.
At the time to his discharge, he was holding the substantive rank of Major.
According to the petitioner, when the joined the military service, he was not suffering from any disease and he was declared unfit for military service.
The disability occurred due to stress and strains of the military service.
The petitioner made a request for the grant of disability pension in the year 1993.
The petitioner was informed on 1011994 that his case was under consideration.
On 541994, the petitioner was informed that his disability pension case has been rejected on the ground that the disability suffered by him was not attributable to the military service.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
As per the respondents, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the short ground of delay and laches as the petitioner has approached this Court after a lapse of 20 years.
It was also the defence of the respondents that since the petitioner was discharged from the service in the year 1978 and as per the rules of the Govt., the respondents were supposed to keep the records for 15 years which period has already expired, therefore, it cannot be verified from the official record, whether the petitioner has suffered the disability while in service or not.
It was also one of the (sic) respondents that this High Court has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition.
3.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to Annexure P-1, which establishes the averments of the petitioner that he joined the army in the year 1962 and he was discharged from the army on 29111978.
We all know that when a person joins the army, he is subjected to medical test.
It has not been shown on the record by the counsel for the respondents that any deformity was detected when the petitioner was enrolled into the service.
Rather, the document, Annexure P-1, would show that there was no disability mentioned in the record of the petitioner.
Against column No. 9, it has been verified by the respondents that the petitioner was declared unfit for any form of military service by (the Medical Board held at Delhi on 371978.
This document, Annexure p-1, has been issued by the respondents on 1631998.
It is the basic principle of law that the disability pension is not a bounty.
It is civil right of a person.
It furnishes successive cause of action.
It is further proved on the record that till the year 1994, the petitioner had been made representations to the respondents and the reply of the respondents was that his request in under consideration.
The cause of action would arise to the petitioner when final reply was given by the respondents on the disability pension case of the petitioner that the same has been declined as the disease suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the army service nor it has been aggravated during the course of army service.
In this view of the matter, the cause of action will arise to the petitioner when his claim for disability pension was finally declined.
From this angle, it cannot be held that there was an inordinate delay in filing the present writ petition.
It does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to say that there is no record available with them.
Rather, it is proved on the record that the petitioner was supplied the information in the year 1996.
This information must have been jotted down or derived from some record which must be in the possession of the respondent- authorities.
The petitioner has been discharged from the service on the ground that he was suffered from Schizophrenia Affective Psychosis.
What is the extent of disability suffered, the case of the petitioner is silent in this regard, but according to Regulation No. 173, a person can be discharged from military service if his disability is assessed at 20%.
5.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that since there is no, prima facie, proof with regard to the extent of disability suffered by the petitioner, therefore, the petition is liable to be dismissed.
6.
I do not subscribe to the argument of the counsel for the respondents in view of Regulation No. 173 which talks that if the disability suffered is to the extent of 20%, in such a situation, a person can be discharged.
7.
With regard to the jurisdiction of this Court, I am of the considered opinion that the present petition can be filed in this High Court.
The petitioner is claiming the relief against the Union of India and, moreover, no prejudice is likely to be caused to the respondents.
Rather, the view of this Court is that such technical objections like jurisdiction, should not be taken by the Union of India or State as these objections do not lie in their mouth.
The rights of a citizen, especially of a military personnel, should not be defeated on the ground of jurisdiction.
In this view of the matter, I allow this writ petition and give directions to the respondents to give the disability pension to the petitioner by assessing it at 20% w.e.f.
the date of the discharge till payment, within three months from the receipt of copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum.
The petitioner is directed to appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the authorities.
No costs.
Petition allowed.