Ratnakar Dash, J - The petitioner in this writ application filed under Arts.
226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has prayed for issue of appropriate writ or direction to Paradeep Port Trust and its functionaries to regularise his services as a Junior Hindi Translator or in any other suitable post according to his qualification.
2.
The case of the petitioner, in short, is that to fill up a post of Junior Hindi Translator the authorities of Paradeep Port Trust held an interview on 1121992.
Pursuant to the letter issued by the Deputy Secretary, Paradeep Port Trust, Annexure-1, the petitioner appeared in the interview and as per the merit list his name finds place at serial No. 2.
Since the post was one, the person who stood first in the selection was appointed vide order dated 14.3.92.
As the matter stood thus, the Secretary, Paradeep Port Trust appointed the petitioner vide order dated 18.9.92 to work in Hindi Cell of the Administrative Department as per appointment order, Annexure-2, for a spell of 44 days on daily wage basis.
Pursuant to the said appiontment the petitioner joined in the post on 19.9.92 and subsequently his service was renewed from time to time with artificial breaks.
Subsequently with the approval of Ministry of Surface Transport, Government of India, one post of Junior Hindi Translator as well as one post of Hindi Typist were created by the Port Trust Authorities.
As regards the filling up the post of Junior Hindi Translator the authorities without taking into consideration the petitioner's case and his past service for regularisation in the said post, with an oblique motive and in order to deprive him of the said post, invited applications from intending candidates by publication of an advertisemnt in the `Prajatantra', a local Oriya daily, Annexure-5.
In the said advertisement it was indicated that the said post has been reserved for scheduled tribe.
The grievance of the petitioner is that as he has been working on daily wage basis in the Hindi Cell of the Administrative Department of Paradeep Port Trust since 1992, his case should have been considered for regularisation in the newly created post of Junior Hindi Translator keeping in mind the dictum of the Apex Court with regard to regularisation of casual/ad hoc employees.
It is further contended that the post in question being one in the cadre, reservation rule has no application.
In that view of the matter, the action of the authorities having no sanction under law, and no other efficacious remedy being available to the petitioner, the present writ application is filed praying for necessary relief as aforesaid.
3.
A comprehensive counter-affidavit has been filed by the opposite parties contending, inter alia, that initially the post of Junior Hindi Translator being one and as per the reservation policy if one vacancy occurs in the initial recruitment year and the corresponding roster point happens to be a scheduled caste or a scheduled tribe, it should be treated as unreserved and filled up accordingly.
In view of this, the said post was filled up by an unreserved candidate in 1992.
The next post in the same cadre was created in 1993 which was meant for reserved category, i.e., scheduled tribe, in view of the reservation principle that in subsequent recruitment year if there is one vacancy it should be treated as reserved.
In that view of the matter, petitioner's case for regularisation against a reserved vacancy is against the reservation principle and, therefore, he could not have been absorbed/regularised against the said post although he had been working in the said post on contract basis on different spells of 44 days.
4.
Shri DN Lenka, learned counsel for the petitioner, contended with vehemence that as there are in total two posts in the cadre of Junior Hindi Translator, both should have been filled up by candidates belonging to general category.
Instead the Port Trust authorities advertised the second post to be filled up by a scheduled tribe candidate which is against the reservation principle formulated by the Government, inasmuch as 75 per cent of the total posts are meant for scheduled tribe and if the second post is given to the reserved category, i.e, scheduled tribe, then it comes to 50 per cent as against 75 per cent.
Shri Lenka further submitted that the authorities should have considered the case of the petitioner keeping in mind that he was in serial No. 2 in the merit list prepared in 1991 and further he served under the Port Trust for a considerable period on casual/ad hoc basis.
Shri Lenka in support of his argument relied upon certain decisions of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1988 SC 959, Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar, AIR 1995 SC 1371 : 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC), RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, and Swati v. Damodar Anant Karandikar, 1996(2) SLJ 6 : 1996(3) SCT 616 (SC) and of Allahabad High Court in 1978(1) SLR 844 JC Mallik v. Union of India.
5.
Shri SK Padhi, learned counsel for opposite parties, on the other hand, submitted that the merit list prepared in 1992 cannot be of any help to the petitioner since the post for which advertisement was made was one and the same was filled up by the candidate who stood first in the interview.
He would further contend that according to the model roster, Annexure-B/2 so far as the State of Orissa is concerned, 15 per cent is meant for scheduled castes, 23 per cent is meant for scheduled tribes and 12 per cent is meant for other backward castes.
As indicated in the said model roster first post in the cadre is meant for scheduled tribe.
In the present case since the post of Junior Hindi Translator created in 1990 was one which was filled up in 1992 by a candidate belonging to unreserved category, the Port Trust authorities by applying carry forward rule advertised to fill up the second post created in 1993 by a candidate belonging to scheduled tribe.
In the premises, no fault can be found with the authorities treating the said post as reserved one and further the petitioner as of right cannot claim absorption/regularisation merely because he was engaged to work in the said post on casual basis.
6.
From the submissions made at the Bar two questions that arise for consideration are:  (1) Whether the post in question in the cadre of Junior Hindi Translator should have been considered as unreserved?
and (2) If the aforesaid question is answered in the affirmative, then whether the petitioner should have been absorbed in the said post?
Undisputed factual position as borne out from the pleadings of the parties is that one post in the cadre of Junior Hindi Translator was created in the Port Trust during the year 1990 and to fill up the said post interview was conducted in which the petitioner was one of the candidates.
In the said interview the petitioner stood second in the merit list.
The post in the cadre being one, the candidate in serial No. 1 who belongs to unreserved category was appointed.
The second post in the cadre was created in 1993 and the Port Trust authorities issued advertisement to fill up the said post by a candidate belonging to reserved category, i.e. scheduled tribe.
This has been seriously objected to by the petitioner.
Contention of Shri Lenka is that when there were two posts in all in the cadre if one goes to the reserved category (scheduled tribe), then percentage of reservation comes to 50 instead of 75 per cent.
This submission of Shri Lenka is neither legal nor supported by any judicial decision.
According to reservation principle applicable to the Port Trust if one vacancy occurs in the initial recruitment year and the corresponding roster point is meant for scheduled castes or scheduled tribes, it should be treated as unreserved and filled up accordingly and the reservation should be carried forward to subsequent years.
But in the subsequent recruitment year or years if there is one vacancy, it should be treated as reserved and a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe candidate, if available should be appointed in the vacancy.
In the case in hand though there are two posts in the cadre but these posts were created in different years, one in 1990 and the other in 1993.
Though according to the model roster applicable to State of Orissa, Annexure-B/2, in a lot of 100 posts, serial No. 1 is earmarked for the scheduled tribe, but according to the reservation principle the post created in 1990 being one, it was treated as unreserved and was filled up accordingly.
The next post created in 1993 though according to the model roster should have gone to the unreserved category but because of the reservation principle it was carried forward and was accordingly advertised to be filled up by a candidate belonging to reserved category, i.e. scheduled tribe.
In that view of the matter, we have no hesitation to hold that the decision taken by the Port Trust authorities to fill up the second post by a candidate of reserved category (scheduled tribe) is in terms of the reservation principle.
From the tenor of submission of Shri Lenka what we gather is that unless there are in total 14 posts in the cadre (75 per cent of the posts according to Shri Lenka are meant for the scheduled tribe which in fact is incorrect in view of the model roster Annexure-B/2) one post cannot be reserved for the scheduled tribe.
So according to him, 1 to 13 posts out of 14 in the cadre are to be filled up by unreserved and reserved (scheduled caste) and not a single post thereof should go to the scheduled tribe.
We are afraid if this logic is accepted and applied, it will infringe the constitutional mandate of Art. 16(4) of the Constitution of India.
The decisions cited by Shri Lenka instead of supporting the case of the petitioner, support the case of the opposite parties.
7.
In the case of Dr. Chakradhar Paswan (supra) the question for consideration was whether the three posts of Deputy Directors of Homoeopathic, Unani and Ayurvedic are distinct and separate so as to apply the reservation principle.
While answering the question in the affirmative the Court observed that according to 50 point roster if in a particular grade a single post falls vacant, it should, in the case of first vacancy, be considered as unreserved, i.e. general and on the second occasion when a single post again falls vacant, the same must be treated as reserved.
The next decision relied upon is the case of RK Subharwal (supra).
In the said case the Court in paragraph 4 of the judgment observed that when a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve categories and the candidates belonging to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserve posts.
We may now come to the next decision in Smt. Swati (supra) where the point for consideration was as to what should be the percentage of reservation for the members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the promotional posts in Bombay Port Trust.
The Court upon consideration held that the percentage of reservation for members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the promotional posts is as per the percentage of reservation fixed by the Central Government for the posts under it, i.e. 15 per cent for scheduled castes and 75 per cent for scheduled tribes.
The last decision relied upon is of Allahabad High Court in the case of JC Malik (supra).
The said decision has no relevance to the present case and, therefore, we do not like to burden the judgment by making a reference to the factual aspect of the said case and the principle decided therein.
8.
Regard being had to the materials on record and on discussion of the submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties threadbare, we are of the considered view that the post in question in the cadre of Junior Hindi Translator being meant for reserved category, the petitioner although was working in the said post on casual/ad hoc basis, could not have been absorbed in the said post and his services could not have been regularised.
9.
In the result, there being no merit in the writ petition, is dismissed accordingly.
In the circumstances, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.