Bhawani Singh, J - Presently, the petitioner is working as Reader in Political Science University of Kashmir.
He joined the University as lecturer in November 1974.
In 1987, he was upgraded to the post of Reader vide order No. F.1 (PP Scheme)/Adm dated 23-10-1987.
He also performed the duties of Head of Department, Political Science during this period.
2.
During the course of service, he had occasion to work under Dr. ZM Qureshi, who was at that time professor and Head of Department, Political Science, University of Kashmir.
Dr. ZM Qureshi remained in the service of University for more than ten years and left in September 1977.
Pursuant to advertisement Notice No. F 10 (APP-Gen)/Admn/T/W/96 dated July 27, 1996 applications were invited for the post of Professor, Reader and Lecturer in various disciplines, among them was Political Science against Item No. 29 of the advertisement notice.
It prescribed qualifications for the post of Professor in Political Science.
Since the petitioner possessed the prescribed qualifications, he applied for the post of Professor.
His application was entertained and he was called for interview vide interview Slip dated 6-2- 1997.
Through this petition, he has challenged the constitution of Selection Committee being not in confirmity with Section 36 of Universities Act.
1969.
According to him, whatever action is taken by this Selection Committee would stand vitiated since it is not constituted in accordance with law.
Pointing out the defect in the Constitution of Selection Committee, reference has been made to Section 36 of Universities Act, 1969 whereunder constitution of Selection Committee is as under :  (1) Vice Chancellor who acts as Chairman.
(2) Pre Vice Chancellor, if any.
(3) Chairman, Public Service Commission or a member of Public Service Commission nominated by him.
(4) Head of the Department concerned in case of selection of Readers and Lecturers.
(5) One member nominated by University council of University concerned in case of appointment of professors and Readers and one member nominated by Syndicate concerned in the case of appointment of Lecturers as the case may be.
Provided that the panel shall be reviewed after every two years.
(6) Two persons not connected with the University having special knowledge the subject in which the appointment is to be made, nominated by the Vice Chancellor from the panel of experts approved by the University Council in case Professors and Readers and the Syndicate in case of Lecturers.
According to petitioner, panel experts were Dr. ZM Qureshi and Dr. Naqvi.
only Dr. ZM Qureshi was available while Dr. Naqvi was replaced by Dr. Vidya Bhushan, Professor Political Science, Jammu University though he was not at all in the panel.
Thus, according to the petitioner, the Selection Committee is vitiated for two reasons namely, that two persons having special knowledge of the subject should not be connected with the University and that the expert should be on the panel of the University.
Since Dr. ZM Qureshi had been in the employment of University up to 1977 as Head of the Department, Political Science, he was connected with the University.
Dr. Vidya Bhushan was not on the panel of expert, therefore, he could not be associated in the Selection Committee.
3.
Respondents have stated inter alia, that petitioner has no locus standi to challenge the process of Selection after having participated as a candidate.
It is for the Selection Committee to select the most suitable candidate for appointment and court cannot sit over its Judgement.
Dr. ZM Qureshi worked in University of Kashmir from 1967-68 to September 1977 whereafter he was never connected with the University of Kashmir.
Name of Dr. Vidya Bhushan was very much on the panel of University Council and the Selection Committee comprised of Dr. ZM Qureshi and Dr. Vidya Bhushan amongst others.
Total number of candidates for the post were three but only two appeared in the interview that took place on 1-3-1997.
Since Dr. ZM Qureshi is not connected with the University after leaving it in 1977, he is not dis-qualified from being member of Selection Committee within the meaning of Section 36 of Universities Act.
1969.
"Not connected" should mean in the day to day functioning of the University Administration.
"Connection" should be intimate rendering the person unable to take independent decision being influenced by his connection with the University.
Dr. ZM Qureshi is not biased in favour of the University and against any candidate.
4.
Supplementary affidavit has been filed by the petitioner wherein it is pointed out that both the experts are connected with the University.
Dr. ZM Qureshi, Head of Department, Political Science, University of Delhi (South Campus) was a co-opted member of the University Board of Undergraduate Studies at the relevant time and continues to be a member (P 1 S. No. 12).
5.
Similarly, Dr. Vidya Bhushan is also connected with the University being co-opted member of the Universities Board of Post Graduate Studies at the time of selection and continues to be so (P 1 S. No. 11).
Accordingly, both the experts were holding the posts of profit at the time the selection was undertaken.
They are, therefore, connected with the University of Kashmir and could not have acted as expert members of the Selection Committee.
6.
First of all, we deal with the preliminary objections of the respondents that the petition is pre-mature and that the petitioner has no locus standi to file the petition having participated in the selection.
We see no substance in this plea.
Challenging the constitution of Selection Committee at this stage is neither improper nor pre-mature.
The petitioner came to know about the participation of Dr. ZM Qureshi and Dr. Vidya Bhushan when he appeared before the Selection Committee, otherwise he did not know that these experts would be members of the Selection Committee since the panel of experts is maintained with the strict confidentiality by the University.
Therefore, he challenged the constitution of Selection Committee immediately thereafter.
His participation in the Selection process does not divest him of right to challenge the Constitution of the Committee if it is not constituted in accordance with law.
7.
Now, we turn to the main question raised in this case.
It is undeniable that Selection Committee comprises of amongst others two experts not connected with the University.
On the basis of above mentioned facts, the petitioner contended that both these experts are dis-qualified to be members of the Selection Committee being connected with the University while respondents urged that they are not connected and whatever connection as pointed out, the same is not intimate.
To buttress this submission, reliance has been placed on two-judge Bench decision of Allahabad High Court reported in AIR 1967 Allahabad 101 Kashi Nath Mishra v. Chancellor, University of Allahabad and others in which the Court said in para 13 as under :  "13.
The election of Shri Sri Prakash was also challenged on the ground that he was ineligible for election, being a registered graduate and thus a person connected with the University within the meaning of Sec. 11(4)(i)(a) of the Act.
A registered graduate does not hold a post of profit in the University.
He is not an officer of the University or a constituent College or an Associate College or Hostel.
He has no concern with the administration of the University and has no dealing with it.
There are no favours that a Vice Chancellor can bestow on him.
All that he is entitled to is, along with other registered graduates, to elect twenty-five persons to the Court.
In our Judgment the word "connected" means intimately connected or " connected in a manner so as to take pressure or be unable to act independently.
The scheme of section 11 of the Act is that in the selection of the Vice Chancellor independent persons should have a hand.
That is why the Chief Justice has to nominate a sitting or a retired Judge and the Chancellor, who is the Governor, a nominee of his.
The election of Shri Sri Prakash cannot, therefore, be assailed on this ground, though on other grounds we have already held it to be invalid."
Other decision placed for our consideration is AIR 1990 SC 434 (Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc.).
Having given our anxious consideration to the problem, we are of the opinion that constitution of Selection Committee is not in accordance with Section 36 of Universities Act.
1969 which specifically provides that the two experts should not be connected with the University.
Expression " Connected with the University" is different from "not in the service of University".
What is clear from these two expressions is that in the case of former, dis- qualification attaches when experts are connected with the University meaning thereby the connection in such a case need not be intimate while in the latter case the connection is intimate being in the service of the University.
Again, in the former case connection has to be liberally construed.
It cannot be limited to association with the University in its day to day administration.
Therefore, University Laws adopting expression "not connected with the University" have to be read differently form the University laws using expression "not in the service of University" (See : 1989(1) SLJ 66 Dr. Gorak Nath Misra Vrs Goa University and others).
With respect, the views taken by Allahabad High Court cannot be accepted since the construction placed by it is too broad which appears to be the result of facts peculiar to the case before the Bench.
The object of having such a provision is to insulate the process of selection from any kind of possible bias that may be entertained by any candidate in the Selection Committee.
In AK Kriapak v. Union of India (AIR 1970 SC 150) the Supreme Court observed that it was not necessary to establish bias but it was sufficient to invalidate the selection process if it could be shown that there was a reasonable likelihood of bias.
Likelihood of bias may arise on account of proprietary interest or on account of personal reason such as hostility to one party or personal friendship or family relationship with the other.
Where a reasonable likelihood of bias is alleged on the ground of relationship, the question would always be as to how close the degree of relationship is or in other words, is the nearness of the relationship so great as to give rise to reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the authority making the selection.
In Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others (1985(4) SCC 417) the Apex Court said that :  ".......
The question is not whether the Judge is actually biased or in fact decides partially, but whether there is a real likelihood of bias.
What is objectionable in such a case is not that the decision is actually tainted with bias but the circumstances are such as to create reasonable apprehension in the mind of others that there is a likelihood of bias affecting the decision.
The basic principle underlying the rule is that justice must not only be done but must also appear to be done.
It is also important to note that this rule is not confined in cases where judicial power stricto sensu is exercised.
It is appropriately extended to all cases where an independent mind has to be applied to arrive at a fair and just decision between the rival claims of parties.
Justice is not the function of the courts alone; it is also the duty of all those who are expected to decide fairly between contending parties................" [See also DK Khanna v. Union of India, (1973) 1 SLR 80 (H.P.)].
8.
In the context of aforesaid discussion, we passed through the facts placed before us in this case.
It is not denied that Dr. ZM Qureshi remained Head of Department, Political Science, University of Kashmir for about a decade.
Obviously, he managed the affairs of University and his Department for a long time leaving great imprint before leaving it.
He had his colleagues, his students and many others in the University.
Thereafter, his co-option as a member of Universities Board of Under-graduate Studies appears to be the result of this connection.
Similar is the case with Dr. Vidya Bhushan who happens to be the co-opted member of Universities Board of Post Graduate Studies.
Both these experts are enjoying benefits out of the University.
This connection is quite apparent and intimate disqualifying both of them from being expert members of Selection Committee within the meaning of Section 36 of Universities Act.
1969.
Their connection with the University has given rise to likelihood of bias also in the mind of petitioner who is one of the candidates for selection in question.
With a view to have fair selection, University Rules have to be followed scrupulously.
These days there is no difficulty in finding experts for empanelment to Selection Committees since they are available.
9.
What emerges out of the aforesaid discussion is that selection Committee in question has not been constituted in terms of Section 36 of the Universities Act.
1969 for reasons aforesaid and is, therefore, quashed.
The University may make the selection after constituting fresh Selection Committee keeping in mind the observations made hereinabove.
Petition is, therefore, allowed in terms of aforesaid.
However, the parties are left to bear their respective costs.
Petition allowed.