Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioners have challenged the orders copies of which have been annexed as Annexures P2, P.4 and P6.
Annexure P2 is that joint tentative seniority list of Assistant/Senior Scale Stenographers.
Vide Annexure P4, respondent No. 3 who was working as Senior Scale Stenographer was promoted as Head Assistant and vide Annexure P6 the representation of the petitioners was rejected.
The petitioners have further prayed for a direction to the respondents to consider their claim for promotion to the post of Head Assistant from the date when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that at the relevant time, the petitioners were working as Assistants in the Economic and Statistical Organisation of the Haryana Government.
As per averments made in the writ petition, promotions in the said Department are governed by the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation (State Service Class III) Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the 1963 Rules).
These rules were framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and they were amended vide notification published in the Gazette on 7th March, 1972.
By the amendment of 1972, under rule 7, inter alia, clause (h) was added after clause (g) which reads as under:  "(h) in the case of Head Assistants, by promotion from amongst the Assistants possessing qualifications mentioned in Appendix B to these Rules and if there is no Assistant fulfilling the qualifications mentioned therein, by direct recrutment."
In terms of clause (h) of rule 7, the post of Head Assistant can be filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistants possessing qualifications mentioned in appendix B to the rules and if there is no Assistant fulfilling the qualifications mentioned, by direct recruitment or by transfer.
3.
In the year 1961, the Governor of Punjab in exercise of powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, made rules regulating the promotions of Stenographers and Steno-typists in the Civil Services of the State to higher posts in the Clerical side and these rules are called the Punjab Civil Services (Promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists) Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the 1961 Rules).
In terms of Rule 1(2) of the said rules, these rules shall apply to all Stenographers and Steno-typists of all the Departments of the State except those of the Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Legislative Council and the Punjab High Court.
Under rule 3(1) of the said rules, in offices where the scale of pay of stenographers is identical to that of Assistants, the Stenographers shall, before becoming eligible for promotion to a higher post on the Clerical side have to work as Assistant for a period of two years on some existing vacancy or by sharing the work of an Assistant.
Rule 8 of these rules provides that "the provisions of these rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any rules for the time being in force regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State".
4.
Respondent No. 3, who had been working in the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation as Senior Scale Stenographer (the scale of pay which post is identical to that of Assistant) since 7th November, 1976 and had acquired two years' experience as Assistant, was promoted as Head Assistant vide order dated 30th March, 1981 (Annexure P4) under rule 3 of 1961 Rules.
The promotion of respondent No. 3 as Head Assistant has been challenged in this writ petition as stated earlier.
5.
Mr. Balram Gupta, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted that the 1961 Rules were applicable to all Departments of the State whereas 1963 Rules were specifically framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India for the officials working in the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation.
He further submitted that the 1963 Rules were framed subsequent to the 1961 Rules.
He, therefore, contended that 1963 Rules being the special Rules framed for the Department where all the petitioners and respondent No. 3 were working at the relevant time, shall prevail over the 1961 Rules which apply to all the Departments.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in JK Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Limited v. State of Uttar Pradesh,AIR 1961 SC 1170 and Ashoka Marketing Limited v. Punjab National Bank, AIR 1991 SC 855 : 1990(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 297.
6.
The learned counsel further submitted that even otherwise the petitioners had entered the service in the year 1965, i.e. before the respondent No. 3 and as such, they were senior to respondent No. 3.
He, therefore, contended that keeping in view the length of service, the petitioners should have been shown senior to respondent No. 3 in the seniority list (Annexure P4) and the senior-most petitioner was entitled to be promoted as Head Assistant in place of respondent No. 3.
7.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana appearing on behalf of the State, submitted that the 1961 Rules have been specifically framed for regulating the promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists in the Civil Services of the State and as mentioned in Rule 1(2) of the Rules, there Rules apply to all the Departments of the State.
He, therefore, contended that the promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Head Assistant has been validly made under the 1961 Rules.
8.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 submitted that both the 1961 Rules and 1963 Rules have been framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and while interpreting these Rules, both the Rules should be read harmoniously.
He further submitted that the 1961 Rules apply to all the Departments of the State and under Rule 8 of the 1961 Rules, these Rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any Rules.
He, therefore, contended that in view of Rule 8 of the 1961 Rules, the 1961 Rules shall prevail over the 1963 Rules.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on two judgments of this Court in SN Kapil v. The State of Punjab and others, 1990(1) RSJ 63 and Vishwa Mitter v. The State of Punjab, 1991(2) RSJ 584 : 1991(3) SCT 276 (P&H).
9.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
No doubt the 1963 Rules were framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and these Rules apply to all the officials working in the Economic and Statistical Organisation, it is also not disputed that all the petitioners as well as respondent No. 3 were working in the said organisation at the relevant time and as such they were governed by the 1963 Rules.
But a bare reading of 1961 Rules shows that these Rules were framed also under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India for regulating the promotion of a particular cadre i.e. Stenographers and Steno-typists working in the Civil Services of the State, to higher posts in the Clerical side.
Under Rule 1(2) of the 1961 Rules, these Rules apply to all the Stenographers and Steno-typists of all the Departments of the State except those of the Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Legislative Council and the Punjab High Court.
Rule 8 of 1961 Rules clearly provides that the provision of these Rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any rules for the time being in force regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State.
In view of Rule 8 of the 1961 Rules, the Rules of 1961 shall prevail over the 1963 Rules so far as the promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists is concerned.
10.
Rule 3(1) of the 1961 Rules further provides that in offices where the scale of pay of Stenographers and Steno-typists is identical to that of Assistants, Stenographers shall, before becoming eligible for promotion to a higher post on the clerical side have to work as Assistant for a period of two years.
Admittedly, respondent No. 3 prior to his promotion as Head Assistant, was working as Stenographer in the scale of pay which was identical to that of Assistant and had two years' experience as Assistant.
In view of this, he was eligible to be considered for the post of Head Assistant.
Accordingly, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that respondent No. 3 being Stenographer could not be promoted as Head Assistant, is rejected.
11.
I do not find any merit in the other contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the writ petitioners were senior to the respondent No. 3 in service.
In para 8(iii) of the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondent, it is clearly stated that respondent No. 3 was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer w.e.f.
7.11.1966 in the scale of pay which is identical to the scale of Assistant whereas the petitioners were promoted as Assistant in the identical scale of Stenographers in 1972 and 1973.
Respondent No. 3 was thus senior to all the writ petitioners.
For the reasons recorded hereinabove, I do not find any merit in this writ petition.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.