GS Singhvi, J - Appointment of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Chief Electoral Officer (for short `ACEO') has been assailed in this petition.
The petitioner has prayed for quashing of the appointment of respondent No. 2 as ACEO and also for directing respondent No. 1 to promote him as Election Tehsildar from 1121989 and as ACEO with effect from 1111990 and also to consider him for promotion to the post of Deputy Chief Electoral Officer with effect from 1571991.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the writ petition, it is necessary to take notice of some of the facts.
The petitioner joined service as Election Naib Tehsildar on 731973.
He was promoted as Election Tehsildar on 681991 and then as ACEO vide order dated 431992.
Respondent No. 2, who was holding the post of Superintendent in the office of the Additional Chief Electoral Officer, Haryana was also promoted as ACEO by the same very order by which the petitioner was promoted as ACEO.
The petitioner made representation to the respondents for his retrospective promotion to the posts of Election Tehsildar and ACEO on the ground that the post of Election Tehsildar became available on 24.4.1990 and that of ACEO on 1111990 and he was the only person who fulfilled the conditions of eligibility for promotion to these posts as on 24.4.1990 and as on 1111990.
He also represented for nullification of the promotion of respondent No. 2 on the post of ACEO by stating that the said respondent did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility for promotion as on 431992.
Having failed to persuade the departmental authorities to pass order in his favour, the petitioner has filed this petition.
3.
The respondent No. 1 has defended the impugned order by stating that two posts of ACEO were available with the Government and the respondent No. 2 was treated eligible to be promoted as ACEO because he was holding the post of Superintendent.
It has been pleaded by the respondent No. 1 that the experience of respondent No. 2 fell short by two months which was relaxed in order to promote him as ACEO.
Respondent No. 1 has also pleaded that the respondent No. 2 is senior to the petitioner because the said respondent was promoted as Superintendent with effect from 26.1.1991 whereas the petitioner came to occupy the post of Election Tehsildar on 681991.
A few more facts:-  4.
One vacancy in the cadre of ACEO occurred on 1121989 due to the promotion of the incumbent for the post of Shri Gurbachan Chauhan to the next higher post of Deputy Chief Electoral Officer.
Shri Jagdish Prasad, who was seniormost person in the next below cadre was not promoted and Shri Brij Lal, who was junior to Shri Jagdish Prasad, was accorded promotion to the post of ACEO.
Shri Jagdish Prasad filed Civil Writ Petition No. 13379 of 1990.
That petition was allowed by the High Court and in compliance of the order of the High Court, Jagdish Prasad was promoted as ACEO posthumously with effect from 24.4.1990 because in the meantime Shri Jagdish Prasad had expired.
Against the vacancy in the cadre of Election Tehsildar, which was caused due to the retrospective promotion of Jagdish Prasad as ACEO, the petitioner was eligible to be promoted but respondent No. 1 did not issue order for a period of one year and almost four months promoting the petitioner as Election Tehsildar.
A vacancy in the cadre of ACEO also became available on 1111990 due to the retirement of Shri Gurbachan Chauhan but the petitioner was not considered for promotion because as on that day, he was not holding the post of Election Tehsildar.
5.
The petitioner has challenged the promotion of respondent No. 2 to the post of ACEO by alleging that respondent No. 1 deliberately delayed the filling up of the post of ACEO in order to allow respondent No. 2 to fulfil the requirement of experience and when it was realised that even after delaying promotion to the post of ACEO, respondent No. 2 will not be able to complete the experience, the respondent No. 1 promoted him by incorporating the condition that respondent No. 2 will get increment after one year from the date of completion of requisite experience of two years.
File No.1/10/91-Nirvachan of the Government of Haryana in which the cases of the petitioner and respondent No. 2 for promotion have been dealt with was produced before me by the learned Assistant Advocate General.
Perusal of this file shows that on some occasions the department did not recommend the promotion of respondent No. 2 on the ground that he lacked the requisite experience.
Note dated 3111992 shows that a suggestion was made to keep one of the two posts of ACEO vacant till respondent No. 2 could acquire the requisite experience.
However, the Financial Commissioner (Elections) opined that in view of the Government instructions dated 1781971 promotion can be accorded to respondent.
This proposal was approved by the Minister concerned on 25.2.1992 and also by the Chief Minister as would appear from the note recorded by the Additional Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister on 2821992.
However, there is no decision on the file for relaxation in the requirement of experience by exercising power under Rule 14.
6.
First contention of Shri J.S.
Khehar is that the failure of the Government to promote the petitioner as Election Tehsildar and then as ACEO from the date of availability of vacancies is arbitrary and unjustified.
He argued that the respondent-Government has acted illegally by withholding promotion to the posts of Election Tehsildar and ACEO without any rhyme or reason.
Second contention urged by Shri Khehar is that the promotion of the petitioner to the post or ACEO was delayed with an ulterior motive to accommodate respondent No. 2.
Shri Khehar contended that promotion of respondent No. 2 as ACEO is clearly illegal because the said respondent lacked the minimum qualification as on 431992 i.e. the date on which order of promotion was issued.
Learned counsel argued that the respondent-Government has not exercised its power under Rule 14 of the Punjab Election Department (Group- B) Service Rules, 1963 which are applicable to the State of Haryana and the Court should not read such relaxation to be implicit in the promotion of respondent No. 2.
Learned Assistant Advocate General and Shri RP Yadav vehemently argued that the petitioner does not have a right to be promoted as Election Tehsildar and ACEO from the date of availability of vacancy because the rules do not impose any obligation upon the competent authority to make recruitment by promotion as soon as the vacancy in a particular cadre becomes available.
Both the learned counsel argued that the experience of respondent No. 2 fell short by few months as on the date of issue of order of his promotion as ACEO and the Government has rightly invoked the circular No. 4044-2GS.1-71/23800 dated 1781971 for promoting respondent No. 2 with a condition that he shall become entitled to annual increment only after completing one year service from the date he fulfils the requirement of experience.
7.
Rules of 1963 have been framed by the Governor in exercise of powers under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Rule 6 of the Rules contains the method of appointment.
Rule 14 contains the power of relaxation and Rule 15 refers to special provision.
For the purpose of the decision of this case, it will be useful to reproduce Rules 6, 14 and 15.
The same are :-  ``Method of Appointment - ``6(1) - Appointments to posts in the service shall be made as under :- (a) In the case of Joint Chief Electoral Officer - (i) by promotion of Electoral Officer; or (ii) by transfer of an officer already in service of Government of India or of a State Government.
(b) In the case of Dy.
Chief Electoral Officer -  (i) by promotion of Assistant Chief Electoral Officer or Election Tehsildar; or (ii) by transfer of an officer already in the Service of Government of India or of a State Government.
(c) In the case of Assistant Chief Electoral Officer - (i) by the promotion of Election Tehsildar or the Superintendent of the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer, Haryana; or (ii) by transfer of an officer already in the service of Government of India or of a State Government.
(d) In the case of Election Tehsildar -  (i) by promotion from amongst Election Naib Tehsildars or Head Assistants of the office of the Chief Electoral Officer, Haryana; or (ii) by transfer of an officer or official already in the service of Government of India or of a State Government.
(2) All promotions whether from one grade to another or from one Service to another shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R.
143/Const/Art.309/Amd(3)/75.
dated 7.11.1975.
(3) No person shall be recruited to the service - (i) in the case of Deputy Chief Electoral Officer, except -  (a) by promotion from amongst Electoral Officer and Assistant Chief Electoral Officer who is a Graduate of a recognised university; or (b) by transfer of a person who is a graduate of a recognised university and has held any gazetted post for a period of not less than ten years; and (ii) in the case of Electoral Officer or Assistant Chief Electoral Officer by transfer unless he is a graduate of a recognised university and has held any gazetted post for a period of not less than five years.''
(4) The required minimum experience for promotion to the various posts shall be as under :- Name of the post from which to be promoted Name of post to which to be promoted Period of experience on the post or posts in column I 1.
(i) Deputy Chief Electoral Officer.
Joint Chief Electoral Officer One year (ii) Assistant Chief Electoral Officer Ditto Ditto, 2.
(i) Assistant Chief Electoral Officer Dy.
Chief Electoral Officer Ditto (ii) Election Tehsildar Ditto Three Years 3.
(i) Election Tehsildar Assistant Chief Electoral Officer Two years (ii) Superintendent Ditto Two Years 4.
(i) Head Assistant Election Tehsildar One year (ii) Election Naib Tehsildar Ditto Three years 14.
Power of relaxation.
- Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons.
15.
Special Provision - Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the appointing authority may impose special terms and conditions in the order of appointment if it is deemed expedient to do so.''
8.
Perusal of the rules quoted above shows that there are two sources for promotion to the post of ACEO, namely, Election Tehsildar and Superintendent.
Persons holding these posts are eligible to be considered for promotion on the condition that they have acquired two years' experience of working as Election Tehsildar/Superintendent.
Sub-rule (4) of Rule 6 is couched in a mandatory form and it requires that the minimum experience for promotion to the post of ACEO shall be two years as Election Tehsildar or as Superintendent.
Rule 14 empowers the Government to relax any of the provisions of the rules with respect to any class or category or persons.
Exercise of this power is, however, hedged with the following three conditions:-  (i) the Government must form an opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so; (ii) the Government must make an order for relaxation of the provisions of the rules with respect to any class or category of person; and (iii) the Government must record reasons in writing for relaxing the rules.
9.
Since the rule-making authority has fixed the minimum experience which a person must possess before he/she could be considered for promotion to the post of ACEO and incorporation of such requirement must be presumed to be in public interest, relaxation in the requirement of experience can be granted by the Government only if the conditions for exercise of power under Rule 14 exist and the same are satisfied.
This would necessarily mean objective application of mind by the Government before an order relaxing the provisions of the rules can be passed with respect to any class or category of persons.
On the face of it, Rule 14 does not envisage relaxation of the requirement of the rules in favour of an individual.
However, even if a single individual is treated as a class for the purpose of Rule 14, then too the three conditions must be satisfied for relaxation of the requirement of the rules.
Record of the writ petition as well as the record produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General do not show that the Government had issued an order in writing granting relaxation in the requirement of Rule 6(4) before promoting respondent No. 2 to the post of ACEO.
It must, therefore, he held that the respondent No. 2 was promoted as ACEO by order dated 431992 even though he lacked the minimum qualification for promotion to the post of ACEO.
Consequently, the promotion of respondent No. 2 to the post of ACEO is liable to be declared illegal.
10.
Argument which the learned counsel for the respondents advanced with reference to the circular dated 1781971, is based on a patently mistaken interpretation of that circular.
That circular relates to the payment of emoluments etc. to an employee who is promoted even though he does not fulfil the condition regarding minimum number of years of service in lower rank.
The circular says that if such a person is promoted then he/she shall be allowed the minimum of the grade only and increment shall be added to his/her pay only on completion of the deficiency in the minimum period of service/experience and completion of one year of service in the higher scale.
This circular could have been applied to the respondent No. 2 only if the Government had exercised its power under Rule 14 and relaxed the requirement of two years of experience as envisaged in Rule 6(4).
In my considered view, the instructions contained in circular dated 1781971, which are executive in nature, cannot be used for the purpose of advancing an argument of implied relaxation of the rules relating to experience.
Rather this circular presupposes the existence of written order granting relaxation in the requirement of experience as envisaged in the recruitment rules.
11.
In this connection, reference deserves to be made to some of the precedents.
In PK Ramachandra Iyer and others v. Union of India and others, 1983(3) SLR 495, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the selection committee is not competent to relax the qualifications pertaining to experience and selection of person lacking prescribed experience is liable to be declared illegal.
In Shanti Devi and another v. The State of Haryana and others, 1986(3) SLR 625, a learned single Judge considered Rule 17 of the Haryana Social Welfare Department and Relief Organisation Rules, 1979 which is pari materia with Rule 14 of the 1963 Rules.
The learned single Judge held that power to relax the qualifications can be exercised only if the Government forms the opinion that it is necessary and expedient to do so.
The following extract of that judgment is quite relevant and, therefore, the same is quoted below:-  ``Strangely enough, however, the order passed by respondent No. 1 under rule 17 ibid relaxing the requisite qualifications in the case of respondents Nos. 3 to 15 has not been produced either with the written statement or at the time of hearing of this petition.
Reading of rule 17 makes it clear that before power of relaxation can be exercised, the Government is to be of the opinion that it is necessary and expedient to do so.
Secondly, an order has to be passed by the Government relaxing the provisions of the Rules for reasons to be recorded.
Again such a relaxation has to be with respect to any class or category of persons.
In the present case it is not shown how it was necessary or expedient to relax the Rules in the case of respondents Nos. 3 to 15.
Again no order relaxing the provisions of the Rules with reasons recorded therein has been placed before me.
As had been rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners, when candidates numbering nearly four times the vacant posts having the requisite qualifications as provided by the Rules were available, by no stretch of imagination could the Government form an opinion that it was necessary or expedient to appoint unqualified persons to the said posts.
In my view, it is for this reason that the order allegedly passed relaxing the condition of qualifications in respect of respondents Nos. 3 to 15 has not been placed on the record, as no valid reasons could have been recorded therein for exercising power under rule 17 ibid.''
12.
Reference may also be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in District Collector and Chairman, Vizianagaram v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi, JT 1990(2) SC 169, in which the Court held that appointment of ineligible persons is not a matter between individuals but it affects the public at large.
Their Lordships held :-  ``It must further be realized by all concerned that when an advertisement mentions a particular qualification and the appointment is made in disregard of the same, it is not a matter only between the appointing authority and the appointee concerned.
The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than the appointee or appointees, but who had not applied for the post(s) because they did not possess the qualification mentioned in the advertisement.
It amounts to a fraud on public to appoint persons with inferior qualification, in such circumstances unless it is clearly stated that qualifications are relaxable.
No Court should be party to the perpetuation of the fraudulent practice.''
13.
On the basis of the above discussion, it is held that respondent No. 2 was not eligible to be promoted as ACEO on 431992.
Consequently the order Annexure-P.1 dated 431992 is liable to be declared illegal insofar as it relates to the promotion of respondent No. 2 as ACEO.
14.
In view of the above, I do not consider necessary to consider and decide the claim made by the petitioner for issue of a mandamus to the respondents to accord him retrospective promotion as Election Tehsildar and as ACEO.
15.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure-P1 is declared illegal qua respondent No. 2.
It is held that respondent No. 2 was not eligible to be promoted as ACEO on 431992 because he did not fulfil the condition of eligibility contained in Rule 6(4) of the 1963 Rules.
However, it is not necessary to order the ouster of respondent No. 2 from the office of ACEO.
Rather the ends of justice would be met by directing that the promotion of respondent No. 2 should be deemed to have been made from the date he completed two years experience as Superintendent.
Seniority of the petitioner and respondent No. 2 shall be determined in the cadre of Assistant Chief Electoral Officer on the premise that respondent No. 2 was promoted as Assistant Chief Electoral Officer on completion of two years experience as Superintendent.
On the basis of that seniority, the case of the petitioner shall be considered for promotion to the next higher post of Deputy Chief Electoral Officer in accordance with the rules.
Costs made easy.
Appeal allowed.