VK Bali, J - Bimal Kumar, through present petition, filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order (Annexure P-6) dated August 13, 1984, vide which it was ordered that he shall remain on ad-hoc basic and his services as Secretary Municipality could not be regularised under the Rules.
It was further stated in the said Rules that the post of Secretary, Municipality would be filled up in accordance with Rule 9 of the Rules.
2.
Brief facts, on which the impugned order has been challenged, would reveal that the petitioner was appointed as Secretary in the Notified Area Committee, Hathin (as it then was) on September 22, 1977 on ad-hoc basis for a period of three months through Employment Exchange.
Vide order dated May 7, 1979, Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon, recommended the petitioner's case for regularisation.
Thereafter, the Government vide letter dated January 1, 1980 decided to regularise the services of those employees who had put in two years service on 31st December, 1979 subject to certain conditions.
In pursuance of the notification referred to above, it is the positive case of the petitioner that his services were regularised vide order dated 16th October, 1980, copy whereof is placed on record as Annexure P-5.
The petitioner in the manner aforesaid came to be employed in the year 1977 and was regularised on 16th October, 1980.
However, without hearing him and giving any show-cause notice, the order of his regularisation (Annexure P-5) was cancelled vide impugned order (Annexure P-6) dated 13rd August, 1984.
It is this order as has been mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment that has been challenged in this writ petition.
3.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that the impugned order cannot possibly sustain for various reasons and in particular that while passing the same, the petitioner was not heard in the matter at all.
He further states that the only reason spelled out in the written statement for passing the impugned order is that the petitioner was not having the requisite qualification for the post under contention i.e. Secretary and that is factually incorrect as the petitioner as per rules governing the qualification of the Secretary was qualified being a graduate.
4.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed by the respondents and in written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 the sole ground praying dismissal of the petitioner is that the petitioner was not qualified to hold the post of Secretary as also that his name was not recommended through employment exchange.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and gone through the record.
In considered view of this Court the order Annexure P-6 is wholly illegal and cannot sustain.
It is not disputed that the impugned order was passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner nor any show-cause notice was given to him.
It is by now well settled that when rights of citizen are adversely affected, he has to be heard in the matter even though the proceedings or the orders passed against him be a judicial, quasi-judicial or even administrative.
Normally while faulting the order Annexure P-6 on ground the mentioned above, this Court would have remitted the case to the authorities to consider and pass fresh order after hearing the petitioner but in this case it appears that the petitioner should not be forced to have another bout of litigation, as is apparent from the facts of the case that the only ground mentioned in the order Annexure P-6 is factually incorrect.
Section 6 of the Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982 deals with qualifications and experience of the person to be appointed to the post in service.
The same reads as under :-  " 6.
No person shall be appointed to any post in a Service unless be is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 4 of appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 5 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of recruitment by promotion."
The relevant portion of Appendix 'B' dealing with the post of Secretary reads thus :-  APPENDIX 'B' Sr. No. Name of post + Class of Municipal Committee Qualification & experience for direct recruitment Qualification & experience for promotion, 1.
Secretaries + A Graduate, Preference shall be given to those with Diploma in Higher Officer's Course in the Local Government Should be graduate and should have worked as Secretary in B and C Class Committee for at least three years.
+ B&C same as for A class Committee provided that candidates next in order of merit after providing for vacancies in A Class Committee would be considered.
Should be a graduate and should have worked as Superintendent (Office) in B Class committee for at least three years" A perusal of the relevant rule and the Appendix would manifest that the qualification required for the post of Secretary is graduate.
It is true that the preference is to be given to those who have Diploma in High Officer's Course in the Local Government but that is not a pre-requisite for the post under contention.
That being the position, it could not possibly be stated while passing the impugned order aforesaid or in the written statement so as to defend the cause of the petitioner that the petitioner was into qualified under the rules to hold the post of Secretary.
The only remaining contention of the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State that requires mention is that the petitioner's name was not routed thought the employment exchange.
This assertoin of the respondent-State has been vehemently denied by positively averring in the petition that the petitioner has got himself enrolled with the employment exchange.
There is, however, no need at all to go into this issue as, in considered view of this Court, even if it is assumed that the petitioner's name was not registered in the Employment Exchange and to that extent the assertion of the respondents made in the written statement is correct, yet such kind of technical objection should not be permitted to be raised by the respondents at this belated stage.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed way back in the year 1977 and his services were regularised in 1980.
When the services of the petitioner had already been regularised and he had worked for about three years, the impugned order came to be passed.
There was no illegality or impropriety in appointing the petitioner to the post of Secretary.
He held the basic qualification required for the post of Secretary.
He was not lacking in any other thing as well.
The mere fact that the petitioner's name was not routed thought the Employment Exchange cannot be such a serious objection.
However, if such an objection had to be raised, in considered view of this Court, the same should have been raised at the time when the petitioner was initially recruited to the post.
That apart, if it is true that the name of petitioner was not routed through the employment exchange, it is not the case of the respondents that he had mis-led his employer and had actually revealed at the time of seeking appointment that his name was registered in the employment exchange.
It is, thus, clear that it is not a case of mis-stating anything or obtaining employment from the respondents by concealment of facts or by fraud.
6.
In the facts and circumstances, fully detailed above, coupled with the fact that the petitioner has been in employment of the respondents for the last 18 years, it would be too inequitous and unjust to tell him to pack up and search for another job.
The Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371, where the employee did not have practical experience so required for the post, was still employed and had continued to work for some years, held that "practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments of petitioners were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length to time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educationl qualifications.
It can be said that three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the Management, in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
This view of the Supreme Court has been followed by me in Civil Writ Petition No. 1549 of 1990 (Krishan Kumar Rao v. Haryana Warehousing Corporation) decided on July 5, 1994.
The case in hand is on far better footing as in the present case all that is objected to is that the name of petitioner was not routed through the employment exchange whereas the petitioners in the cases aforesaid, were not having requisite qualification or experience.
7.
For the reason recorded above, this petition is allowed, order Annexure P- 6, is quashed.
It requires to be mentioned that while the petition remained pending, operation of impugned order, Annexure P-6, remained stayed by virtue of interim orders passed by this Court.
If on account of the impugned order, Annexure P-6, some adverse orders have been passed against the petitioner or he has been ignored as per seniority for promotional posts etc., he will be given the desired reliefs.
In other words, while setting aside order, Annexure P-6, it is held that the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential reliefs that he may be entitled to.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.