GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves a challenge to the seniority list of Demonstrators/Drawing Instructors, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, which has been circulated by the Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, vide his memo dated 141980 (Annexure P6).
The petitioner has prayed that the impugned seniority list be quashed and he be ordered to be ranked senior to respondents 3 to 10 with a direction for his promotion to the next higher post from the date of promotion of his alleged juniors.
2.
Facts lie in a very narrow compass.
In response to the advertisement issued by the Punjab Public Service Commission in the year 1966 for recruitment to the post of instructors, the petitioner had applied for the same and on having been selected by the Commission, he was appointed as Instructor (electrical engineering) with effect from 331967.
The pay scale of the post of instructor was revised from Rs. 200-10-300 to Rs. 200-450 with effect from 121968.
Respondents 3 to 10 were appointed as demonstrators in the pay scale of Rs. 150-10-300 on the recommendations of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab.
In the year 1971 the Government of Punjab decided to amalgamate the cadres of instructors (Electrical and Mechanical Engineering) with the cadres of Demonstrators (Electrical and Mechanical Engineering).
After merger of the two cadres, a combined seniority list was issued by the department.
The petitioner made representation against the seniority list showing respondents 3 to 10 as senior to him in the amalgamated cadre.
His representation has been rejected by the Government as would appear from communication Annexure R2, dated 2731980.
The petitioner has challenged his placement below respondents 3 to 10 in the seniority list of instructors on the ground that he was appointed on a post which carried pay scale higher than the post on which respondents 3 to 10 were appointed and even the qualifications for the post on which the petitioner had been recruited were higher than that of the post on which respondents 3 to 10 were recruited and, therefore, he should have been given promotion to the post of Principal in preference to the respondents.
The petitioner has placed reliance on part 3(d) of Annexure P7 by which the Government of Punjab had issued administrative instructions in the form of Model Service Rules for the purpose of determination of seniority of the employees appointed to one cadre from different sources.
3.
Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 have contested the writ petition and have pleaded that the grade of post held by the petitioner, as also the grades of post held by respondents 3 to 10 were revised with effect from 121968 and both the posts carried identical pay scale of Rs. 200-450 from that date.
According to the respondents, special pay of Rs. 50/- per month was also allowed to the holders of the posts in the two cadres with effect from 121971 and on the date of amalgamation i.e. 31.8.1971, the Instructors working in the Junior Technical Schools and the Demonstrators working in the polytechnics were in the same pay scale.
Further assertion of the respondents is that only those persons who possessed qualifications of diploma in engineering were made members of the amalgamated cadre of instructors and as there was no difference either in the qualifications or pay scale of the persons holding the posts in the amalgamated cadre, seniority was assigned to them on the basis of length of service.
Respondents have also pleaded that after having taken advantage of amalgamation of the two cadres and having got promotion to the post of lecturers, the petitioner cannot question the seniority list issued in the year 1971 or rejection of his representation in the year 1980.
According to the respondents, a large number of persons senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Instructors were left out from amalgamation and but for the petitioner having chosen to become a member of the amalgamated cadre, he would not have got promotion to the next higher post.
4.
By placing reliance on one decision of this Court in Milkha Singh v. State of Punjab and others, L.P.A. No. 191 of 1970 decided on 1941971 and two decisions of Patna High Court, one in Nawal Kishore Singh v. Union of India and others, 1973(1) SLR 509 and the other in Ram Nagina Prasad v. Union of India and others, 1979(3) SLR 379, Shri SK Pipat, Sr. Advocate appearing for the petitioner, argued that determination of seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondents 3 to 10 de hors the academic qualifications possessed by the petitioner, which were higher than the qualifications of respondents 3 to 10 and the higher grades which the petitioner drew at the time of his appointment, is patently arbitrary and unconstitutional because unequals have been treated equally.
Shri Pipat contended that the petitioner had been recruited on the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission whereas respondents 3 to 10 were recruited on the recommendations of the Subordinate Services Selection Board and as the petitioner was paid salary in the grade of Rs. 200-10-300/- in comparison to respondents 3 to 10 who were paid salary in the grade of Rs. 150-10-300, the petitioner ought to have been ranked senior to respondents Nos. 3 to 10.
Shri Pipat further argued that as on the date of merger, the petitioner was drawing higher salary as compared to respondents 3 to 10, on that ground also he should have been ranked senior to respondents 3 to 10.
On the other hand, Mrs. Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab appearing for respondents 1 and 2, submitted that as on the date of merger/amalgamation of the two cadres, the petitioner and respondents 3 to 10 formed one class from the point of view of pay scale and the educational qualifications, therefore, no distinction could have been drawn between them for the purpose of seniority on the ground that at the time of entry in service, the petitioner was appointed against a post which carried a higher pay scale.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that the petitioner should have protested against the amalgamation brought about in the year 1971 and should not have taken the advantage of becoming a member of the amalgamated cadre.
5.
In principle Shri Pipat is right in arguing that when person belonging to different cadres are appointed to a third cadre by transfer or by way of amalgamation the persons holding posts carrying higher pay scale shall rank senior to these who were holding posts carrying lower pay scale.
Apart from the two decisions of Patna High Court and the observations made by this Court in Milkha Singh's case (supra) on which Shri Pipat has place reliance, it would be profitable to refer to two decisions of the Supreme Court in Kewal Krishan Bagga v. The Chairman, Railway Board, (1978) 4 SCC 733 and in State of UP v. Dr. MJ Siddiqui and others, AIR 1980 SC 1098.
In both the aforesaid cases, the Apex Court has unequivocally recognised the principle that when there is an amalgamation of two cadres into one, then the persons who are holdings posts in higher pay scale have a right to be assigned seniority over and above those who hold posts carrying lower pay scale.
In both the cases, a challenge to the assignment of seniority on the basis of higher pay scale has been repelled by the Supreme Court.
6.
However, so far as the present case is concerned, the admitted factual position which has emerged from the pleadings of the parties shows that more than three years and six months before the merger/amalgamation of the cadres of Instructor of Junior Technical Schools and the Demonstrators of the Polytechnics is, the Government had revised the pay scales of the instructors and the demonstrators with effect from 121965 and both the posts carried identical pay scale of Rs. 200-10-450.
Special pay of Rs. 50/- per month was also given to the holders of the two posts with effect from 121971.
Therefore, after the date of amalgamation there was no difference in the pay scale of the posts of demonstrators on the one hand and the instructors on the other hand.
At the same time, it is to be noted that the Government had made only those demonstrators as members of the amalgamated cadre, who possessed academic qualification of diploma in engineering.
Therefore from the point of academic qualifications also, the respondents 3 to 10 were identically placed.
This being the factual position, it is not possible to accept the submission of Shri Pipat that the petitioner should have been ranked senior merely because at the time of initial recruitment to the service, he was appointed on a post which carried a higher pay scale than the post which was held by respondents 3 to 10.
If at all, the Government had relied on the factum of the petitioner getting higher pay scale at the time of initial appointment for the purpose of determination of his seniority, such action of the Government would have been open to attack on the ground of unconstitutionality.
In my opinion, the Government has rightly assigned the seniority on the basis of length of service.
After the Demonstrators and the Instructors had become members of a common cadre by way of amalgamation, the Government could not have made the seniority dependent on the fact that the petitioner drew more salary as compared to respondents No. 3 to 10 at the time of appointment.
Even otherwise, it would have been irrational to overlook the long period of service rendered by respondents 3 to 10 before the appointment of the petitioner, for the purpose of assignment of seniority after amalgamation on 31.8.1971.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is held without substance and is, therefore, dismissed.