GS Singhvi, J - One hundered and fifty seats for admission to MBBS/BDS courses were notified by the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak (hereinafter referred to as `the University') in the year 1992.
Of these 115 seats were in Rohtak Medical College and 35 seats in Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha.
Two seats in Rohtak Medical College and one seat in Maharaja Agarsen Institute were reserved for the children of the deceased/disabled officers (if there are no such case then children of ex-servicemen).
The petitioner, whose father late Shri Rajinder Singh Yadav was Lieut.
Colonel in the Army, applied for the reserved seat.
Similarly, respondent No. 4 Miss Yang Chan Kishore and some other candidates applied against the three reserved seats.
On the basis of the examination conducted by the respondent-University, a merit list was prepared wherein respondent No. 4 was placed at Serial No. 3 and the petitioner was placed at serial No. 4.
Both of them were interviewed.
The petitioner submitted her Domicile Certificate on 2971992, i.e. within the time limit fixed by the University but respondent No4 submitted the same on 12.8.1992.
Ultimately, respondent No4 was admitted in the Medical College, Rohtak.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the admission of respondent No. 4 against the seats reserved for children of deceased/disabled officers on the ground that respondent No4 was not a resident/domicile of Haryana as per the requirement of Circular letter No. 6229/84-6-GSI dated 1091991 issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana and, therefore, her admission is illegal and void and in her place, the petitioner has a right to be admitted to the MBBS course.
In support of her claim that respondent No. 4 cannot be treated as a bona fide resident of Haryana, the petitioner has stated that the certificate submitted by respondent No. 4 was procured from City Magistrate, Gurgaon, by furnishing wrong informations to the said authority.
Her allegation is that father of respondent No. 4, Shri Nand Kishore is permanently settled in Delhi after his retirement in June, 1991.
He has a flat No. 569 at Sarita Vihar, New Delhi and a telephone connection with telephone No. 634430.
This flat is in the name of his wife Smt. Raj Kishore.
It has also been alleged that Shri Nand Kishore got his pension credited in his account in Syndicate Bank, South Block, New Delhi, and he continued to receive his pension in the said account till May 30, 1992, but with a view to get a domicile certificate, he made an application dated 2261992 to the Syndicate Bank to transfer his account with pension file to the State Bank of India, Gurgaon.
This file was received by the State Bank of India, New Colony Branch, Gurgaon on 25.6.1992 and in the month of August, 1992, he received pension from Gurgaon.
Further allegation of the petitioner is that in order to secure domicile certificate, respondent No. 4 gave her address as House No. 508/10, Krishna Colony, Gurgaon, although this house belongs to her father's brother- in-law, Shri Brij Mohan Bajaj.
Earlier to this, respondent No. 4 had given her address of some other place at Patel Nagar, Gurgaon, for seeking admission in a College.
The petitioner says that respondent No4 cannot derive any benefit from a certificate secured by her father on the basis of patently wrong informations furnished to the concerned authority.
3.
In its reply, the respondent-University pleaded that admission was granted to the respondent No4 on the basis of the domicile certificate produced by her and that the University could not have gone into the authenticity of the domicile certificate submitted by respondent No. 4.
Respondent No. 1 has further pleaded that if any candidate secures admission by producing false affidavit/certificate his/her admission is liable to be quashed and if it is found that respondent No4 secured admission by producing a fake certificate appropriate action will be taken by the University.
In his separate reply respondent No. 2 has stated that domicile certificate was issued to respondent No. 4 after verification of the facts by Halqa Patwari and on the basis of the report submitted by the Tehsildar.
He has, however, admitted that no inquiry was made by his office after receipt of complaint from the mother of the petitioner.
In their joint reply, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have stated that the certificate issued by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Gurgaon, is a genuine document and none of the informations furnished by respondent No. 3 was false.
Their case is that they are permanent residents of Haryana.
These respondents have admitted that Flat No. C-569 in Sarita Vihar, New Delhi, belongs to the wife of respondent No. 3 and he has got a telephone connection at that house but it has been reiterated that for the last many years, he has been residing with his brother-in-law at Krishna Colony, Gurgaon and even the Sainik Board, Gurgaon, has also issued a certificate to that effect.
4.
Along with Civil Miscellaneous Application Nos. 2443 and 2444 of 1994, the petitioner has filed a number of documents, including a report dated 1121993 submitted by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Gurgaon, to the Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon and letter dated 8.12.1992 issued by the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board, Gurgaon to the Director, Medical College, Rohtak.
These documents have been marked as Annexures P-12 and P-13.
In reply to the Civil Misc. No.2443 of 1994, respondent No1 has stated that an inquiry was got conducted in the matter and as per the report dated 2031993 submitted by the Inquiry Officer (Annexure P-1), the certificate of domicile produced by Respondent No3 is not genuine and the Inquiry Officer has recommended that admission of respondent No4 be cancelled.
In reply to Civil Misc. No. 2444 of 1994, respondent No1 has submitted that the documents Annexures P-12 and P-13 may be considered by the Court.
5.
All the parties are in agreement that Circular (Annexure P-2) is applicable to the case of respondent No4.
This Circular contains guidelines issued by the Government of Haryana for determination of the bona fide residents of Haryana.
Relevant extracts of this Circular are reproduced below:-  ``No. 62/29/84-6/GSI dated 1091991 from the Chief Secretary to Govt. Haryana; and addressed to all Heads of Departments, Commissioners, Ambala, Rohtak, Gurgaon and Hissar Divisions, all Deputy Commissioners and all Sub Divisional Officers in Haryana.
Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court and all District and Sessions Judges in Haryana.
Subject: Bona fide residents of Haryana - Guidelines regarding.
I am directed to invite your attention to Haryana Govt. instructions issued vide letter No. 463-6GSI-77/19856, dated the 26th July, 1977, letter No. 62/46/83-6GSI dated 691983 and letter No. 62/284-6GSI dated 851985, on the subject noted above and to say that the question of further ``widening the scope of the definition of the term `bona fide residents of Haryana' for the purpose of admissions to educational institutions (including technical/medical institutions), grant of scholarships and other concessions, where they are restricted to bonafide residents of Haryana has been under consideration of the Government for sometime past.
After careful consideration, it has been decided that henceforth the following categories of persons would be eligible for the grant of domestic certificates:  (i) Candidates who have passed the examinations, qualifications for selection in an institutions from a school/college in Haryana.
(ii) Children/wards (if parents are not living)dependents; (a) of the employees of Haryana state posted in or outside Haryana State or working on deputation; (b) of the employees of the statutory bodies/corporations established by or under an Act of the State of Haryana who are posted in Chandigarh or in Haryana or outside Haryana; (iii) Children/wards (if parents are not living) dependents persons who after retirement have permanently settled in Haryana and draw their pensions from the treasuries situated in the State of Haryana.
(iv) Children/wards (if parents are not living) dependents of persons of Haryana Govt. irrespective of the fact that the original home of the retiree is in a State other than Haryana or he has settled after retirement in or outside Haryana; (v) Children/wards (if parents are not living) dependents of persons who have permanent homes in Haryana and include persons who have been residing in Haryana for a period of not less than 15 years or who have permanent home in Haryana but on account of their occupation, they are living outside Haryana.
xx xx xx  xx xx xx  4.
If a candidate is admitted on the basis of claim that he belongs to the State of Haryana but at any subsequent time it is discovered that his claim was false, the student shall be removed from the institution and all fees and other dues paid upto the date of such removal shall be confiscated.
The Principal/Headmaster may take such other action against the student and his/her parents/guardians as he may deem proper in the circumstances of any particular case.
5.
These instructions may kindly be noted carefully for compliance.''
6.
The main controversy between the parties is whether the respondent No4 has been admitted to the MBBS course against the reserved quota on the basis of a valid certificate of bona fide resident of Haryana.
While the petitioner has pleaded that the certificate issued in favour of respondent No4 is contrary to the guidelines issued by the Government, the respondent No4 has strenuously pleaded that she possessed a valid domicile certificate at the time of admission and that the said certificate was not secured by providing wrong informations to the concerned authorities.
Perusal of the averments made in paragraph 7 of the writ petition and the reply of respondent No. 3 and 4 shows that respondent No4 passed 10+2 examination from the Central Board of School Education, New Delhi.
At that, time, she was a student in Army Public School, Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi.
Her father retired from the Army as a Lieutenant-Colonel in the month of May, 1991, Thereafter, he secured telephone connection with telephone No. 634430 at Flat No. 569, Pocket-C, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi, which is owned by his wife Smt. Raj Kishore.
On 2261992, respondent No3, submitted an application to the Syndicate Bank, South Block Branch, New Delhi to transfer his account with pension file to the State Bank of India, Gurgaon Branch, and in the month of August 1992, respondent No3 received pension for the months of June and July, 1992 from the State Bank of India, Gurgaon Branch, In para 1(iii) of the Circular dated 1091991, it has been laid down that children of a person would be entitled to the grant of domicile certificate in case they are dependents of the persons who have permanently settled in Haryana after retirement and draw their pensions from the treasuries situated in the State of Haryana.
In terms of clause 1(v) children of these persons are also entitled to domicile certificate who have permanent homes in Haryana and includes persons who have been residing in Haryana for period of not less than 15 years or who have permanent home in Haryana but on account of their occupation they are living outside Haryana.
From the material placed on record, it is evident that till the month of August, 1992 respondent No. 3 did not receive pension from any place within the State of Haryana.
In the application submitted by respondent No3, it was given out that his family has been residing in Gurgaon since 1977 and since 1985 they were residing with the brother of his wife.
Thus, it is clear that the case of respondent No. 4 was not covered by any of the classes contained in the Circulars dated 1091991.
This conclusion is supported by the detailed report (Annexure P-12) dated 1121993 submitted by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) Gurgaon, to the Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon, and also from Annexure P-13 which is a letter dated 8.12.1992 written by the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board, Gurgaon, to the Director, Medical College, Rohtak.
This is also borne out from the report dated 2331993 submitted by the Inquiry Officer appointed by the respondent-University to go into the issue of genuineness of the certificate produced by respondent No. 4.
In the inquiry report, it has been recommended that the University should proceed for cancellation of admission of respondent No. 4.
7.
In view of the above, it must be held that as on the last date fixed for determination of eligibility, respondent No4 was not a bona fide resident of Haryana and therefore, she was not entitled to be considered for admission to the M.B.B.S/B.D.S.
course in response to the notification issued by the respondent-University and she was not entitled to be given admission against the seats reserved for the children of deceased/disabled officers.
8.
In Mrs. Daisy Narula v. Government of Punjab, 1984(3) SLR 690, a learned Single Judge of this Court held that a candidate must fulfil the qualifications by the last date of the submission of the application so as to be entitled to be selected for appointment to any public post.
In Dr. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan, 1993(2) SCT 279(SC) : 1993 Supp(3) S.C.C.
168, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have taken a similar view that the candidate who does not fulfill the conditions of eligibility on the last date fixed for the receipt of the applications, cannot be considered for appointment.
The same very view has been reiterated in Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission, Uttar Pradesh v. Alpana, 1994(1) SCT 701(SC) : JT 1994(1) SC 94.
In the last mentioned case, their Lordships have distinguished the judgment recorded in Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekher, 1993(2) SCT 208(SC) : 1993(1) S.L.R.
379.
9.
In view of the above legal position, it must be held that respondent No. 4 was not eligible to be considered for admission to the MBBS course and against the reserved seats in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the respondent University and but for the admission granted to respondent No4 the petitioner would have been admitted.
Further, it has to be held that the respondent No4 had secured domicile certification/bona fide resident certificate by supplying incomplete and incorrect information to the authorities and, therefore, in terms of para 4 of the circular dated 1091991, the admission of respondent No. 4 is liable to be cancelled.
10.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
It is declared that the domicile certificate produced by the respondent No. 4 for admission to the MBBS court was secured by respondent No3 by furnishing incorrect informations to the authorities and on the basis of such certificates, respondent No4 has no right to be admitted to the course.
Consequently, the petitioner shall be deemed to have been admitted against the seat reserved for the children of the deceased/disabled officers.
However, keeping in view the fact that by now respondent No4 has completed three years of her studies, it would be just and proper not to order cancellation of her admission.
Instead in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Ku Nilofer v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1992(1) SCT 169(SC) : A.I.R 1991 SC 1872, the University is directed to allow her to continue her studies against the seat which was given to the petitioner on the basis of the interim order passed by the High Court, Parties are left to bear their own costs.