VK Jhanji, J - In this writ petition petitioner is seeking writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated 13111991, Annexure P-7 vide which petitioner was removed from service.
A further direction is sought that the respondents be directed to reinstate the petitioner with all consequential benefits including arrears of pay, seniority etc.  2.
In brief, the facts as stated in the petition, are that petitioner joined respondent-bank on 511982 as a Probationary Officer and has since been confirmed.
Petitioner has been working as Staff Officer with the bank and has been posted at various places all over the country.
On 9.7.1987, petitioner was transferred to the main branch of the Bank of Chandigarh.
During the month of April, 1989 to June, 1989 when petitioner was dealing with share applications of different companies, he substituted some shares in the name of his wife.
Vide Memo.
dated 7.2.1991 respondents decided to proceed against the petitioner under Regulation 6 of the Bank of India Officer Employees (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the 1976 Regulations) for the acts of misconduct alleged to have been committed by the petitioner while he was posted as Staff Officer in the main branch of respondents at Chandigarh.
Petitioner was served with the following charges  Article-I  that while attending to share application/many collection business during April, 1989 to June, 1989 without paying any share money you surreptitiously substituted the share application in the name of your wife in the place of the share application alongwith the share money received from genuine applicants one time each in respect of the share issues of M/s. Kanoria Petro Products Ltd, M/s. Pearl Polymers Ltd, M/s. Punjab Power General Machine Limited and twice in respect of the share issue of M/s. Cadialla Hospital Products Limited thereby wrongfully adjusting the share money received in each case against the share application in the name of your wife,  that in the aforesaid manner, on each such occasion, you perpetrated a fraud on the Bank.
You have thus failed to discharge your duties with utmost honesty, integrity, devotion and diligence and you have also failed to ensure and protect the interest of the Bank which if proved will amount to breach of Regulation 3(i) of the Bank of India Officer Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1976.
Article-II  that, with a view to cover up the aforementioned frauds committed by you, you wilfully suppressed and/or destroyed the relevant file and papers containing the details of share money collected by the bank in respect of the share issues of M/s. Pearl Polymers Ltd, M/s. Konoria Petro Products Ltd and M/s. Punjab Power General Machine Limited, that in the aforesaid manner you failed to discharge your duties with utmost honesty, integrity, devotion and diligence which if proved will amount to breach of Regulation 3(i) of the Bank of India Officer Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1976.
2.
Breach of any of the provisions of the Bank of India Officer Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1976 shall be deemed to be a misconduct in terms of Regulations 24 of the aforesaid Regulations and will be punishable under the Bank of India Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
Regulations 3(i) of the Bank of India Officer Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1976 alleged to have been breached by you reads as under :-  "Every Officer Employee shall at all times take all possible steps to ensure and protect the interests of the Bank and discharge his duties with utmost integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence and do nothing which is unbecoming of a Bank Officer."
3.
According to the petitioner the allegations as contained in the charge sheet were completely untrue but on the assurance given by the Disciplinary Authority that the matter would be closed with a light warning, petitioner sent his letter dated 3171990 formally admitting the allegations against him.
Petitioner was under the impression that after admitting the allegations, he would not be served with the charge-sheet but when he was served with the charge-sheet dated 7.2.1991, he submitted letter dated 1821991 stating therein that he had already admitted the charges.
In view of this admission made by the petitioner, no enquiry was ordered against the petitioner.
Respondent No. 3 who is the petitioner's Disciplinary Authority vide order dated 13111991 Annexure P-7 imposed the major penalty of removal from service.
A copy of the order has been attached with the petition as Annexure P-7.
Petitioner is impugning this order in the petition on the ground that though the Disciplinary Authority had proposed that some increments of the petitioner be stopped but when the proposal was sent to the Vigilance Officer for his advice, he did not agree with this proposal but rather directed that the petitioner be removed from service.
Petitioner's Disciplinary Authority again sent a proposal in August, 1991 to the Chief Vigilance Officer disagreeing with this directive that the petitioner should be removed from service and again stating the penalty of stoppage of increments be imposed upon the petitioner.
The Chief Vigilance Officer rejected this proposal and again directed that the petitioner be removed from service.
Respondent No. 3 thus had no option but to remove the petitioner from service.
4.
In reply, Respondents in their written statement have stated that major penalty proceedings against the petitioner were initiated as envisaged under Regulation 6 of 1976 Regulations.
Petitioner was served with Memo.
dated 7.2.1991 together with Articles of charge and statement of allegations in support of the articles of charge.
Vide letter dated, 1821991, petitioner unconditionally admitted the allegations under Articles 1 and 2 i.e. both the charges.
After the admission by the petitioner voluntarily the question for conducting further enquiry was neither warranted nor required under the Regulations.
Respondents have also taken objection that the petitioner has not exhausted the other alternative remedy of filing appeal before filing the present writ petition and thus the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on this ground.
Respondents have further stated that the respondent or any other official/Disciplinary Authority had given no assurance to the petitioner for dropping out the charges if the petitioner admits the same.
Admission was made not under pressure but on his own voliation.
Respondents have denied that the punishment in question was imposed by the Disciplinary Authority with the prior concurrence of the Central Vigilance Commission under its direction.
The order in question has been passed by the Competent Authority under the Regulations by applying its mind and considering and examining the entire evidence on record.
They have denied that the punishment was exposed under the instructions of the Chief Vigilance Officer.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioner on the strength of the judgment in Nagaraj Shivarao Kariaqi v. Syndicate Bank Head Office Manipal and another, 1991(2) JT 529 : 1991(2) SCT 307 (SC).
contended that the Disciplinary Authority was required to exercise its judicial discretion but instead of doing so, it has acted solely on the advice tendered by the dictation of a third party like the Vigilance Officer, cannot be maintained.
As regards the alternative remedy of appeal he contended that in appeal, respondents can only go into legality or correctness of the enquiry against an employee or can go into the adequacy of the punishment.
Since in the present case, the punishment has been awarded on the advice of the Chief Vigilance Officer which was required to be sought as per instructions, approaching the Appellate Authority would be absolutely futile.
6.
In reply, Mr. HS Hooda, Senior Advocate, counsel for the respondents, contended that the Disciplinary Authority had applied its own independent mind and had not acted on the advice of the Vigilance Officer as contended by counsel for the petitioner.
He also contended that if this Court comes to a finding that the punishment was awarded under the advice of the Vigilance Officer, then the petitioner can always make his grievance before the Appellate Authority who is competent to go into this question.
7.
In matters of discipline the conditions of service of the petitioner are governed by the 1976 Regulations.
Regulation No. 4 of the 1976 Regulations gives the details of penalties which can be imposed on the employees whereas Regulation No. 6 thereof prescribes the procedure which has to be followed before imposing the penalty.
Clause (1) of the Regulation, provides that no major penalty shall be imposed, except after an enquiry is held in accordance with the Regulations.
Further, Regulation-19 of the said Regulations says that the Bank can consult the Central Vigilance Commission wherever it is necessary in respect of all disciplinary cases having vigilance angle.
Since petitioner had alleged in his petition that the punishment was awarded at the dictation of the Chief Vigilance Officer, counsel for respondent No. 2 was asked to produce the record which the counsel did.
On perusal of the record, I find that the Chief Vigilance Commission was not consulted as contended by the counsel for the petitioner.
Rather concurrence to the proposed penalty was sought from the Chief Vigilance Officer.
Vide letter dated 2951991, the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner proposed that the petitioner be given one chance to mend keeping in view the extenuating and mitigating circumstances as explained in the said letter.
He also proposed that his pay be reduced to 8 steps.
In answer to this, vide letter dated 1571991 Vigilance Officer asked the Disciplinary Authority that the petitioner's case merits capital punishment but it may also examine the feasibility of lodging a criminal complaint against the petitioner in pursuance of the directive of the Board taken in a meeting dated 15291.
The Disciplinary Authority again sought the advice of the Vigilance Officer and proposed that petitioner be retained in service after inflicting upon adequate penalty.
He also felt that it is not a fit case for filing of a criminal complaint.
The Disciplinary Authority submitted the matter for kind consideration and perusal for the proposed penalty mentioned in letter dated 2951991.
The Vigilance Officer vide letter dated 2691991, found that no fresh grounds have been brought out to justify reconsideration of the matter and advice already given by him in this behalf.
On receipt of this letter, respondent No. 3 passed order dated 13111991, Annexure P-7 removing the petitioner from service.
8.
On perusal of the record, I am not prepared to accept the argument of counsel for respondents that conclusion of the Disciplinary Authority was not based on the advice tendered by the Vigilance Officer, but was arrived at independently on the basis of charges and relevant material placed before the Disciplinary Authority in support of the charges.
Record shows that the punishment of removal from service was awarded to the petitioner when the Disciplinary Authority failed to get concurrence of the Vigilance Officer on the proposed punishment, which was other than removal from service.
Under the rules, the Vigilance Officer had no statutory status, nor he was required to be consulted by respondents.
Even assuming that the Disciplinary Authority committed no serious or material irregularity in consulting the Vigilance Officer, the Disciplinary Authority was not required to base its decision on the advice tendered by the Vigilance Officer.
The matter would have been different if the Disciplinary Authority had arrived at its own conclusion on the basis of material, rather than acting on the advice of the Vigilance.
Officer.
Under Regulation 6, it is the Disciplinary Authority who has to decide on the facts and circumstances in each case that as to what penalty is to be imposed on a particular officer for the alleged misconduct.
The Disciplinary Authority is not entitled to act on any material which is not included in the record.
If the Disciplinary Authority is required to take into consideration any directions or instructions, secret or otherwise, they must form record of the enquiry.
If, in the matter of imposing punishment of dismissal on the delinquent officer, or even determining the final guilt, the Disciplinary Authority took into consideration sonic directive or instructions from any authority, may be Vigilance Officer or Commission, of which the charged delinquent officer had no notice, or the Disciplinary Authority was not in a position to disclose, it must be held that the rules of natural justice which require that the concerned Authority should not act on the material which is not disclosed to the person for giving an explanation, were completely violated by the procedure adopted.
The action of the Disciplinary Authority in basing its conclusion solely on the advice tendered by the Vigilance Officer, cannot be sustained.
For this, I find support from the judgment of the Supreme Court in Nagaraj Shivarao Kajagi's case (supra), wherein it was held as under :-  "It is not obligatory upon the punishing authority to accept the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission.
Secondly, the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, has no jurisdiction to issue the impugned directive to Banking Institutions.
The Government may regulate the banking institutions within the power located under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, Section 8 empowers the Government to issue directions in regard to matter of policy but there cannot be any uniform policy with regard to different disciplinary matters and much less there could be any policy in awarding punishment to the delinquent officers in different cases.
The punishment to be imposed whether minor or major depends upon the nature of every case and the gravity of the misconduct proved.
The authorities have to exercise their judicial discretion having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case.
They cannot act under the dictation of the Central Vigilance Commission or the Central Government.
No third party like the Central Vigilance Commission or the Central Government could dictate the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority as to how they should exercise their power and what punishment they should impose on the delinquent officer.
The impugned directive of the Ministry of Finance is, therefore, wholly without jurisdiction, and plainly contrary to the statutory Regulations governing disciplinary matters.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow the appeal and the writ petition quashing the directive issued by the Finance Ministry, Department of Economic Affairs (Banking Division) dated 21 July, 1984.
We also issue a direction to the Chairman of the Syndicate Bank to withdraw the circular letter dated 27th July, 1984 and 8 September, 1986.
We further set aside the impugned order of the disciplinary authority and appellate authority with a direction to the former to dispose of the petitioner's case in accordance with the law and in the light of the observations made.'
Learned counsel for respondents cannot derive any help from the judgment of the Supreme Court in Sunil Kumar Banerjee v. State of Bengal, AIR 1980 SC 1170, because in that case, it was found that the conclusion of the Disciplinary Authority was not based on the advice tendered by the Vigilance Commissioner but was arrived at independently, on the basis of the charges, the relevant material placed before the Enquiry Officer in support of the charges and the defence of the delinquent officer.
As regards the contention of the counsel that the writ petition is not maintainable as the petitioner has failed to avail the remedy of an appeal.
I am of the view that formally this Court is reluctant to entertain the writ petition where remedy of appeal is provided, but keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case and considering that the impugned order was passed in the year 1991, this Court is not inclined to relegate the petitioner to the remedy of an appeal.
9.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed, order dated 13111991, Annexure P-7, quashed and a direction is issued to the Disciplinary Authority to reconsider the matter in accordance with law, without taking into consideration the advice tendered by the Vigilance Officer.
The Disciplinary Authority, after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner, shall pass an appropriate order within two months from today.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.