V K Bali, J - O P Bhagat, who has since retired during the pendency of this petition, has taken exception to order of promotion of B I S Brar- respondent No. 3, which promotion, he pleads, was given without considering his claim and prior right to the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller.
The facts need a necessary mention.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as General Manager on August 18, 1972.
He successfully completed his two years' probation period as General Manager and, thus, came to occupy the said post on substantive basis.
Earlier, the post of Secretary, Regional Transport Authority was one of the sources from which one could be promoted as General Manager but later on the posts of Secretary, Regional Transport Authority as well as General Manager were equated with common seniority and inter-transferable with each other till the year 1980 when the Department of Transport was split up into two wings known as 'Commercial Wing' and 'Non-Commercial Wing'.
The appointments to the posts of Deputy Transport Controller/Deputy Director State Transport and Joint Provincial Transport Controller are governed under the Punjab Transport Department (State Service Class-I) Rules, 1963.
Rule 6 deals with the method of recruitment to the aforesaid posts, relevant extract of which is as under :-  "Recruitment of the service shall be made as under :- (a) In the case of Joint Provincial Transport Controller :- (i) by promotion from amongst the Deputy Transport Controllers; or (ii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of the State Government or of the Union Government; or  (iii) by direct appointment.
(b) xx xx xx xx (c) In the case of Deputy Transport Controller (T&C) : (i) by promotion from the post of General Manager, Punjab Roadways having experience of working on that post for a minimum period of five years or by promotion from the post of Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, having an experience of working on that post for a minimum period of five years out of which at least two years should be as General Manager, or has put in seven years' service as Secretary, Regional Transport Authority; or  (ii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of the State Government or of the Union Government; or  (iii) by direct appointment."
It is pleaded that petitioner was eligible for appointment by way of promotion to the post of Deputy Transport Controller/Deputy Director State Transport on the basis of his qualifications and experience as prescribed in the Class-I Service Rules.
On July 26, 1979 by order of Governor of Punjab, he was appointed as Deputy Director, State Transport, Punjab in the Head Office at Chandigarh against a vacant post from the post of Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, Jalandhar.
He continued to officiate and perform the duties of higher post of Deputy Director, State Transport, Punjab in pursuance of the order dated July 30, 1979 to the entire satisfaction of his superiors.
Post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller became vacant on May 1, 1978 after the death of one Gurjeet Singh and that post was given to one Saran Singh, who was promoted on May 4, 1978 as Joint Provincial Transport Controller.
Shri Saran Singh retired on December 31, 1971 and the second point which became available was given to the candidate of non-scheduled caste, Shri Bachhiter Singh.
On the retirement of Shri Bachhiter Singh on March 31, 1980 the point again became vacant and was to be filled in by a member of Scheduled Caste.
It is pleaded that petitioner being the only eligible candidate from the reserved quota, had acquired sufficient experience as Deputy Director, Punjab State Transport.
The Secretary to Government of Punjab had written letter in consultation with the Legal Rememberancer for filling up the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller from the candidate of reserved quota.
On May 26, 1981 petitioner was appointed to Class-I post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller being candidate from the reserved quota.
The Government vide letter dated June 20, 1981 informed the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Social Welfare of Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes that petitioner had been posted as Joint Provincial Transport Controller being a candidate from reserved quota.
In the manner aforesaid, petitioner was working in Class-I service without any complaint.
During that period, he was allowed to cross efficiency bar in the scale of General Manager of Rs. 940-1050 w.e.f.
January 1, 1981 raising his pay from Rs. 1200/- to Rs. 1250/- vide order dated September 9, 1985 and then w.e.f.
January 1, 1985 raising his pay from Rs. 1400/- to Rs. 1460/- vide order dated February 20, 1986.
He made repeated representations for considering his case for regularisation to the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller, Punjab.
On his repeated representations, the Secretary to the Government of Punjab-respondent No. 2 vide letter dated January 9, 1987 requested the Government to decide his case for regularisation to the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller but he was neither considered nor was he paid the salary of the said post, although he had been working as Joint Provincial Transport Controller.
It was also stated in the said letter that in order to avoid hardships, his case for regularisation should be decided immediately as the same was hanging fire for the last so many years.
Irrespective of the request, as mentioned above, respondent No. 3 vide order dated April 9, 1987 was promoted and posted as Joint Provincial Transport Controller and petitioner was reverted to the post of District Transport Officer i.e. Class-II post.
It is this order of promotion of respondent No. 3 and reversion of petitioner which has been challenged in this petition.
3.
The only contention of Mr. Gopal Mahajan, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, is that the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller became available in 1980 and at that time, admittedly, petitioner was the only eligible person to occupy the said post.
However, this post was kept vacant even though petitioner was asked to officiate on the said post in his own pay scale till 1987 when respondent No. one was promoted to the said post without considering his (petitioner's) claim.
In the context of the fact that post became available in the year 1980 when petitioner alone was eligible, it is further maintained by learned counsel that consideration of the post under contention had to be taken at the time when the same became available and not seven years thereafter as has been precisely done in the present case.
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objections that respondent No. 3, who is an ex-serviceman, was given the benefit of his military service vide order dated June 14, 1982.
His deemed date of appointment was fixed as October 26, 1969.
This order was challenged by petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 2647 of 1982 which was dismissed at motion stage.
In view of the military service benefit that was given to respondent No. 3, he became senior to petitioner.
Since the seniority list so prepared was thereafter never challenged by the petitioner, he could not ask for promotion to the post under contention as respondent No. 3 is senior to him and has been rightly offered the post.
The assertion of the petitioner as to when the post became available has not, however, been disputed.
It has also been admitted that petitioner was eligible for promotion to the said post on May 26, 1981 and respondent No. 3 was not eligible on the said date as till then he had not been granted the benefit of military service and as such was junior to petitioner.
Besides that respondent No. 3 did not possess the requisite qualification/experience of the post of Deputy Director, State Transport/Deputy Transport Controller as on May 26, 1981 as required under the then applicable service Rules and as such he was not eligible for promotion on the relevant date.
The case of petitioner was still not considered as some vigilance enquiry was pending against him.
Insofar as claim of petitioner that he was posted as Joint Provincial Transport Controller is concerned, it is pleaded that same was in his own pay scale and was not a promotion, of which he could take any benefit.
It is also admitted that petitioner was allowed to cross two efficiency bars in the scale of Rs. 940-1800 w.e.f.
January 1, 1981 and January 1, 1985.
5.
The perusal of the pleadings, as extracted above, would thus manifest that the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller became available in the year 1981 when petitioner alone was eligible under the then Rules or instructions, as the case may be.
His case was either not considered or if at all considered, he was not promoted on the solitary ground that some vigilance enquiry was pending against him.
The only question that, thus, requires adjudication is as to whether the mere pendency of vigilance enquiry was enough to deny the petitioner the promotional post.
This Court, after hearing learned counsel for the parties, is of the considered view that such a course was not open to the respondents.
The moment the promotional post became available, the right of those who answered the eligibility criteria provided for the same, had necessarily to be considered.
While considering their case, the mere fact that some vigilance enquiries were pending, was not enough to deny them the right of promotion.
Supreme Court in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman etc., 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2010, held that "it is only when a charge-memo in a disciplinary proceeding or a charge-sheet in a criminal prosecution is issued to the employee that it can be said that the departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is initiated against the employee."
Delhi High Court in V K Gupta v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi, 1993(1) SCT 187 (Delhi) : 1993 Lab.I.C.
55, while relying upon Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2010 held that "the sole ground of pendency of vigilance enquiry against a person so as to deny him the promotion is contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court."
I am in complete agreement with the view expressed by the Delhi High Court in V K Gupta's case (supra).
In Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel v. State of Punjab and Ors., 1993(1) SCT 782 (P&H) : 1993(1) SLR, 139, after relying upon the decisions of the apex Court as also the Full Bench of this Court and instructions issued by the Punjab Government, I had held that, "those who are eligible have necessarily to be considered for promotion to the next higher post when the post in question becomes available."
6.
It is rather strange to note that whereas, respondents thought the pendency of vigilance enquiry sufficient to negate the claim of petitioner for higher post, respondent No. 3 who was placed under suspension on October 11, 1986, was promoted on April 9, 1987, even though the enquiry regarding charges of which he was placed under suspension, was still pending against him.
He was reinstated on March 21, 1987 and it is admitted position that by the time he was reinstated, enquiry was still pending against him.
This certainly is totally arbitrary and the way and manner in which the respondents proceeded would, thus, leave no one in doubt that petitioner was denied promotion in an arbitrary manner.
7.
Before I part with this judgment, the contention of Mr. Masih, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab that the present petition is barred by the principle of res-judicata, needs to be noticed.
It is argued that petitioner had earlier filed civil writ petition No. 1986 of 1987 wherein he had claimed salary commensurate to the post that he was holding as also regularisation on the said post.
The matter aforesaid came to be decided by brother M R Agnihotri, J and is reported as O P Bhagat v. State of Punjab and Ors., 1990(2) PLR 216.
Since petitioner had claimed his regularisation on the post on which he now claims preference to respondent No. 3, it is pleaded and so argued by Mr. Masih that the present petition is barred by the principle of constructive res judicate.
I find no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the State.
The learned Judge while deciding the case aforesaid only dealt with the right of petitioner to get pay attached to the post on which he was working.
His claim with regard to promotion or regularisation was asked for whereas in the present case petitioner claims precedence over respondent No. 3, who, it is stated, has been promoted without considering his claim.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
Inasmuch as petitioner has since already retired, there is no necessity whatsover to pass any adverse orders against respondent No. 3.
It will be sufficient, in the facts and circumstances of this case, to issue a direction to the respondents to consider the case of petitioner for promotion to the post of Joint Provincial Transport Controller when the post became available without taking into consideration the vigilance enquiry that was stated to be pending against him.
If in such consideration, petitioner is promoted, he shall obviously be entitled to consequential relief of pay of higher post and his retiral benefits shall also be computed on that basis.
Let this exercise be done within a period of two months from today.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.