Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus for directing respondents No. 1 and 2 to send her for the Intermediate School Course.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a constable on November 9, 1981.
A test was held in the year 1987 for selecting constables for being deputed for the Lower School Course.
The petitioner avers that she had appeared in the test and had stood first in order of merit.
In spite of that, she was not deputed for the course.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, she filed C.W.P.
No. 8496 of 1987 which was allowed by this Court vide orders dated November 26, 1987.
The petitioner qualified the Lower School Course and was promoted as a Head Constable on September 15, 1988.
She was ordered to be reverted on November 10, 1988.
Aggrieved by the order of reversion, she again approached this Court vide CWP No. 10156 of 1988.
This writ petition was allowed by a learned single Judge of this Court on May 8, 1992.
The order of reversion was quashed.
As a result, the petitioner is to be deemed to have continued as Head Constable since September 15, 1988.
3.
Another fact that deserves mention here is that the petitioner was originally posted in Hissar Range.
In October-November 1989 she was posted in Gurgaon Range.
It is stated that on June 5, 1992 the petitioner was transferred to Gurgaon district.
The petitioner avers that respondent No. 3 Smt. Prem Devi was also recruited as a constable on November 9, 1981.
The said respondent was promoted as Head Constable with effect from November 30, 1988.
Respondent No. 3 having been promoted after the petitioner, was junior to her.
In spite of this, respondent No. 3, was deputed for the Intermediate School Course in preference to the petitioner vide order dated October 16, 1992.
The petitioner claims that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
In the written statement filed by Mr. KKoshy, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been inter-alia averred that according to the combined seniority list of Head Constables of all the four districts, the name of petitioner figures much after that of respondent No. 3.
It has been further averred that after her reversion order dated November 10, 1988 had been set aside, the petitioner's seniority was fixed in Bhiwani police district in which she was firstly promoted and not in district Gurgaon.
It has been averred that the "benefits legally available to the petitioner in terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble High Court including sending her to the Intermediate School Course are to be given by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range and Superintendent of Police, Bhiwani after assigning her seniority."
On these premises, the petitioner's claim has been contested.
5.
We have heard Mr. HS Mehtani, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Jagdev Sharma, learned Additional Advocate-General for the respondents.
Mr. Mehtani has primarily contended that the petitioner having been promoted as a Head Constable earlier than respondent No. 3 is senior to her and had a right to be deputed for the Course before respondent No. 3 who is junior to her.
On the other hand, Mr. Jagdev Sharma claimed that the petitioner was junior to respondent No. 3 according to the seniority-list maintained for Gurgaon range.
The position in the seniority list is sought to be justified on the basis that while respondent No. 3 had been promoted as a Head Constable on November 30, 1988, the petitioner was promoted as such on June 13, 1992.
It has also been pointed out that respondent No. 3 had been confirmed as Head Constable with effect from January 31, 1991, while the petitioner had not been so confirmed.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties we find that the petitioner had been actually promoted as a Head Constable on September 15, 1988.
She was ordered to be reverted on November 10, 1988.
The orders of her reversion were set aside by this Court vide judgment dated May 8, 1992 while allowing C.W.P.
No. 10156 of 1988.
Consequently, the petitioner is to be deemed to have continued as a Head Constable since September 15, 1988.
It further appears that during the pendency of the aforesaid writ petition, the respondents had considered the case of Respondent No. 3 for confirmation.
As a result of such consideration, respondent No. 3 had been confirmed with effect from January 31, 1991.
Since the petitioner was working as a Constable at that time, her claim could not have been considered.
However, after the order of reversion had been set aside, she had a right to be considered for confirmation with effect from the date a person junior to her or one who had been promoted after her had been considered for promotion.
This has obviously not been done.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had admittedly been promoted as Head Constable prior to respondent No. 3, we are of the opinion that it was incumbent upon the respondents to consider her claim for confirmation with effect from the date the claim of respondent No. 3 had been considered.
Still further, nothing has been pointed out to show that there was anything wrong with the petitioner, as a result of which she was not suitable for confirmation.
It further appears to us that the respondents have wrongly treated the petitioner as having been promoted as Head Constable with effect from June 13, 1992.
Factually, she was promoted on September, 15, 1988.
Her order of reversion passed in November 1988 having been set aside by this Court, it has to be presumed that she has continued as Head Constable with effect from September 15, 1988.
Consequently, the seniority assigned to the petitioner in Gurgaon Range is not based on correct appreciation of facts.
7.
Equally untenable is the plea of the respondents that the petitioner's seniority has to be determined in Hissar Range.
As already noticed,it has been averred in paragraph 10 of the written statement that "other benefits legally available to the petitioner in terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble High Court including sending her to the Intermediate School Course are to be given by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Bhiwani after assigning her seniority."
Admittedly, she is posted in Gurgaon Range.
Her seniority has to be determined vis-a-vis the persons working in that range in accordance with the rules.
She is no longer on the strength of Hissar Range.
She has consequently a right to be considered for being deputed for the Course vis-a-vis others working in Gurgaon.
This has admittedly not been done.
As a result, the petitioner's claim was wrongly ignored.
8.
It has been suggested that the seniority of Constables and Head Constables has to be determined in the respective districts in which they are posted.
In the normal course of events it may be so.
However, it is the admitted position that for consideration of claim for being deputed for Intermediate School Course, the seniority has been actually prepared for the entire Range.
That is the precise reason for the preparation of the list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1.
In such a situation, it is not necessary for the purpose of this case to consider the validity or otherwise of the action of the respondents.
Suffice it to say, that even in the seniority list prepared for the entire Range, the petitioner has been treated as junior to respondent No. 3 on an erroneous assumption of facts.
She consequently had a right to be deputed for the course alongwith respondent No. 3.
The respondents erred in ignoring her claim.
We are of the opinion that the respondents have denied the equality of opportunity to the petitioner.
The action of the respondents is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
9.
Mr. Jagdev Sharma produced a letter dated August 11, 1993 issued by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, in which it has been stated that "so far as the next batch of Intermediate School Course is concerned, it will start from November 1993 and then the name of the petitioner will be considered against the seats available for Lady Head Constables."
After hearing learned counsel for the parties we are of the opinion that the petitioner had a right to be deputed for the course alongwith respondent No. 3.
Accordingly, we direct that she will now be deputed for the course commencing in November 1993.
It is further clarified that since the petitioner was wrongly ignored for being deputed for the Intermediate School Course, when respondent No. 3 was so deputed, her interests would in no way be prejudicially affected by the mere factum of delay in her qualifying the course.
In fact, this is even the view taken by the Director General of Police.
Instructions dated November 20, 1991 issued by the Director General of Police provided that "those Head Constables, who have done Intermediate School Course out of turn, they will be deemed to have done training only in their turn till such time their seniors have undergone the said Course and they will not get benefit of Intermediate School Course.
Accordingly, their names will be brought on list 'D' for further promotion as per Police Rules."
It is thus clear that even under the instructions issued by the Head of Department, the rights of a Head Constable for being deputed for the course after her junior cannot be adversely affected.
10.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the petitioner will be deputed for the course commencing in November 1993.
It is further directed that her claim for confirmation as Head Constable shall be considered by the appropriate authority on the basis that she had been promoted on September 15, 1988 and not on June 13, 1992.
On being found suitable she will be confirmed with effect from the same or an earlier date on which respondent No. 3 had been confirmed.
Her chances of further promotion etc. shall not suffer on account of her qualifying the course after respondent No. 3.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs