NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's Regular Second Appeal.
Briefly put, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration against the State of Haryana and others on the following allegations.
The plaintiff was employed as Constable in Police Department and was posted in Police Station Taurn in District Gurgaon in September, 1987 (actually September, 1986) under the control of defendant No. 2 Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon.
A departmental enquiry was ordered against the plaintiff by defendant No. 2 on the allegations that the plaintiff had consumed alcohol with one Suraj Bhan constable at the hotel of one Gurbachan Singh on 1891987 (actually 1991986) and the plaintiff and Suraj Bhan threw and broke utensils of Gurbachan Singh and also misbehaved with him under the influence of alcohol.
The enquiry officer held the plaintiff guilty without any material on record.
On the basis of that finding, defendant No. 2 dismissed the plaintiff from service on 11121987.
The appeal preferred by the plaintiff was dismissed by defendant No. 3 vide order dated 2231988.
The plaintiff challenged the orders passed by defendants No. 2 and 3 as being illegal, null and void on the ground that the rules were not followed; that reasonable opportunity of hearing was not afforded to the plaintiff; that the impugned orders are non-speaking and non-reasoned; that occurrence of District Magistrate, Gurgaon for holding departmental enquiry is non-reasoned and in violation of law; that the plaintiff was not on duty at the time of alleged occurrence dated 18986; that defendant No. 2 did not act independently while issuing show cause notice for dismissal and he had already made up his mind to impose the punishment of dismissal; that defendant No. 3 also rejected the plaintiff's appeal through non-speaking order and by making wrong observations.
Notice under Section 80 CPC was also served on the defendants, but to no effect.
Hence the plaintiff filed suit seeking declaration that the orders dated 11121987 of defendant No. 2 and 2231988 of defendant No. 3 are wrong and illegal, null and void and the plaintiff is in continuous service under the defendants with full back wages and emoluments.
2.
The defendant in their written statement admitted that the plaintiff was posted as Constable in police station Tauru and a departmental enquiry was held against him and ultimately he was dismissed from service by defendant No. 2 and the plaintiff's appeal was rejected by defendant No. 3.
However, the other allegations of the plaintiff were controverted and it was inter alia pleaded that the departmental enquiry was held according to Rules and that the impugned orders dated 11121987 and 2231988 of defendants No. 2 and 3 respectively are also legal and valid and according to Rules.
Various grounds challenging the said orders were also controverted.
Preliminary objections were raised that the suit is bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of parties; that valid notice under Section 80 CPC was not served; that the suit is not maintainable in the present form; that the plaintiff is estopped from filing the suit and that the Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit.
3.
On the peadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether order dated 11121987 passed by SP Gurgaon defendant No. 2 dismissing the plaintiff from service and the order dated 23.3.1988 passed by defendant No. 3 rejecting the appeal of the plaintiff are null, void, illegal, ultra vires, without jurisdiction and non est is in the eyes of law?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is bad non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
3.
Whether no valid notice under Section 80 CPC was served on the defendants hence the suit is liable to be dismissed on its ground?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit by his own act and conduct ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
4.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the plaintiff holding that the impugned orders dated 11121987 and 22.8.1988 are perfectly legal.
Issues No. 2 and 3 were decided against the defendants as not pressed.
Issue No. 4 to 6 were also not pressed.
In view of these findings, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
5.
The appellate Court once again examined the case after perusal of the relevant material on record came to the conclusion that the order of dismissal of the plaintiff was passed on the basis of enquiry held against him.
Thus, the appellate Court too found no merit in any of the submissions made by the counsel for the appellant and so dismissed the appeal.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant has almost reiterated the same argument which did not find favour with the Courts below.
Both the Courts after carefully examining the evidence led have reached to a conclusion that the order passed by defendant No. 2 dismissing the plaintiff from service was legal.
The scope of second appeal as envisaged by Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure is rather limited.
Both the Courts after examining the evidence on record have found no fault with the order passed by the authorities dismissing the plaintiff.
This being essentially a finding of fact is not amenable to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
This being the position, the regular second appeal is without any merit and the same is consequently dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.