VK Jhanji, J - Respondent Surinder Singh Johar who was employed with Haryana State Electricity Board (for short the Board) had shown 10.4.1934 as his date of birth in his service record.
On the basis of this, he was to retire on 3041992.
Before his retirement, i.e., on 321989, he made a representation to the Department for correcting his date of birth.
He based his claim on the basis of a transfer certificate issued by a School in Pakistan.
He alleged in the suit that the date of birth was wrongly recorded when he was admitted in school in India after partition and he has been making efforts for correction of the same.
He made reference to certain documents, i.e., the correspondence between the Inspector of Schools and the Deputy High Commissioner of India, at Lahore, Ministry of Scientific Research and Education, Pakistan and Government of India, New Delhi for verification of these entries, which were recorded by a school in Pakistan.
The suit is being contested by the Board.
Alongwith the suit, an application for ad interim injunction was also filed.
Injunction was not granted by the trial Court.
Respondent filed appeal before the Additional District Judge, Hissar who allowed the appeal of the respondent and granted injunction.
In consequence thereof, defendants were restrained from retiring the plaintiff on the basis of date of birth recorded in his service record.
When the Civil Revision.
came up for motion hearing, this Court stayed operation of the order of the lower Appellate Court in July, 1992.
Counsel for the petitioners has filed affidavit that in view of the stay vacated by this Court, petitioner was retired from service with effect from 1871992.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that this order was passed without hearing the respondent and, therefore, this fact should not be taken into consideration.
It is true that the order dated 1871992 was passed ex parte but nevertheless the respondent stands retired with effect from 1992.
His suit is pending and is still at the preliminary stage.
In case the respondent succeeds in his suit, he shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
That would not only include his salary but also the service benefits which may accrue to him from time to time.
The loss which may be caused to the respondent can be quantified in terms of money and, therefore, in my view he is not entitled to injunction as prayed for.
Considering that the respondent stands retired, he shall be given all retiral benefits upto 1871992.
It is made clear that in case he succeeds in suit, he shall also be entitled to all consequential service benefits.
Respondent shall make appropriate application to the Board for release of retiral benefits.
On receipt of his application, the same shall be paid within two months.
The trial Court is also directed to expedite the decision of the suit preferably within six months.
This civil revision stands disposed of accordingly.
No costs.