Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The claim for higher seniority position, that is, above respondent No. 3, Sh. Nirmal Singh, Additional District and Sessions Judge, a member of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service, has been staked by the petitioner by invoking to his aid the provisions of Rule 12 of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963.
Respondent No. 3 belongs to one of the recognised Scheduled Castes and, as such, is entitled to the benefit of reservation as provided by the State of Punjab according to the policy instructions issued on 6th March, 1961, which were adopted by the Punjab and Haryana High Court and were given statutory force in the form of Rule 8-A of the aforesaid Service Rules.
Rule 8-A reads as under :-  "8-A.
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the instructions issued by the Government from time to time in relation to reservation of appointments or posts for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes shall apply for the purpose of making appointments to posts in the service."
2.
According to the instructions dated 6th March, 1961, the post vacated by a member of the Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes shall remain earmarked and be filled up by a member belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes.
In nutshell, it provides that if by applying the aforesaid policy instructions in favour of the Scheduled Castes/Tribes, certain appointments have been made, and one of the persons appointed resigns or by some other exigency, a post falls vacant in the quota meant for Scheduled Castes/Tribes, that resultant vacancy has to be filled up by appointing the next person belonging to the Scheduled Caste/Tribes and the vacancy shall not be diverted to the general side, that is, open pool.
These instructions have since been upheld and the intention of the State Government made clear by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1978(2) S.L.R.
108.
3.
In the present case, the petitioner Sh. SS Grewal and respondent No. 3, Sh. Nirmal Singh, were selected and appointed to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service along with Sh. Gian Singh alias Gian Dass Savra, a member of the Scheduled Caste.
Mr. Savra later on resigned and on the basis of the aforesaid policy, instructions of the State Government, as sanctioned by Rule 8-A of the Statutory Rules of 1963, respondent No. 3 had a right to be adjusted against the vacancy caused by the resignation of Mr. Savra.
This claim of respondent No. 3 which was originally rejected, was ultimately upheld by the Punjab and Haryana High Court on the administrative side by accepting his representation.
The said representation was accepted in view of the Punjab Government instructions contained in Circular Letter No. 1818-SWI/75/10451b dated 5-5-1975.
Sh. Nirmal Singh, respondent No. 3 and given rester point No. 7 being a Mazhbi Sikh and was adjusted w.e.f.
26.5.1986 as he had a superior claim over and above Shri G.S.
Savra (since resigned).
Resultantly, the seniority list was re-drawn, the petitioner was placed at number 53, that is, immediately below respondent No. 3.
4.
In view of the above narration of facts and the law settled on the point, we do not find any legal infirmity with the decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court arrived at on the administrative side, as it is perfectly in accordance with the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh's case (supra) as also the policy instructions of the State Government.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed in lmine, with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.