Vijender Jain, CJ.
(Oral) - The above mentioned two appeals have been filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent against the common judgment dated 7.8.1996 passed by the learned Single Judge in the aforementioned two writ petitions, filed by the respondents herein-petitioners, who were jointly tried by General Court Martial.
2.
Shri Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel for the appellants has contended that the learned Single Judge failed to appreciate that the convening order dated 2541986 (Annexure P. 10) itself raises ex facie presumption that the order was by the convening authority and he has applied its mind.
It was further contended that the respondents did not challenge non-compliance of Rule 37 of the Army Rules, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as "Rules") before the General Court Martial.
It has further been contended by learned counsel for the appellants that the learned Single Judge while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India could not sit in appeal against the finding of General Court Martial.
It has eminently been contended before us that Brig.
Neville Foley was competent and authorized to issue detailment order and finding to the contrary is bad in law.
It is also contended that the power of judicial review cannot be stretched now by the respondent if the objection regarding violation of Rule 37 of the Rules had not been taken before the General Court Martial.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the appellants relied upon Union of India and others v. Gurnam Singh, 2004(2) SCT 405 : (2004)4 Supreme Court Cases 636.
Learned counsel for the appellants also relied upon Major GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 537 : AIR 1991 SC 1617.
3.
On the basis of the aforesaid authorities, it is contended that order passed by Brig.
Neville Foley could not have been faulted.
Towards similar proposition, counsel for the appellants relied upon Rajmal Sharma v. Union of India and others, 1998(3) SCT 143 : 1998(4) SLR 547, referred to observations in para 9 of the judgment by Hon'ble Division Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court, which reads as "But it is forgotten that the jurisdiction depends upon a particular fact and the non-existence of such a fact must be alleged and pleaded.
In the present case no such factual plea that the appointment order was not made by the competent officer was raised before the concerned Court.
It cannot be raised before us under Article 226 of the Constitution of India" and contended that since no such plea that appointment order was not made by the competent officer was raised before the General Court Martial, it could not be raised before this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the respondent has contended that Brig.
Neville Foley was neither competent nor had the authority to act as General Officer Commanding, therefore, even if the respondents have not pleaded violation of Rule 37 of the Rules before General Court Martial then also there was statutory violation, that need not to be argued and therefore, the learned Single Judge was right in recording that there was non-observance of sub-rule (3) of Rule 37 of the Rules 1954.
It is also contended that it was admitted position that Brig.
Neville Foley, Deputy Divisional Commander was subordinate to the competent authority and he never exercised the power of General Officer Commanding, as would be apparent from perusal of documents on record as Mark A to D In support of his contention, learned counsel for the respondent has relied upon Union of India and others v. Harish Chandra Goswami, 1999(2) SCT 727 : AIR 1999 SC 1940, the relevant para of which reads thus :  "Admittedly there is no record whatever in the file to show that the personnel of the Court-martial were appointed by or nominated by the Lt. General.
The order for the Assembly of a General Court-Martial did not contain either the signature or the initial of the Lt. General.
It was signed only by the Colonel and none else.
In the circumstances the said order cannot be considered to be an order evidencing the appointment of personnel of the Court-martial by the Lt. General.
There is no dispute before us that under Rule 37, the Commanding Officer has to apply his mind to satisfy himself that the charges to be tried by the Court are for offences within the meaning of the Act and that evidence justifies the trial of those charges.
It is also admitted the Commanding Officer has also to satisfy himself that the case is a one to be tried by the kind of Court-martial which he proposes to convene.
However, learned counsel for the appellants contends that sub-rule (3) of Rule 37 is only procedural in nature and there is no need for the application of mind by the Commanding Officer in the matter of appointment of the personnel of Court-martial.
That contention loses its relevance in the present case in view of the categorical stand taken by the appellant, that there was an order by the Commanding Officer appointing or detailing the officers to form the Court-martial.
According to the learned counsel as stated earlier, the form for Assembly of Court-martial is the only relevant form and when it is signed by an officer on behalf of the Lt. General, that is sufficient proof of the appointment of the personnel of the Court-martial by the Lt. General.
We are unable to accept this contention in view of the fact that the said form does not contain either the signature or the initial of the Lt. General.
Even assuming that the Lt. General passed an oral order, there is no record of any kind whatever to prove it.
The form for Assembly of Court-martial was not contemporaneous to such oral order, if any.
In the absence of any record whatever to show that the appointment of the personnel of the Court martial was by the Lt. General, we are not persuaded to accept the contention of the appellants that the requirements of Rule 37 were fully satisfied.
It is unnecessary for us to consider whether sub-rule (3) of Rule 37 requires an order in writing or not in view of the specific stand taken by the learned counsel for the appellants in this case that there was an order in writing and the said order was nothing else but the form for Assembly of the Court- martial."
5.
We have given our careful consideration to the arguments advanced by both the parties.
6.
At the outset, we failed to understand as to why this appeal has been filed by Union of India.
Learned Single Judge in its impugned order has discussed in detail the submission of counsel appearing for the respondent in the writ court that members of the court martial were not selected or detailed by the competent authority.
Four documents, reliance on which has been placed before us, were the subject matter of the arguments raised by the appellants before the learned Single Judge.
Learned Single Judge has referred to these documents, which were shown to us also by learned counsel for the appellants as Mark A, Mark B, Mark C and Mark D  7.
After going through the documents with Mr. Pipat, who was the counsel for the appellant in the writ court, a clear cut observation has been recorded by the learned Single Judge, which is as follows :  "The learned counsel, however, concedes that "there is no order of the General Officer Commanding the Division specifically detailing or naming the officers who will constitute the General Court Martial on record."
On the basis of the concession of the appellant, the learned Single Judge has recorded that the General Court-Martial was not convened by an officer empowered by a warrant of the chief of the Army Staff as required under Section 109 of the Army Act, 1950.
One should not forget that when there is a statute operating in the field, the judicial functions can only be exercised by a duly constituted court and on the basis of the concession of the appellant based on examination of record, learned Single Judge has allowed the writ petition but in view of the charges, which according to the learned Single Judge in the impugned order, were serious, it directed the appellant before us to proceed further against the respondent in accordance with law.
Further direction was also issued that the appropriate authority, shall be competent to take such action as may be permitted by law thereby meaning that appellants were free to either constitute the order for fresh court-martial or the said court-martial after observing compliance of sub rule (3) of Rule 37 of the Army Rules and the impugned order went step further.
It recorded an undertaking from counsel for the respondents that they will not raise any objection, if they were tried by the court thereafter.
That order was passed on August 07, 1996.
8.
At the beginning of the hearing, we had asked learned counsel for the appellants that how could they maintain an appeal against an order, which had been given on account of their own concession based on appreciation of record.
Our second query to the counsel for the appellant was as to what have they done in view of the leave, which has been granted by the impugned order to the appellant to further proceed in the matter.
Instead of wasting 12 years, they have done nothing.
As a matter of fact, as we observed earlier that if anybody was aggrieved, it was the respondents because their right to object was also nullified by the impugned order.
The appellant has not availed the liberty granted by the court.
In view of the facts established, after perusal of four documents Mark A to Mark D, that there was no valid convening of GCM by the competent authority, the case law cited by the learned counsel for the appellant is not applicable and of no assistance.
There is no merit in these appeals and the same are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.