Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J - This application under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India is at the instance of an unsuccessful applicant under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act and is directed against order dated April 18, 2005 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Kolkata Bench, in OA No. 680 of 2004 thereby dismissing the said application.
2.
In the application under Section 19 of the Act, the writ petitioner prayed for passing an appropriate order directing the respondents, the employer, to review the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Senior Administrative Grade and to give all consequential benefit and for passing an appropriate order to quash and set aside the order dated July 2, 2004 passed by the Railway Board which had been communicated to the writ- petitioner by letter dated July, 14, 2004.
The other consequential reliefs were also claimed.
3.
The case made out by the writ petitioner may be summed up thus :  (a) The writ petitioner at the relevant point of time, i.e. in the year 1989, was working in the Junior Administrative Grade of the Mechanical Engineering in the Indian Railway-Service.
In or around July/August, 1989, a panel for promotion to the Senior Administrative Grade in the Mechanical Engineering Department of the Indian Railways was prepared by the Railway Board, the Ministry of Railways, wherein the writ petitioner was also considered for empanelment.
However, in the said panel, three officers junior to him were promoted in the month of August/September, 1989 and the case of the writ petitioner, was ignored though he was senior to the aforesaid three officers and the service record of the writ petitioner was outstanding, inasmuch as there was no adverse remark in the service book of the writ petitioner.
(b) The writ petitioner at that point of time was working as Deputy Chief Mechanical Engineer and submitted a representation dated September 16, 1989, which was forwarded to the Railway Board through the official channel on September 17, 1989 agianst the denial of promotion of the writ petitioner giving full details of the case.
The said representation was followed by a reminder on November 20, 1989 and number of oral representations and request to various officers in the Board including the member mechanical but the writ petitioner was not given any specific or satisfactory reason for not being considered for empanelment.
(c) Till the formation of the panel, the norms for selection for promotion specified by the Ministry of Railway were governed by the Railway Board Circulars dated May 15, 1987 and March 6, 1986.
Those norms specified that the "points system of rating" should be followed for promotion, the benchmark for promotion being "very good" grade.
The officers who had obtained 23 or more points for the preceding five years would be considered as "outstanding".
According to the Railway Board Circular for promotion, the following marks should be awarded for each of the year's confidential report :  (1) Outstanding 5 marks  (2) Very good 4 marks (3) Good 3 marks  (4) Good/not fit 25 marks  (5) Average 2 marks  (6) Below average 1 mark  (d) On the basis of the aforesaid marking, the writ petitioner was awarded 23 marks as per information given to the writ petitioner after taking into account the "outstanding" report for the four years and the "good" remarks for the one year.
The said circular further provided that candidates securing 23 or above marks would be considered as "outstanding."
(e) Subsequently however, the Railway Board changed the norms of selection by the letter dated September 26, 1989 based on revised circular of the Department of Personnel dated March 10, 1989.
The basic difference in policy was that by the letter circular, the DPC was to grade the officer as "outstanding" not merely on the basis of points system but also on a review of confidential reports and overall merit.
(f) As per information given to the petitioner, he had 23 points in the five years up to the year 1988-89 on the basis of which the panel was formed and as such, he ought to have been graded as "outstanding" and should not have been superseded as per norms of promotion applicable as far as the notified policy of the Railway Board prevailing at that point of time.
According to the working norms of the Ministry of Railway, any change in norms, policies, procedures etc. is required to be deliberated and adopted by a resolution of the Railway Board and in the present case, no such norms was followed at that time nor was any notification made.
(g) According to the writ petitioner, the DPC followed the new norms without following the procedure and while considering the case of the applicant, totally overlooked him for promotion despite his overall outstanding record and that was done without any reasonable and rational basis.
4.
The aforesaid application was contested by the Railway Administration by filing reply thereby taking a preliminary point that the application was hopelessly barred by limitation having been filed along 14 years after the selection for promotion.
It was submitted that no application for condonation of delay was filed by the writ petitioner.
Secondly, it was contended that the writ petitioner having asked for revision of seniority after long 14 years, the same would adversely affect number of the officers who had not been impleaded by the writ petitioner.
Lastly, it was contended that according to the Rule 203 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code of volume 1, the posts of Administrative Grade are selection posts and all the appointments are made on the basis of selection on merit.
The Railway Authority further asserted that the procedure for holding such selection was contained in the Ministry of Railway's letter dated 26th September, 1989 and the benchmark for promotion to Senior Assistant Grade was "very good".
It was further stated that DPC was not guided merely by entries in the confidential report but it made its own assessment and the DPC having been held in the month of August, 1989, did not consider him suitable for promotion based on his performance and other relevant factors.
The Railway authority, therefore, prayed for dismissal of the said application.
5.
The learned Tribunal after consideration of the materials on record accepted all the objections raised by the employer and dismissed the application not only on the ground of bar of limitation but also on merit by holding that the appropriate guidelines applicable in the case of consideration was the one issued on March 10, 1989 issued by the Department of Personnel which was recognized by the Circular of the Railway dated September 26, 1989.
6.
Being dissatisfied, the writ petitioner has come up with the present application under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Mr. Gupta, the learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner has vehemently attacked all the findings recorded by the learned Tribunal.
First, Mr. Gupta contends that his client not havingbeen specifically given any information in writing disclosing the reason for supersession by his juniors until the year 2004, no cause of action had accrued earlier for filing any application under Section 19 of the Act.
Mr. Gupta further contends that in the matter of grant of promotion, the decision of the employer affects the salary of the employee and in such a case, the cause of action is a recurring one and accrues every month.
He, therefore, submits that in such a situation, the application cannot be said to be barred by limitation.
8.
Mr. Gupta further contends that his client not having prayed for disturbing the promotions given to the others, there is no bar in considering the case of his client in accordance with the relevant rules without unsettling the promotion already given to his juniors.
According to Mr. Gutpa, a Writ Court is entitled to mould the relief according to the situation demanded in the fact of the case and as such, this Court can pass direction upon the employer to consider only the case of promotion of the writ petitioner in accordance with the appropriate rule prevailing at that point of time without disturbing the promotions already given to his juniors in violation of the norms.
9.
Mr. Gupta, on merit, submits that the circular dated September 26, 1989 cannot be held applicable inasmuch as at the relevant point of time i.e. in the month of July/August, 1989, the said circular did not see the light and the relevant circular applicable at the relevant point of time was the one dated March 6, 1986 supplemented by May 15, 1987.
Mr. Gupta complains that his client's case of promotion was not considered in the light of those two circulars and if those were really considered and applied, his client would have got promotion.
Mr. Gupta, therefore, prays for a direction upon the employer to consider the case of his client afresh in the light of those two circulars without disturbing the promotion already given to others who were not made parties.
Mr. Gupta submits that if his client succeeds according to those two circulars, further direction should be given upon the employer to consider the case of future promotion by taking into consideration the fact as if his client was really promoted in the month of August, 1989.
Mr. Gupta, therefore, prays for passing appropriate direction.
10.
Mr. Pal, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Railway Administration has seriously opposed the aforesaid contentions advanced by Mr. Gupta and has contended that the application filed by the writ petitioner after the long lapse of 14 years was, on the face of it, barred by limitation and therefore, the learned Tribunal did not commit any illegality in dismissing the same.
Mr. Pal submits that for not impleading the employees, who had allegedly superseded the writ petitioner, the application was not maintainable as in their absence, no effective direction can be given to the employer and if given, the same will prejudicially affect the interest of those persons.
11.
Even on merit, Mr. Pal contends that the appropriate circular applicable for considering the promotion in question was the one issued by the Department of Personnel on March 10, 1989 and the same was formally adopted by the Railway in the month of September, 1989 and the employer rightly applied the principles mentioned therein and therefore, the writ petitioner cannot be aggrieved in any way.
According to Mr. Pal, the learned Tribunal by a detailed judgment having discussed all the points raised by the writ petitioner and having overruled those, this Court in this writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, cannot sit over the said judgment like a Court of first appeal Mr. Pal further contends that at this stage if fresh direction is given for reconsidering the promotion given in the year 1989, the same will affect the interest of various persons whose right accrued in the meantime.
Mr. Pal, therefore, prays for dismissal of the present writ application.
12.
Therefore, three questions arise for consideration in this writ application; first, whether the Tribunal was justified in rejecting the application as barred by limitation; secondly, whether the present writ application should be held to be "not maintainable" for want of necessary parties and thirdly, whether the employer was justified in applying the circular dated March 10, 1989 issued by the Department of Personnel which was adopted by the Railway on September 26, 1989 for the purpose of considering the question of promotion in the month of July/August, 1989, if we answer the first two questions in favour of the writ-petitioners.
13.
So far the first question, namely, the question of delay is concerned, we find that the writ petitioner made his first representation before the employer on October 6, 1989 when he was superseded by his three juniors.
There is no material on record indicating that the said representation was ever disposed of in writing nor is there any assertion on behalf of the employer that such representation was considered and the outcome of such consideration was communicated to the writ petitioner.
It is only on July 2, 2004, that the employer for the first time turned down the representation of the writ petitioner dated April 9, 2004 and the same was communicated to the writ petitioner on July 14, 2004 and the application under Section 19 of the Act was filed on July 21, 2004.
Therefore, this is not a case of an endeavour to extend the period of limitation by repeated representations although the earlier representation had been rejected.
In such circumstances, we are unable to conclude that the application under Section 19 of the Act was barred by limitation in the strict sense of the provisions of the Act.
14.
We are quite alive to the position of law that if a person in spite of making reorientation does not get an answer but remains idle for a long time, it should be presumed that he had knowledge that his prayer has not been considered and in such circumstances, the Court will be slow to interfere after a long time.
The law is equally settled that in case of dispute as regards promotion or seniority, such dispute financially affects a person every month when he gets salary and thus; the cause of action is a recurring one and the provision of limitation contained in the Act does not stand in the way of the applicant in filing an application under Section 19 of the Act.
If ultimately, the petitioner succeeds, he may not be, however, able to recover the arrears of his dues beyond the period of limitation fixed under law for recovery of money but his right to challenge illegal denial of promotion or seniority cannot be taken away.
(SeeMR Gupta v. Union of India, reported in AIR.
1996 SC 669)  15.
We, therefore, find that in this case, the Tribunal could not throw away the petition simply on the ground of bar of limitation created under the provision of the Act.
16.
The next question is whether the application should be dismissed on the ground of want of necessary party.
In the case before us, the grievance of the writ petitioner is that while depriving him of his right of promotion, the appropriate procedure had not been followed and wrong criteria were applied, as a result, he was superseded by his junior colleagues.
It is true that for the purpose of getting appropriate relief against supersession, the persons who have superseded should be made parties.
In the case before us, the writ petitioner has not impleaded the three junior colleagues who superseded him.
We, however, find substance in the contention of Mr. Gupta, the learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner that while deciding a writ application, the Court, on the basis of materials, on record may shape the relief by refusing the actual relief claimed by an applicant.
Mr. Gupta fairly conceded before us that his client is now interested in the reopening his case of promotion on the basis of the rules which prevailed in the field at the relevant point of time and does not want to disturb the illegal promotion granted to three of his juniors.
In our opinion, if he writ petitioner is satisfied with the reopening of the case of his promotion without disturbing the promotion given to his juniors, there is no bar in entertaining such modified prayer.
We, therefore, hold that the modified prayer of the writ petitioner, only to consider his case of promotion without disturbing the promotion given to others may be considered in this writ application provided the writ petitioner can show that his legitimate right was improperly refused by not following the then relevant norms prevailing.
At this stage, we may profitably refer to the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Brij Nath Pandey v. State of UP and others, reported in (2001) 9 S.C.C.
398 where the Apex Court was considering a case in which the applicant alleged that this promotion was improperly refused by taking into consideration adverse report in ACR notwithstanding the fact that he subsequently crossed the efficiency bar.
In such a case, the Apex Court held that the dispute in question being purely between the applicant and the employer, there was no need of hearing other candidates who might be effected by the order in the proceedings.
17.
We, therefore, proceed to consider the last question, viz. whether the employer applied the correct norms at the relevant point of time for considering the case of the writ petitioner.
18.
After going through the materials on record, we find that according to the circulars dated March 6, 1986 and May 15, 1987, if an employee gets points between 23 and 25 he should be graded as "outstanding".
According to the then norms, the writ petitioner secured 23 marks and belonged to the "outstanding" categories.
The panel was approved in or about the month of August, 1989 and the circular dated September 26, 1989 itself discloses that by the said circular, the previous circulars dated March 6, 1986 and May 15, 1987 stood superseded.
The aforesaid fact necessarily implied that on the date of selection namely, August 18, 1989, those two circulars were operating in the field and there was no occasion for applying the circular dated September 26, 1989, which did not see the light till that date.
We do not find any substance in the contention of Mr. Pal, the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the employer that the office memorandum dated March 10, 1989 issued by the Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension was already in force and was applicable to the Railway Employees.
The fact that the Memorandum dated March 10, 1989 was not applicable to the Railway Employees would appear from the fact that the Railways Ministry decided to issue a separate circular on September, 26, 1989, which is in tune with the Memorandum dated March 10, 1989.
Issue of such a separate circular is itself suggestive of the fact that the circular of Ministry of Personnel was not applicableipso facto to the Ministry of Railways.
In the case before us, there is no dispute that the promotion of 1989 was considered on the basis of the Memorandum dated March 10, 1989 issued by the Department, of Personnel which was adopted by the Railways by issuing fresh circular dated September 26, 1989 and not on the basis of the earlier two circulars dated March 6, 1986 and May 15, 1987, which were the guiding circulars and those, were superseded only by the circular dated September 26, 1989.
After going through the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 of the Government of India placed before us by Mr. Gupta we are convinced that the circular issued by the Department of Personnel and Training cannot have any application to the Railways vide pages 62 and 69 of the Government Publication amended up to January 12, 2004.
19.
We, therefore, find substance in the contention of Mr. Gupta that the writ petitioner was deprived of his due promotion by not following the appropriate circulars, which were required to be followed.
20.
We now propose to deal with the decisions cited by Mr. Pal.
21.
In the case of Secretary to the Government of India v. Shivram Gaikwad, reported in (1995) Supp (3) SCC 231, an employee was dismissed from service on October 7, 1986 whereas an application under Section 19 of the Act was filed before the Tribunal on September 14, 1990.
In such circumstances, the Supreme Court was of the view that the said application was clearly barred by limitation in view of the provision contained in Section 21 of the Act.
In the case before us, after the supersession, the applicant gave representation but the same was not replied to and ultimately, further representation made by the writ petitioner was answered for the first time on July 14, 2004 and the application under Section 19 of the Act was filed within seven days thereafter.
Moreover, we have already pointed out that the Supreme Court in the case of MR Gupta (supra), specifically held that in this type of the case, where the cause of action is a recurring one, the application cannot be held to be barred by limitation.
We, therefore, find that the said decision is of no assistance to Mr. Pal's client.
22.
In the case of AP Public Service Commission v. K. Sudershan Reddy and others, reported in (2006)5 SCC 505, the question before the Supreme Court was whether the protection granted in the case of VN Sunanda Reddy, reported in (1995)2 SCC 235 to those Telugu medium candidates who had already been appointed on the strength of 5% weightage in the total marks given to them under the unconstitutional G.Os.
and were working on their posts concerned should be disturbed and whether further protection should be given to them from being adversely affected by the said judgment.
We fail to appreciate how the said decision can be of any help in the present case.
23.
In the case of Malcom Lawrence Cecil D'Souza v. Union of India reported in AIR 1975 SC 1269, the seniority list of the Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax was issued in the year 1956 but the writ-application challenging the said list was filed in the year 1971.
While dealing with such a case, the Supreme Court observed that anyone who felt aggrieved with an Administrative decision affecting one's seniority should act with the due diligence and promptitude and should not sleep over the matter.
According to the Supreme Court, baking of old matters like seniority was likely to result in administrative complications and difficulties and therefore, it would appear to be in the interest of smoothness and efficiency of service that such matter should be given quietus after lapse of sometime.
In the case before us, although the writ petitioner made representation, the same was not answered to and it was only in the year 2004 that the employer for the first time rejected the representation of the writ petitioner.
Therefore, in this case, the writ petitioner cannot be blamed for the delay.
Over and above, we have already taken decision not to disturb the promotions given to others in violation of the norms because of the intervening delay.
We, thus, find that the said decision does not help the employer in any way.
24.
In the case of State of M.P. v. Srikant Chaphekar, reported in AIR 1993 SC 1221, the Supreme Court was considering a case where the Administrative Tribunal after consideration of the fact that the performance report of the applicant in his ACR was vague, itself considered the case of promotion.
In such a situation, the Supreme Court made the following observations :  "We are of the view that the Tribunal fell into patent error in substituting itself for the DPC.
The remarks in the annual confidential report are based on the assessment of the work and conduct of the official/officer concerned for a period of one year.
The Tribunal was wholly unjustified in reaching the conclusion that the adverse remarks were not sufficient to deny the respondent his promotion to the post of Deputy Director.
It is not the function of the Tribunal to assess the service record of a Government servant and order his promotion on that basis.
It is for the DPC to evaluate the same and make recommendations based on such evaluation.
This Court has repeatedly held that in a case where the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that a person was not considered for promotion or the consideration was illegal then the only direction which can be given is to reconsider his case in accordance with law.
It was not within the competence of the Tribunal, in the facts of the present case, to have ordered deemed promotion of the respondent."
In the case before us, we propose to follow the aforesaid principle laid down by the Supreme Court and have decided to direct the employer to consider the case of the writ petitioner afresh in accordance with the norms then prevailing.
In the said decision, although the first entry was deleted in the year 1982 and he made representation in the year 1984, the applicant did not take any, step for the next seven years and accordingly the Supreme Court was of the view that no direction should be given for even reconsideration of the matter.
In the case before us, we have already pointed out that the writ petitioner did not get the answer of the representation till the year 2004 and within seven days of the getting the answer, he came up with an application under Section 19 of the Act.
Therefore, the said decision cannot have any application to the fact of the present case.
25.
In the case of SS Rathore v. State of M.P., reported in AIR 1990 SC 10, the Supreme Court was considering the scope of Article 58 of the Limitation Act, 1963 and the meaning of the words "First accrued" appearing therein.
In that context, the Supreme Court made the following observation :  "Appellant's counsel placed before us the residuary Article 113 and has referred to a few decisions of some High Courts where in a situation as here reliance was placed on that Article.
It is unnecessary to refer to those decisions as on the authority of the judgment of this Court in the case of Pierce Leslie and Co Ltd v. Vioet.
Ouchterlong Wapshare Vice Versa ((1969)3 SCR 203 : AIR 1969 SC 843), it must be held that Article 113 of the Act of 1963, corresponding to Article 120 of the old Act, is a general one and would apply to suits to which no other Article in the schedule applies.
The fate of this appeal, therefore, rests upon the finding as to when the right to sue first accrued.
All the three Courts have accepted the position that on 1311966 when the order of dismissal was made by the Collector, the right to sue first accrued.
Admittedly, the suit was not filed within a period of three years from that date.
The appeal was dismissed on 3131966.
The sixty days time spent for complying with the requirement of notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was available to the plaintiff in addition to the period of three years.
If the date, therefore, counts from the date of the appellate order, the suit would be within time."
Subsequently, the Court at paragraphs 16 and 17 made the following observations :  "The Rules relating to disciplinary proceedings do provide for an appeal against the orders of punishment imposed on public servants.
Some Rules provide even a second appeal or a revision.
The purport of Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act is to give effect to the Disciplinary Rules and the exhaustion of the remedies available thereunder is a condition precedent to maintaining of claims under the Administrative Tribunals Act.
Administrative Tribunals have been set up for Government servants of the Centre and several States have already set up such Tribunals under the Act for the employees of the respective States.
The law is soon going to get crystallised on the line laid down under Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
In this background if the original order of punishment is taken as the date when cause of action first accrues for purposes of Article 58 of the Limitation Act, great hardship is bound to result.
On one side, the claim would not be maintainable if laid before exhaustion of the remedies; on the other if the departmental remedy though availed is not finalised within the period of limitation, the cause of action would no more be justiciable having become barred by limitation.
Redressal of grievances in the hands of the departmental authorities takes an unduly long time.
That is so on account of the fact that no attention is ordinarily bestowed over these matters and they are not considered to be governmental business of substance.
This approach has to be deprecated and authorities on whom power is vested to dispose of appeals and revisions under the Service Rules must dispose of such matters as expeditiously as possible.
Ordinarily, a period of three to six months should be the outer limit.
That would discipline the system and keep the public servant away from a protracted period of litigation."
26.
In our view, the principles laid down in the said decision cannot have any application to a case of recurring cause of action as pointed out in the case of MR Gupta (supra) and the more so, when there is no right of appeal against an order of grant of promotion as in this case.
We, therefore, find that the said decision is of no avail to Mr. Pal's client.
27.
We, accordingly, in the fact of the present case direct the respondents to consider the case of the writ petitioner for promotion in the light of the circulars dated March 6, 1986 and May 15, 1987 as pointed out above but not on the basis of the circular dated September 26, 1989.
If the employer finds that the writ petitioner was entitled to get promotion according to his service record by virtue of those two circulars, it would grant promotion with effect from the date the other persons including his juniors were given promotion.
The employer will also consider the case of further promotion depending upon its finding pursuant to our direction.
All the process should be concluded within three months from today.
We make it clear that our order will not affect the rights of others who obtained promotion on the basis of circular dated September, 26, 1989 although illegally.
28.
The writ application is, thus, allowed to the extent indicated above.
The order passed by the Tribunal impugned in this application is set aside.
In the facts and circumstances, there will be, however, no order as to costs.
Kishore Kumar Prasad, J - I agree.
Petition allowed.