Girish Chandra Gupta, J. -This writ petition is directed against an award dated 23rd February, 2000 passed by the 9th Industrial Tribunal, Durgapur.
The facts of the case briefly stated are that the unskilled workman in question fell sick on 27th October, 1973.
He was admitted as an indoor patient on 31st October, 1973 in the DSP Hospital belonging to the employer itself.
He informed about his sickness to the employer by a letter dated 2nd November, 1973.
The employer by a letter required the worker to report for duty by 15th November, 1973, in default, he would be deemed to have abandoned the service.
He was unfit till 29th November, 1973.
On 30th November, 1973 when he went to join his duty he was not allowed to do so and an order dated 21st November, 1973 was served upon him whereby his name had been struck off the rolls of the company for unauthorised absence.
By an order dated 9th March, 1992 the Government of West Bengal made a reference to the Industrial Tribunal.
The issue, which was referred, reads as follows :  "Whether the management is justified in terminating the services of Shri Sastipada Keot (T/No.2345) with effect from 21.11.73 ?
To what relief, any, is the workman entitled ?"
2.
The learned Tribunal has answered the issue in the negative and has directed reinstatement with full back wages from 29th November, 1973.
The reasons advanced by the learned Tribunal are as follows :  "I have considered the facts and circumstances of this case and the submissions of the Ld.
Lawyers of both sides on the case.
I have considered the relevant provisions of the ID Act, 1947 in this regard.
The Ld.
Lawyer for the employer had put to much emphasis on the Standing Order 10(x) which provided that the company could presume abandonment of service by the employee in the event of this unauthorised absence of 8 days consecutively.
This stipulation in the Standing Order as the presumptive also but this presumption is rebuttable by cogent evidence.
It is an admitted fact the company had received the intimation from the employee on 3.11.1973 as regards the reasons of his absence from duty with effect from 27.10.73.
He was sick from 27.10.73.
This information was sufficiently ahead of expiry of the consecutive absence for 8 days.
Therefore, reliance on the stipulation of the terms of the service as regards unauthorised absence giving rise to presumption of the abandonment of service on part of the employee does not hold much water in this case.
In other words, the company is not entitled to get the benefit of Section 2(oo) (bb) of the ID Act, 1947 in this case.
What the company should have done in these facts and circumstances is to initiate a proceeding on the ground of absence without reasons if the medical certificate is disbelieved and after furnishing charge sheet to that effect to the employee and holding enquiry into it he should have been punished had he been found guilty after such enquiry.
This procedure has not been followed in the instant case.
Therefore, the termination of this employee is bad in law.
In the next place I take into consideration the xerox copy of the medical certificate produced by the employee.
I take judicial notice of the fact that the xerox machine was not introduced in the year 1973.
Therefore, there is every possibility of manufacturing this document.
In spite of giving several chances for examining the doctor and producing the original document the employee has failed to do so.
These circumstances itself is ground for concluding that the employee has failed to explain his absence satisfactorily for the period from 3.11.73 onwards till 301173.
This kind of unauthorised absence has been tried to be explained by oral evidence but how far the oral evidence is true that has to be determined by proper enquiry by an Enquiry Officer in a proper proceeding.
This thing has not been done in the instant case nor any Standing Order has been produced to show what sort of misconduct these facts and the circumstances constituted.
So, I hold that in the absence of proper Standing Order as to how delinquent could be dealt with this sort of delinquency, nothing could be done against him.
Had those misconduct been defined by any Standing Order in that case.
This could have been enquired into in a proper disciplinary proceeding and the employee should have been punished if he was found guilty.
In this instant case the Employer has not followed any such procedure.
Therefore, I hold that the order of termination is bad in law.
The issues are therefore disposed of in favour of the petitioner - employee.
He is entitled to reinstatement and back wages subject to deduction of the salary for the period from 31.10.73 to 29.11.73 in the event no leave is due to his credit.
He is entitled to back wages.
Hence, that the reference case is allowed on contest.
No costs.
The impugned order of termination of service of Sri Sastipada Keet is hereby set aside.
The Employer is directed to reinstate him forthwith and to give him the back wages with effect from 201173.
The employer is entitled to deduct his salary and allowance if no leave is due to his credit of the Employer for-the period from 27.10.73 to 301173."
3.
Aggrieved by the order, the employer has come up before this Court in its writ jurisdiction.
The workman is the respondent No. 3.
The writ petition was filed on 6th April, 2000 whereas the workman concerned died on 2nd February, 2000.
At the time of his death his age was 50 years.
The award under challenge was passed on 23rd February, 2000.
From the records of the Tribunals called for by this Court it appears that evidence was closed on 10th September, 1999.
The matter was fixed for `Argument' on 1st October, 1999.
On 1st October, 1999 the matter could not be taken up because the Presiding Officer was not there.
For the same reason the matter was adjourned on 3rd November, 1999.
Ultimately the arguments were advanced on 16th February, 2000 and 18th February, 2000 and the award was passed on 23rd February, 2000.
It does not appear from the records of the Tribunal that death of the workman was brought to its knowledge.
The writ petition has indeed, been filed against the dead workman.
Heirs of the deceased workman were decided at their own instance by this Court by an order dated 16th November, 2004.
4.
At the hearing of the writ petition Mr. Bhattacharya appearing for the employer made the following submission :  (a) Service of the workman was terminated by an order dated 21st November, 1973, whereas the reference was made in the year 1992.
He submitted that the reference belatedly made could not have been entertained.
There was an inordinate delay in making the reference and, therefore, the reference was not entertainable.
In support of his submission, he has relied on judgments of the Apex Court reported in AIR 2000 SC 839, paragraphs 6 and 7 and (2004) 10 SCC 679, paragraphs 3 and 4.
Lastly, on this point he relied, on a judgment of the Apex Court reported in (1999) 9 SCC 178.
He submitted that in the last cited judgment, the Supreme Court refused to entertain objection to the award on the ground of delay because the Tribunal had itself given only fifty per cent of the back wages regard being had to the fact that there had been delay of eight years.
He submitted that in the present case the delay was for 19 years in making the reference.
Yet the Tribunal has granted full back wages.
(b) The next point urged by Mr. Bhattacharya was that the award is perverse.
He has drawn attention of this Court to page 9 of the award wherein the learned Tribunal has opined that the medical certificate could be a forged document, but that could only be gone into by way of a proper enquiry.
Mr. Bhattacharya submitted that when the Tribunal itself came to a finding that the medical certificate produced by the workman could be a forged document, the Tribunal did not have any jurisdiction thereafter to pass an award as the Tribunal did by directing reinstatement any payment of back wages.
In support of his submission, he has relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court reported in (2004) 10 SCC 460 paragraphs 49 and 52.
(c) Thirdly, he submitted that where there has been miscarriage of justice, the Supreme Court held, it shall entertain an objection.
He relied on a judgment of the Apex Court reported in AIR 2002 SC 3032.
(d) Lastly, he cited a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in 1974 CLJ 251.
At page 313 of that report the Division Bench of this Court has categorised the grounds on the basis whereof a judgment can be said to be perverse.
On such category is where the judgment is based on conjecture.
Mr. Bhattacharya submitted that the award was based on conjecture and should be set aside.
5.
Mr. Alam the learned Advocate appearing for the heirs and legal representatives of the deceased, submitted that it is not a fact that there was any laches on the part of the workman.
He, as a matter of fact, had moved the Civil Court which, because of the jurisdictional incompetence, was unable to grant the appropriate relief.
When the mistake was realised he raised the dispute which ultimately was referred to the Tribunal by the Government.
The workman therefore cannot be said to have acquiesced in the wrong done to him and therefore delay if any can be no bar.
The reference made by the Government was not challenged and it is not longer open to the petitioner to make any grievance with regard to the delay.
6.
With regard to the ground of perversity, he submitted that the portion read out by Mr. Bliattaharaya does not really depict the finding of the Tribunal.
On the contrary, it goes to show that the Tribunal was of the view that if the employer wanted to contend that the medical certificate produced by him was a forged one, a disciplinary proceeding should have been held so that the truth could be established.
7.
With regard to the judgments cited by Mr. Bhattacharya, he submitted that these judgments have no manner of application.
8.
Mr. Bhattacharya, in reply, submitted that delay is admitted.
Therefore, the award cannot be allowed to stand.
9.
It would appear from the award that no submission whatsoever was made before the learned Tribunal questioning the validity of the reference itself on account of delay.
The submission made before this Court not only was not made before the Tribunal but a mala fide stand was taken which would be evident upon comparison of the submissions made on behalf of the employer before the Tribunal with those made by the employer in an application under Article 227 arising out of dismissal of the suit filed by the workman.
In paragraphs 11 and 12 of the writ petition the case of the petitioner is as follows :  "The respondent No. 3 however after a lapse of further 4 years (approximately) filed a suit against his termination from service which however was rejected on 21st September, 1988.
The revision application under article 227 of the Constitution of India filed by the respondent No. 3 against the order of dismissal of suit was also rejected on the 6th February, 1989 by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Hon'ble High Court.
The Hon'ble Court however granted liberty to the respondent No3 to Make fresh appeal before the proper appellate Court.
The respondent No3 without acting in terms of the aforesaid order of the Hon'ble Court as aforesaid sought to raise selfsame dispute by way of present reference in 1992 after a lapse of 19 years which is invalid, and without jurisdiction....."  10.
Whereas it would appear from the judgment and order 11th September, 1989 that the case of the employer before the Division Bench was "that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit as it is impliedly barred under the provision of the Industrial Disputes Act."
In paragraphs 11 and 12 the writ petitioner contends before me that the workman should have preferred an appeal against rejection of the plaint.
Whereas at the hearing of application under Article 227 it was contended by the employer that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction.
Is this not enough to show the mala fide approach of the petitioner ?
11.
The reference, moreover, made in the year 1992 was not challenged by the employer on any ground whatsoever.
If the reference itself was invalid it should have been challenged then and there rather than submitting to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and allowing the parties to spend time and money on an invalid reference.
The employer, I am inclined to believe, took chance of a favourable decision from the Tribunal.
When it has failed to obtain the same it has sought to challenge the competence of the reference itself before this Court.
Such challenge is anything but bona fide.
12.
The decision in the case of Nedungadi Bank v. KP Madhavan Kutty, reported in AIR 2000 SC 839 is of no assistance to the petitioner because in that case the reference belatedly made was itself under challenge.
The petitioner did not challenge the reference.
At this stage the considerations, applicable to the case, are different which I already have indicated.
In the case of SK Kapur v. New Delhi Municipal Council, reported in 2004(10) SCC 679, the appellant had retired on 31.3.1981 and he wanted to take benefit of pension which became effective with effect from 161982.
It is on this basis that this claim was negatived.
Delay was an additional factor.
In the present case the workman has an impeccable case on merit.
The judgment in the case of Mahavir Singh v. UPSEB is an authority for the proposition that where there has been illegal termination the reference could not have been rejected on the ground of delay.
In the present case the point as regards delay was not even urged before the Tribunal.
The first contention of Mr. Bhattacharyay is thus rejected.
13.
Tile second submission of Mr. Bhattacharya is without any merit whatsoever.
The question before the Tribunal was whether the termination was just and legal.
The Tribunal has in no uncertain terms and for valid reason set out, hereinabove, held that the termination was bad.
14.
Whether the alleged unauthorised absence could be grouped in the category of misconduct and whether the workman could have succeeded in proving his innocence had an enquiry been initiated were not the questions which the Tribunal was called upon to decide.
The Tribunal has unnecessarily indulged into apprehensions as regards as hypothetical issue which was not before it.
In any event the medical certificate relied upon by the workman was of no significance when the established fact is that during the period commencing from 30th October, 1973 the workman was in the hospital of the employer itself.
He was in the hospital till after 15th November, 1973 when he was directed to report for duty.
Regard being had to the common course of human conduct no one can suggest that a person shall remain in hospital for nothing.
The fact that during the relevant period the workman was in the employer's hospital has not been disputed nor is there any suggestion to that effect given to the workman in his cross-examination.
Therefore xerox copy of the medical certificate purporting to have been issued by the hospital authority assumes a secondary importance.
15.
The Tribunal has on the top of that missed the law laid down by the Apex Court in the case of DK Yadav v. JMA Industries Ltd, reported in 1993(3) SCC 259 wherein the following view was expressed :-  "It is thus well-settled law that right to life enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution would include right to livelihood.
The order of termination of the service of an employee/workman visits with civil consequences of jeopardising not only his/her livelihood but also career and livelihood of dependents.
Therefore, before taking any action putting an end to the tenure of an employee/workman fair play requires that a reasonable opportunity to put forth his case is given and domestic inquiry conducted complying with the principles of natural justice.
In DTC v. DTC Mazdoor Congress the Constitution Bench, per majority, held that termination of the service of a workman giving one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof without inquiry offended Article 14.
The order terminating the service of the employees was set aside.
In this case admittedly no opportunity was given to the appellant and no inquiry was held.
The appellant's plea put forth at the earliest was that despite his reporting to duty on December 3, 1980 and on all subsequent days and readiness to join duty he was prevented from reporting to duty, nor was he permitted to sign the attendance register.
The Tribunal did not record any conclusive finding in this behalf.
It concluded that the management had power under Clause 13 of the Certified Standing Orders to terminate with the service of the appellant.
Therefore, we hold that the principles of natural justice must be read into the Standing Order No. 13(2) (iv).
Otherwise it would become arbitrary, unjust and unfair violating Article 14.
When so read the impugned action is violative of the principles of natural justice."
16.
The decision in the case of Mukund Ltd reported in (2004) 10 SCC 460 does not render any assistance to the petitioner because I am satisfied that the award of the Tribunal is justified in the facts of this case.
17.
The third submission of Mr. Bhattacharya has no merit whatsoever.
There has been no miscarriage of justice and therefore the decision cited on behalf of the petitioner has no relevance whatsoever.
18.
The last submission of Mr. Bhattacharya, according to me, is equally without any merit.
The award is not by any stretch of imagination based on conjecture nor is the award perversed.
The award is based on evidence and therefore the challenge thrown to the award on that ground is liable to be rejected.
19.
All the points advance by Mr. Bhattacharya have thus been disposed of.
20.
The question still remains as to the validity of the award which was passed after the death of the workman concerned.
When the termination was wrongful the workman was not only entitled to reinstatement but he also was entitled to back wages which has been granted by the Tribunal.
The money payable to the deceased did not cease to be payable just because the workman died.
The award directing reinstatement became otiose.
Therefore the cause of action to that extent survived.
So did the right to sue insofar as the back wages were concerned.
There has been no violation of the principles of natural justice in that the workman concerned was alive until the evidence was concluded.
Under Order 22 Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure the cause does not abate by reason of the death of either party between the conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of the judgment.
Order 18 of the CPC is devoted to hearing of the suit and examination of witnesses.
The expression hearing includes production of evidence and argument.
We already have noticed that the evidence was closed on 10999. and the matter was fixed for argument on 11099.
Rule 2 of Order XVII provides as follows :  "2.Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed.
- Where, on any day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.
[Explanation.
- Where the evidence or a substantial portion of the evidence of any party has already been recorded and such party fails to appear on any day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the Court may, in its discretion, proceed with the case as if such party was present.]"
21.
It would thus appear that notwithstanding that the failure of the party to appear on a day to which the suit is adjourned, where the evidence has already been recorded, the Court can precede with the matter as if the party was present.
It would follow that the fact that the workman died after conclusion of the evidence would not render the award invalid.
The added respondents would be entitled to execute the award insofar as recovery of back wages until the date of death of workman is concerned after bringing on record the death of the workman and the heirs of the deceased.
Reference in this regard can also be made to a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of R Manjhi v. Mgt.
of Sangramgarh Colliery and Ors., reported in 1994(1) LLJ 336, wherein Their Lordship opined as follows :  "It is, therefore, in conformity with the scheme of the Act that the proceedings in such cases should continue at the instance of the legal heirs/representatives of the deceased workman.
Even otherwise there may be a claim for back-wages or for monetary relief in any other form.
The death of the workman during pendency of the proceedings cannot deprive the heirs or the legal representatives of their right to continue the proceedings and claim the benefits as successors to the deceased workman."
22.
This writ petition is thus disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Let the records of the Tribunal be sent back forthwith.
23.
Urgent certified copy of this judgment be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Order accordingly.