Tapan Mukherjee, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed by Learned Single Judge in WP No. 538 of 1996.
The respondent No. 2 was previously employed by the appellant-writ petitioner in its' factory on 31st May 1967 and he absented himself from his duty from 18.11.1981 without any permission.
On 911982 his service was terminated.
According to the petitioner such termination was done in accordance with cause-18 of the Standing Order and the settlement which was entered into by and between management and the union.
Respondent No. 2 did not challenge the said termination.
To the contrary, he took all his outstanding dues except his retirement benefit which were offered to him.
Over the year after such termination he submitted an application do 431983 and offer of new employment was given to the petitioner by the respondent No. 2 through a letter dated 30.4.1983 and in such letter it was made clear that he was being offered fresh employment a grade-1 staff on condition that he would never arise any dispute regarding his past service and respondent No. 2 accepted the said offer and a formal order of appointment was issued and the respondent No. 2 joined his new appointment and continued to work in his new employment without protest.
He was confirmed therein and then in the year 1989 respondent No. 2 by a letter dated 28.8.1989 alleged that his employment was terminated from 911982 without following principles of natural justice and he was deprived of his seniority and suffered monetary loss.
The dispute, which was not an industrial dispute according to the petitioner was referred for conciliation proceedings and thereafter reference was made before the tribunal for adjudication of the following issues :  i) Whether the company is justified in demoting Shri Subhas Chandra Das (respondent No. 2),  ii) Whether the company is justified in denying the benefits of past service from 30th May 1967 to 8th January 1982 to Shri Subhas Chandra Das (respondent No. 2),  iii) To what relief workman is entitled.
Then the Tribunal passed an award.
The Tribunal held that automatic discharge of the respondent No. 2 was an unfair labour practice and the Tribunal further held that the job of the concerned workman from 31567 to S. 1.82 for a period of about 15 years had got to be considered and tagged with the present service.
After tagging both the jobs he should be given all financial benefits including seniority.
The gap between 9182 to 1583 had got to be treated as on duty without pay.
2.
Being aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal the appellant Dunlop India Limited moved this Court in writ jurisdiction and Learned Single Judge by the impugned order dated.
8102002 held that the Learned Tribunal had rightly dealt with the matter and came to the conclusion and passed the award and there was no reason to interfere with the said award passed by the said learned Tribunal and dismissed the writ application.
3.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order of the Learned Single Judge the writ petitioner-appellant preferred this appeal.
4.
It has been contended by the learned lawyer for the appellant that it is true that the respondent No. 2 was previously employed by the appellant from 31st May 1967 but he abandoned that employment by remaining absent from 18th November 1981 and as per the Standing Order the service of respondent No. 2 was terminated.
The said termination was never challenged by the respondent- workman nor was set aside in the court of law.
Even after lapse of more than one year the respondent no. 2 applied before the appellant company for a new employment and stated that if he was appointed he would abide by the rules and or settlement and the certified standing order of the company.
Accordingly, the respondent no. 2 was offered fresh appointment by letter dated 2583 with certain conditions and he accepted the fresh appointment and he was then confirmed in his new employment as per letter dated 28th December, 1983.
5.
Learned lawyer for the appellant further contended that the Tribunal travelled beyond the scope of reference and passed the order for reinstatement of the respondent no. 2 in his past service by holding the demotion of the respondent no. 2 as continuation of service and also treating the respondent as on duty without pay between 9111982 to 251983 i.e, from the date of his termination to the date of his new appointment and by tagging the said period with the present fresh service.
Learned counsel on behalf of the appellant further contended that reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act cannot be exercised at any point of time to revise the matter which had since been settled.
The reference was stale having been made after long lapse of time and at the time of reference no industrial dispute existed or apprehended.
The dispute which is stale could not be the subject-matter of reference under Section 10 of the Act.
If the reference fails as there was no dispute then the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to pass the impugned order and consequently, the order of the Learned Single Judge upholding the award of the learned Tribunal is not legally sustainable and the same is required to be set aside.
Learned lawyer for the appellant placed his reliance upon the ruling reported in (2000) 2 Supreme Court Cases at page 455, 1976 (63) Indian Factories and Labour Reports at Page 14, 1997 (1) Supreme Court Cases at page 9 and (2004) 8 Supreme Court Cases at page 200.
Learned lawyer for the respondent No. 3 and 4 supported the award of the learned Tribunal as well as the order of the Learned Single Judge and contended that the termination of respondent No. 2 was illegal.
The said termination was effected without any enquiry and also without giving the workman an opportunity of being heard and the same offends the principles of natural justice.
Automatic termination from service is absolutely bad, illegal.
The respondent No. 2 was wrongfully and illegally terminated in the post of staff in Grade-1 for the alleged misconduct without holding any departmental proceeding and without affording any opportunity of being heard.
The company not only demoted him to the lower initial post but also deprived him of all service benefits to which he was entitled to by ignoring the total length of service rendered by him since the year, 1967.
By the company's letter dated 30.4.1983 the company purported to re-employ the workman and at the same time all the terms and conditions as contained in company's letter No. E-L,6/355 dated 251983 would remain in force.
No question of re-employment without valid termination of service can arise.
The workman should be deemed to be in his previous employment and he is entitled to all the privileges and benefits arising out of such employment as alleged charge of misconduct against the workman has not in any way been established by instituting domestic inquiry.
The present service which is being rendered by the respondent no. 2 be treated as continuation of his previous service.
6.
Admittedly, the respondent No. 2 was previously employed by the appellant in its factory from 31st May, 1967.
It is also not denied that the respondent no. 2 was absent from his duty from 18th November, 1981 till 8th January 1982.
There was Standing Order to the effect that the staff employees would be automatically discharged after absenting themselves, without permission, for more than 25 consecutive working days.
The company's policy is to consider the re-engagement of any staff employees whose absence is explained to its satisfaction and, if there be a suitable vacancy and when a staff employee is re-engaged his service would be regarded as continuous or unbroken provided that the period of absence has not exceeded 40 days.
The annexure `A' letter of appellant addressed to the respondent No. 2 show that by letter dated 19121981 respondent No. 2 was advised that he was unauthorisedly absenting from his work and directed to report for duties latest by 411982 and his attention was drawn to the relevant provision of Memorandum of Settlement for monthly paid employees which read to the effect the staff employees would be automatically discharged after absenting themselves without permission for more than 15 consecutive working days.
It was further mentioned in that letter that the respondent No. 1 did not report to his duty.
Under the circumstances by the said letter he was discharged from service of company with effect from 911982 as per the relevant provision of Memorandum of Settlement for monthly paid employees and his name was removed from the rolls of the company.
The Standing Order and Memorandum of Settlement as observed speak of automatic discharge when the employee concerned absented himself without permission for more than 15 or 25 consecutive working days.
The said Memorandum of Settlement and the Standing Order do not provide for any departmental proceedings for discharging a workman who remained absent without permission for more than 15 or 25 days.
There is nothing to show that during the period from the date of unauthorised absence till the date of termination the respondent No. 2 did make an attempt to contact with the company and showed reasons for his absence.
Admittedly, such absence was without permission.
So as per the Standing Order and Memorandum of Settlement and respondent No. 2 was liable to be automatically discharged.
As the period of absence of the respondent No2 exceeded 40 days so the question of his re- engagement against a suitable vacancy as per the Standing Order as mentioned in the writ petition does not arise.
7.
It further appears that after long absence and also after a lapse of considerable time from the date of termination of earlier service of the respondent No. 2 the respondent No2 came with a request for re-engagement on 431983 and with reference to his said request dated 431983 for re- engagement and on his assurance that there would be future instance of misconduct the appellant agreed to appoint him as a staff in the Grade 1 at a basic salary of Rs. 167 per month.
It was specifically mentioned that his employment at the company would be strictly governed in terms and conditions set out in their letter E/L,6/355 dated 251983 and no further claim or any demand related to his past service shall ever arise in future.
The respondent No. 2 joined new employment accepting the said terms and conditions.
The offer of appointment dated 251983 embodied the terms and conditions of the appointment of the respondent No. 2.
The said offer of appointment which is placed annexure-`D' of the writ petition (at page 32 of the paper book) provides the terns and conditions of the said employment.
It appears therefrom that the respondent No. 2 would be placed in Gr.1 at the pay scale of Rs. 167 to 675 and his basic salary will be Rs. 167.
It was further provided that the respondent No. 2 would be in probation for six months and on satisfactory completion of probation period he would be confirmed in service.
It was also provided that if he was working at present he would be required to produce a release certificate from the present employer before he joined.
8.
Learned lawyer for the petitioner contended that respondent No. 2 had abandoned his previous service under the appellant.
The materials on record justify the said contention of the learned laywer for the appellant.
The respondent No. 2 absented himself from duty from 18th November 1981.
He did not make any communication with the company regarding his absence.
On 19121981 he was informed by company that he was unauthorisedly absenting from the work and directed him to report to duty letter by 411982.
But respondent No. 2 did not report to duty.
There is nothing to show that he made any communication explaining reasons of his absence.
His attention was invited to the fact that by letter dated 19121981 he was apprised that he was unauthorisedly absenting himself from work and directed him to report to duty latest by 411981 and that his attention was drawn to relevant provision of Memorandum of Settlement for monthly paid employees regarding automatic discharge and in spite of that he did not report to his duties and under the circumstances he was discharged from service of the company with effect from 911982 as per the relevant 'provision of memorandum of Settlement for monthly paid employees and department was advised to settle all the dues subject to adjustment if any.
The said letter also could not arouse the respondent No. 2 from his deep sleep of silence and on 431983 the respondent No. 2 moved the appellant-company for employment.
This, unexplained silence on the part of respondent no. 2 lends support to the contention of the lawyer for the appellant that he abandoned the service.
Even he accepted the fresh appointment on the condition that his employment would be strictly governed in terms of the conditions set out in the letter E/L6/355 dated 251983 and no further claim of or any demand relating to his past service shall raise or arise in future, the respondent No. 2 acquiesced to the said factum of automatic termination of his previous employment not only by not resorting to any legal action against termination of his earlier employment but also in accepting the fresh appointment having no right to raise any claim or demand relating to his first service in future.
It appears that the letter of termination contains the ground of misconduct of the respondent No. 2 which is unauthorised absence from work for more than 15 consecutive working days in violation of the provision of Memorandum of Settlement for monthly paid employees.
The respondent No. 2 did not dispute that he was unauthorisedly absent from his work in violation of the relevant provision of Memorandum of Settlement.
It is not the case of the respondent No. 2 that he was not aware of the ground of his termination.
Even he does not dispute the truth of the ground of his termination.
When the fact of unauthorised absence is admitted by the respondent No. 2 and the said fact of unauthorised absence in violation of the Memorandum of Settlement is a ground for termination of the respondent No. 2 there is obviously room for contention that there was no necessity of embarking on any formal enquiry for establishing an admitted fact of unauthorised absence and enquiry if ordered was a mere formality.
There is also room for the contention that the said termination was not violative of the principles of natural justice and ground of termination i.e., unauthorised absence from duty was an admitted fact.
9.
Learned laywer for the respondent has challenged the said abrupt termination of the service of the respondent No. 2 as an arbitrary, illegal placing reliance on the ruling reported in AIR 1985 Supreme Court at page 722.
In the said case the regulation after West Bengal Electricity Board regulation no. 34 enabling board to terminate service of permanent employee by giving three months' notice or salary in lieu thereof was challenged and Apex Court held that on the face of it, the regulation is totally arbitrary and confers on the Board a power which is capable of vicious discrimination.
It is naked `hire and fire' rule, the time of banishing which altogether from employer- employee relationship is fast approaching.
Its only parallel is to be found in the Henry VIII class so familiar to administrative laywers.
In Moti Ram Deka v. North East Frontier Railway, AIR 1964 SC 600 Rules 148 (3) and 149(3) of the Indian Railway Establishment Code were challenged on the ground that they were contrary to Art. 311 (2) of the Constitution.
The challenge was upheld though no opinion was expressed on the question whether the rule offended Art. 14 of the Constitution.
Since then Art. 14 has been interpreted in several decisions of this Court and conferment and exercise of arbitrary power on and by the State or its instrumentalities have been frowned upon and struck down by this court as offending Art. 14.
In SS Muley v. JRD Tata (1980 Lab IC 11) PS Sawant, J. of the Bombay High Court considered at great length Regulation 48(a) of the Air India Employee's Service Regulations which conferred similar power on the Corporation as Regulation 34 confers on the Board in the present case.
The learned judge struck down Regulation 48(a) and we agree with his reasoning and conclusion.
In Workmen Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Hindustan Steel Ltd, AIR 1985 SC 251 this Court had occasion, to hold that a Standing Order which conferred such arbitrary, uncanalised and drastic power to enable the employer to dispense with an inquiry and to dismiss an employee, without assigning any reason, by merely stating that it was expedient and against the interest of the security to continue to employ the workman was violative of the basic requirement of natural justice.
In the instant case as already observed the reasons for automatic discharge or termination have been provided in the Memorandum of Settlement for monthly paid employees.
The reason are absence without permission for more than 15 consecutive working days.
It cannot be said that the power to dismiss an of employee was given without assigning any reason as already observed the letter of termination discloses the reason for termination.
The impugned Regulation 34 of West Bengal Electricity Board regulation confers the power to terminate service of permanent employee by giving three months notice or salary in lieu thereof and it did not provide any reason for such termination.
So, facts and circumstances of the case reported in AIR 1985 SC at page 722 are different from that of the present case.
10.
Even it is assumed that for termination of respondent No. 2 formal inquiry in the matter was required "still then the fact remains that the respondent No. 2 did not challenge that termination for considerable time and he applied for fresh employment accepting that automatic termination and got fresh appointment accepting the condition that he would not claim benefit of his past service.
In other words, there was no dispute between the employers and the employee.
Even if it is assumed that there was dispute regarding the past service it can be said that such dispute was a stale dispute and the matter which had been settled and become final cannot be reopened by resorting the provision of Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In this rega reference may be made to a decision of the Apex Court reported in (2000) Supreme Court Cases at page 455.
It was held by the Apex Court in the same case that Law although does not prescribe any time-limit for the appropriate Government to exercise its powers under Section 10 of the ID Act, this pow cannot be exercised at any point of time and to revive matters which has already been settled.
Power is to be exercised reasonably and in a ratios manner.
A dispute which is stale could not be the subject-matter of referen under Section 10 of the Act.
As to when a dispute can be said to be stale would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
When the mather has become final, it is rather incongruous that the reference be made under section 10 of the Act in the circumstances like the present case.
In this case the reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act is not accordance with law the concerned Industrial Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to settle the alleged dispute and the award by the said Tribunal illegal and without jurisdiction and the same is not sustainable.
Consequent the judgment and order of the Learned Single Judge affirming the aware the Tribunal cannot stand in law.
11.
Before parting with the judgment it must be placed on record that Learned Tribunal travelled beyond the order of reference by testing demotion as continuation demotion of service and also treating the respond No. 2 as on duty without pay between 911982 to 251983 from the date the termination to the date of his new appointment.
In this regard refere may be made to the case reported in 1976 (33) Indian Factories and Lab, Reports at page 14, wherein it is held the Tribunal could not travel beyond ambit of reference.
In the case reported in AIR 1959 Supreme Court Cases page 1191 it was held that in construing the terms of reference and determining the scope and nature of appointment referred to the Industrial Tribunal, the court must look at the order of reference itself.
It is only subject matter of reference with which an Industrial Tribunal can deal.
So, award of Learned Tribunal also suffers from manifest legal defect.
Under circumstances the appeal succeeds and the same is allowed.
The judgment order of Learned Single Judge is hereby set aside.
The writ petition star allowed.
The reference and the award are hereby quashed.
We make no on as to costs.
Petition allowed