Viney Mittal, J - The petitioners have sought directions against the respondent Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot to grant the benefit of grace marks to them.
Additionally, the petitioners have challenged the orders dated August 31, 2006 (Annexure P-5), whereby the aforesaid claim made by them before the University has been rejected.
2.
In pursuance to their merit position obtained in Punjab Medical Entrance Test, 2000, the petitioners were admitted to BAMS course in the academic session 2000-01 in September 2000 in Sri Laxmi Narayan Ayurvedic College, respondent No. 3.
When the petitioners were admitted to the said College, the said College was affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
However, Baba Farid University of Health Sciences came into existence in March 2001 and on 2001 and on constitution thereof, all the Colleges imparting medical education to the students, in the State of Punjab, earlier affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar came to be affiliated with the Baba Farid University.
3.
After the Colleges were affiliated to the new University, the syllabus/ordinances prevalent with the earlier University ie Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar were continued to be followed by Baba Farid University.
However, the faculty of Ayurveda of Baba Farid University held a meeting on September 22, 2000 and recommended the syllabus/ordinance for BAMS course to be followed by Baba Farid University.
The said recommendations were approved by the Academic Council and Board of Management in their meetings held on September 27, 2000 and October 11, 2000, respectively.
Thereafter with effect from September 13, 2001, the new syllabus/ordinance for BAMS course were adopted by the University.
At this stage, the relevant clause of the decision taken by the University on September 13, 2001 may be extracted as below for ready reference :  "(g) It was decided that the syllabus/ordinance for BAMS course which was recommended by the Faculty of Ayurveda at its meeting held on 2292000 and further approved by the Academic Council and Board of Management at their meetings held on 2792000 and 11.10.2000 respectively would be applicable from the batch admitted in the year 2000 onwards.
For the students admitted prior to 2000 old syllabus/ordinances would be followed."
4.
The petitioners continued to pursue their studies of BAMS examination held in May 2006.
The result of the aforesaid examination was declared on July 28, 2006.
All the present petitioners were placed in re-appear in one or more subjects.
After declaration of the result, the petitioners claimed, that as per the then regulation/ordinance of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, they were entitled to grace marks of one percent of the total aggregate marks and if such grace marks were made available to the petitioners, they would clear their final examination of BAMS course.
Although, the regulations/ordinance of the Baba Farid University did not contain any such provision of grace marks but the petitioners maintained that since they had taken admission in college, respondent No. 3, at the time when the same was affiliated with the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, therefore, erstwhile regulations of Guru Nanak Dev University would continue to govern their case and as such they are entitled to the grace marks.
In these circumstances, the petitioners approached the respondent University for the grant of grace marks.
They also relied upon a Division Bench judgment dated 2006(4) SCT 85 (P&H) : May 16, 2006 passed in LPA No. 30 of 2006 (Munish Kumar Talwar v. The Vice Chancellor, Baba Farid University of Health Sciences and others) to claim that the regulations/ordinances framed by Baba Farid University could not be made operative with retrospective effect.
In this regard, the petitioners also approached this Court on an earlier occasion through CWP No. 12509 of 2006.
At that point of time also, the petitioners had claimed that they were covered by the law laid down by the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in Munish Kumar Talwar's case (supra).
The said writ petition filed by the petitioners was disposed of by this Court vide order dated August 10, 2006 and the University was directed to take a decision on the aforesaid claim made by the petitioners.
In pursuance to the aforesaid directions issued by this Court, the claim of the petitioners has been considered, but has been rejected vide separate orders dated August 31, 2006.
All the aforesaid orders (passed in the case of each of the petitioners) have been appended collectively as Annexure P-5 and are subject-matter of challenge before this Court.
5.
The claim of the petitioners has been contested by the respondents.
Although no written-statement has been filed by the respondent University, but Shri TS Dhindsa, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has maintained that since only a question of law is involved, therefore, arguments in the case can be heard without even a formal reply on behalf of the University.
6.
We have heard Shri DS Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and Shri TS Dhindsa, the learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
7.
Shri DS Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has vehemently argued that the petitioners had sought admission in the year 2000 for the academic session 2000-01 and at that point of time, the College was affiliated with Guru Nanak Dev University.
The learned counsel, thus, maintains that since at the time of their admission, the petitioners were governed by regulations/ordinance of Guru Nanak Dev University and even after the constitution of Baba Farid University, have continued to be governed by erstwhile regulations of Guru Nanak Dev University for some time, therefore, the said regulations/ordinance were still applicable to the case of the petitioners and as per the said ordinance, the petitioners were entitled to grace marks.
Shri Patwalia has further argued that as per the new ordinance framed by the University governing BAMS course, the said ordinance, concededly, is not applicable prior to the year 2000, when old syllabus/ordinances have been made to operate.
The grievance made by the learned counsel is that since the aforesaid ordinance has been made applicable to the case of the petitioner, therefore, the same in fact, has been made operative retrospectively, which according to the law laid down in Munish Kumar Talwar's case (supra) was wholly unjustified and illegal.
Thus, the learned counsel has maintained that in view of the law laid down in Munish Kumar Talwar's case (supra), the petitioner were liable to be governed by the erstwhile regulations of Guru Nanak Dev University and as such were entitled to grace marks as per the said regulations.
8.
On the other hand, Shri TS Dhindsa, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent University has contended, with equal vehemence, that the petitioners had appeared in their BAMS final examination held in May/June 2006 and as such the rules and regulations and the ordinances which were operative at that point of time were liable to be applied to the case of the petitioners.
Shri Dhindsa has pointed out that as per the rules/regulations of Baba Farid University, there is no provision of any grace marks to the students who were admitted in session 2000 and onwards but only five grace marks are to be granted to only those students who have cleared all the subjects except one, where maximum of 5 marks can be granted.
Thus, the learned counsel has argued that the claim of the petitioners was, wholly, without any justification and was not covered under any of the rules/regulations/ordinances of Baba Farid University.
Shri Dhindsa has also placed reliance upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Punjab University v. Subash Chander and another, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1415 to support the aforesaid contention.
9.
We have duly considered the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
In our considered opinion, there is no merit in the claim made by the petitioners.
10.
The facts, as noticed above, clearly show that, although, the petitioners had been admitted in BAMS course in the College, respondent No. 3 in the year 2000 and at that point of time the said college was affiliated with Guru Nanak Dev University, but, later on, on constitution of Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, the said college came to be affiliated with Baba Farid University in March 2001.
For a period of some time, the old syllabus/ordinances of Guru Nanak Dev University were made applicable to the students who were already admitted but later on Baba Farid University of Health Sciences framed its own rules/regulations/ordinances.
The decision taken on September 13, 2001 has already been extracted above.
The said decisions shows that only the students admitted prior to 2000 were to be governed by old syllabus/ordinances.
The petitioners have continued with their studies under the new Regulations/Ordinances of Baba University.
They have appeared in their final BAMS examination held in the month of May/June 2006.
In these circumstances, the rules/regulations and ordinance of Baba Farid University, operative at the time of conducting of the examination, are to govern the case of the petitioners.
Concededly, the regulations/ordinances of Baba Farid University do not contain any provision of grace marks, as claimed by the petitioners.
The petitioners cannot claim to have acquired any vested rights, merely on account of the fact, that at the time of admission, they were governed by Guru Nanak Dev University regulations.
We do not find that the grievance made by the petitioners, that a retrospective operation has been given to the ordinance of Baba Farid University, is justified.
As a matter of fact, the case in hand is squarely covered by the judgment of the Supreme Court in Subhash Chander's case (supra).
11.
In Subash Chander's case (supra), a similar claim to grace marks was made by a student claiming that the amended regulations by the Punjab University could not have been made retrospective and as such the regulation governing the grace marks at the time of admission of the students would remain applicable.
A Full Bench of this Court had accepted the said claim made by the student.
The matter was taken up to the Apex Court.
The judgment of Full Bench of this Court was set aside by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
The following observations made by the Apex Court may be noticed with advantage :  "We do not agree with the learned Judges of the Full Bench of the High Court that there is any element of retrospectivity in the change brought about by the addition of the exception of Rule 21 of the Calendar for the year 1970.
"Retrospective" according to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition, in relation to Statutes etc. means "Operative with regard to past time."
The change brought about by the addition, of the exception to Rule 21 does not say that it shall be operative with effect from any earlier date.
It is obviously prospective.
It is not possible to hold that it is retrospective in operation merely because though introduced in 1970, it was applied to Subash Chander, respondent No. 1, who appeared for the final examination in 1974, after he had joined the course earlier in 1965.
No promise was made or could be deemed to have been made to him at the time of his admission in 1965 that there will be no alteration of the rule or regulation in regard, to the percentage of marks required for passing any examination or award of grace marks and, that the rules relating thereto which were in force at the time of his admission would continue to be applied to him until he finished his whole course."
12.
Even in Munish Kumar Talwar's case (supra), upon which a strong reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners, the Division Bench had noticed the law laid down in Subash Chander's case (supra) but had distinguished the said judgment with the following observations :  "The case before the Hon'ble Supreme Court related to the award of grace marks.
In the said case, as per the unamended rule, the petitioner was entitled to get 16 grace marks, being 1% aggregate of all the four subjects, whereas by amendment it was provided that the grace marks would be awardable only as 1% of the aggregate marks in one particular subject.
In the case before Supreme Court, the candidate had got admission in the year 1965, and had appeared in the examination in 1974 after 9 years of his admission.
Four years prior to the date of the examination, the Rule was amended in 1970.
It was in this context that the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Rule amended in 1970 would apply in the said case.
It is to be noted that question in issue before the Supreme Court was concerning grace marks and did not relate to change in the duration of the course.
The case before us is different on many counts and does not relate to grant of grace marks.
Here the eligibility to appear in the examination has become an issue on account of change made in duration of one of the professional after the grant of admission to the appellant....." 13.
In view of the laid down in Subash Chander's case (supra) and also observations made by this Court in Munish Kumar Talwar's case (supra), we do not find any merit in the present petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.