Rajive Bhalla, J - Prayer in this writ petition, filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, is for issuance of a writ, order or direction for quashing the proceedings of the General Court Martial dated 2141999, whereby the conviction of the petitioner was recorded on the twelfth charge and the sentence of reprimand awarded to the petitioner, as also all consequential orders passed in respect thereof.
2.
The petitioner herein is a Commissioned Officer, who joined the Indian Army on 24121982.
The petitioner was posted in 168 Field Regiment from 1987 to 1992.
He filed certain complaints with respect to mal-practices in the CSD Canteen.
During inquiry into these complaints, the petitioner was threatened with physical harm.
This fact was brought to the notice of the Commander 29 Artillery Brigade through a letter dated 2791991.
However, nothing came of the aforementioned communication.
The petitioner sought an interview with the GOC 29 Infantry Division vide letter dated 2941992.
Once again, his grievance remain un-addressed.
Consequently, the petitioner sought an interview with the GOC Corps vide letter dated 961992.
The petitioner was granted an interview by GOC 29 Inf.
Division on 871992.
During the course of the interview, the petitioner presented a written complaint levelling allegations of acts of dishonesty committed by Col. CS Dhillon while functioning as Commanding Officer 168 Field Regiment.
The petitioner also requested for a high powered inquiry.
The petitioner also complained against the conduct of Brigadier Harjeet Singh Brar, Commander 29 Artillery Brigade.
A Court of Inquiry was ordered.
It is alleged that the petitioner was forced to withdraw his complaint, on account of pressure exerted by Col. CS Dhillon, Brig Brar and Maj Gen Dhillon.
The Court of Inquiry, unearthed various acts of misconduct.
Proceedings were initiated against Col. CS Dhillon and ultimately a charge-sheet was served upon him.
Thereafter another Court of Inquiry was held and as a result, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet levelling twelve charges.
Nine out of these charges, flowed from the petitioner's complaint dated 971992.
A General Court Martial was convened.
After conclusion of the General Court Martial, the petitioner was held guilty of nine charges but acquitted with respect to charges 4, 10 and 11.
The petitioner was sentenced to forfeiture of two years service for the purpose of promotion, forfeiture of two years past service for the purpose of pension and severely reprimanded.
This punishment was duly confirmed by the confirming authority.
The petitioner, thereafter, filed an appeal/a post confirmation petition under Section 164 of the Army Act.
The said petition was accepted in part.
The petitioner was exonerated of all charges except the twelfth charge.
Counsel for the petitioner contends the charge, framed under Section 56-A of the Army Act, namely the twelfth charge, is inherently flawed.
Section 56-A of the Army Act, envisages punishment for levelling false accusations against any person subject to the discipline of the Army Act, knowing or having reason to believe that such accusation to be false.
3.
It is contended that a perusal of the twelfth charge as framed and the facts disclosed therein, reveal that the charge should have been framed under Section 60 of the Army Act.
The twelfth charges arises from certain allegations levelled in an additional written statement, dated 12101992, filed by the petitioner, during a Court of Inquiry.
It is contended that the charge as framed, and the facts as disclosed fall within the mischief of Section 60 and not Section 56(a) of the Army Act.
Section 56(a), prescribes punishment for general complaints but Section 60 relates to a statement specifically made before a Court Martial or other Court competent under the Army Act to administer on oath or affirmation.
As the affidavit was allegedly presented by the petitioner before a Court of Inquiry, which is competent to administer on oath under Rule 181, the petitioner should have been charged under Section 60 and not Section 56(a) of the Army Act.
It is, thus, contended that as the petitioner has been incorrectly charged, all proceedings namely the Court Martial, the punishment imposed, the confirmation thereof and rejection of the post confirmation petition should be set aside.
4.
Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submits that the nature of the charge i.e. whether it falls under Section 56(a) or Section 60 of the Army Act, cannot be urged for the first time in a writ petition.
The petitioner was required, by the provisions of Rule 49, to raise his objections to the charge, during the court martial.
As no such objection, was ever raised, the petitioner cannot now be allowed for the first time to urge that he was charged under a wrong provision of law.
5.
It is further argued, that initially the complaints, filed by the petitioner, levelling allegations against other officers were disposed of with an administrative warning.
The petitioner repeated these allegations by way of an affidavit during a Court of Inquiry.
Consequently, after following, the procedure prescribed under the Army Act, a charge-sheet was framed and served upon the petitioner.
The petitioner impugned the administrative warning as also the charge-sheet served upon him by filing CWP No. 1283 of 1993.
The writ petition was dismissed with liberty to the petitioner to raise all pleas available to him in accordance with law in any proceedings which may be held against him on the basis of the charge-sheet.
Despite the aforementioned liberty, the petitioner failed to raise any plea, challenging the correctness of the charges, as framed.
The only plea raised, was a written submission titled as "Bar of the Trial" i.e. no trial could be held against the petitioner as he had already been given a warning and, as the petitioner did not challenge the correctness of the charges as framed, the present petition be dismissed.
6.
It is further argued that if the petitioner was truly aggrieved, he could have filed an application under Rule 50 of the Rules, praying for amendment of charges.
No such application was ever filed, and, therefore, the petitioner cannot now be heard to urge, at this belated stage, that the charges framed were inherently flawed and therefore, proceedings finalised against him, stand vitiated.
It is also contended that mere infraction of provision of law, in the absence of any averment or proof of prejudice, would not render the impugned proceedings void.
Reliance for the above proposition is placed upon a judgment reported as Union of India v. Major A Hussain (IC-14827), 1998(1) SCT 288 (SC) : 1998(1) RCR(Criminal) 300.
7.
The last argument advanced by the counsel for the respondent is that the present petition be dismissed as it suffers from unexplained delay and laches.
The post confirmation petition was decided on 2841997, whereas the present writ petition was filed on 1672003.
No explanation, has been set out in the writ petition for this inordinate delay.
8.
I have heard counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
9.
The first contention raised by counsel for the petitioner that the twelfth charge framed under Section 56(a), was incorrectly framed.
Charge No. 12 reads as follows :-  "At field, on 12101992 in his additional written statement at the Court of Inquiry, convened vide HQ 16 Corps order No. 2720/19/168 Field Regiment/A3 dated 191992 used language against IC-15500 Brig HS Brar the then Commander 29 Artillery Brigade to the following effect, that is to say "Brig HS Brar has been party to this league of corrupt senior officers and he was the conduit between Maj Gen JS Dhillon YSM and Col CS Dhillon.
All aspects were fully known to him and he also joined the game of misappropriation."
The contention, as noticed hereinabove is that the petitioner should have been charged under Section 60 and not Section 56 of the Act, because the offending allegations, were levelled, by way of an affidavit, submitted before a Court of Inquiry, which was competent to record evidence.
10.
In my considered opinion, the contention raised by counsel for the petitioner, cannot be accepted.
After service of the charge-sheet upon the petitioner, the general court-martial assembled and was convened in accordance with the provisions of the Army Act.
Charges were read out and were put to the petitioner.
Section 49 of the Act confers a right upon the petitioner to raise any objection as to the nature of the charges.
The petitioner was also entitled to plead that the charge as framed does not disclose the commission of any offence, under the Act or were violative of the rules.
Furthermore, Rule 50 of the rules, confers jurisdiction to amend or alter the charge at any stage.
11.
A perusal of the record, reveals that after charges were put to the petitioner he entered plea not guilty.
He did not challenge the correctness of the twelfth charge, as framed but instead filed written objections as to legality of the court-martial.
These objections titled as "Plea in bar of trial" runs into 10 pages, comprising of 25 paragraphs.
A perusal of these objections reveals that the petitioner did not impugn the correctness of the twelfth charge in any manner.
It is thus apparent that the petitioner, though aware of his rights, under the Act and the Rules, consciously chose not to raise any objection to charge twelfth as framed.
The petitioner cannot be permitted to lay challenge to the correctness of the twelfth charge, as framed, in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
12.
It would also be necessary to notice, that initially the allegations levelled by the petitioner invited a simple administrative warning.
His subsequent repetition of these allegations, by way of an affidavit filed before a Court of Inquiry, led to service of the charge-sheet containing 12 charges.
The petitioner impugned the administrative warning and the charges including the twelfth charge, by filing CWP No. 1283 of 1993 before this Court.
The said writ petition was dismissed vide order dated 20.12.1993.
The concluding paragraph of the aforementioned order reads as follows :-  "Before parting with this judgment, we wish to make it clear that the above discussion is only for the purpose of disposing of this writ petition and it will be open to the petitioner to raise all pleas, which are open to him under the law, in the proceedings which may be held against him on the basis of the charge-sheet and these pleas shall be decided in accordance with law, uninfluenced by the above observations.
Dasti.
At once."
Thus while dismissing the writ petition, the petitioner was granted liberty to raise all pleas which were available to him under the law, in proceedings which may be held against him on the basis of the charge-sheet.
Despite this liberty being available, the petitioner consciously chose not to challenge the correctness of the twelfth charge before the court martial and thus accepted its correctness.
The petitioner cannot be permitted to turn the clock back and impugn the correctness of the twelfth charge for the first time in the present proceedings.
13.
The contention raised by counsel for the respondent that the present petition be dismissed as it suffers from unexplained delay and laches, merits acceptance.
The post confirmation petition, filed by the petitioner, impugning the punishment imposed, was dismissed on 2141999.
The present petition was filed on 1672003 i.e. after a lapse of 6 years.
The pleadings, do not contain any averment.
No explanation for this inordinate delay of more than six years has been set out in the writ petition.
Thus, apart from the fact that the petition lacks merit, it is liable to be dismissed on the ground of unexplained delay and laches.
In view of what has been stated above, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.