BP Dharmadhikari, J - By this Writ Petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner MSEB challenges the award dated 23-4-1992, delivered, by the First Labour Court in Reference IDA No. 34/1985, and by the said award the learned Labour Court while answering the Reference in affirmative has found that the termination of service of present respondent w.e.f.
1-7-1982 is illegal, and has directed the petitioner Board to re- instate him with continuity and full back wages.
This Court has while admitting the Writ Petition on 29-3-1993 granted Stay only to payment of back wages.
Thus petitioners have re-instated the respondent No. 1 in service and today he is continuing in service.
2.
The respondent No. 1 approached the machinery under Industrial Disputes Act, raising a dispute about his termination w.e.f.
1-7-1982, contending that he has been working as employee on daily wages from September, 1981 and he was terminated on 1-7-1982, without complying with the provisions of Section 25(f) and (g) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He therefore, requested for re- instatement.
It appears that after a failure report was submitted, the Deputy Commissioner of Labour made a reference about this to the Labour Court and the Labour Court accordingly took cognizance of it.
In reply before the Labour Court, the present petitioner stated that the respondent No. 1 joined only in October, 1981 and he was casual labour, who was being provided work as and when the work was available.
It stated that he was discontinued w.e.f.
30-6- 1982 and he did not put any continuous service of 240 days in preceding 12 months.
It therefore contended that it was not necessary for the petitioner to comply with the provisions of Section 25(f) and (g) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
3.
The parties lead their respective evidence before the Labour Court.
After appreciating the evidence the Labour Court has recorded a finding that the respondent No. 1 has put in continuous service of 240 days and as such there was failure to comply with the provisions of Section 25(f) and (g) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It therefore answered the award in favour of the present respondent No. 1 and against the petitioner.
4.
I have heard Advocate Moharir for petitioner and advocate Pillai, for respondent No. 1.
5.
Advocate Moharir states that the learned Labour Court has drawn adverse inference against the petitioner only because of their failure to produce the attendance register for the period from July, 1981 to September, 1981.
He states that the petitioner had produced attendance certificates for said period and he further states that the bonus register was also produced to substantiate the defence taken by the board that the respondent No. 1 entered into the service in October, 1981.
He further contends that in evidence of respondent No. 1 also this fact has been established.
He further contends that the adverse inference drawn is totally perverse and unsustainable.
He contends that the award therefore, needs to be quashed and set aside.
6.
As against this Advocate Pillai, appearing for respondent No. 1 states that, as there was dispute about the date of entry in the service the respondent No. 1 deliberately called upon the petitioner to produce the original muster register for the period from July, 1981 to September, 1981.
That register was deliberately withheld and Labour Court was not permitted to look into the same.
He contends that the petitioner has accepted that the respondent No. 1 has worked for 218 days from October, 1981 and if the period of work put in by the respondent No. 1 in September, 1981 is also added the respondent No. 1 completes continuous service of 243 days.
He contends that the best possible evidence which was available with the petitioner has not been produced and the argument being advanced are only an inference and as such, on the strength of the material available on the record, he contends the finding reached by the Labour Court is based upon the facts and cannot be interfered with in writ jurisdiction.
7.
He further invites the attention to the communication dated 21-7-2001, received in relation to his regularisation.
He states that after the High Court refused stay on 24-2-1994, the petitioner have issued order appointing the respondent No. 1 on NMR basis and even today he is continuing in service.
He further states that the proposal for creating post of SSA for his absorption in permanent employment as per service regulation is also submitted, but the same has not been considered because of pendency of the present Writ Petition.
He points out a communication dated 21-7-2001, by the Chief Engineer to the Establishment Officer, in this respect and states that in it there is a reference to the pending petition and also non receipt of application by the present respondent that he is ready to withdraw the same.
He contends that the petitioner will be required to shoulder the burden of back wages of respondent No. 1 from 1-7-1982 till his reinstatement in 1993 and the respondent No. 1 has already expressed his readiness and willingness to forgo back wages for this period.
He submits that even today the respondent No. 1 is ready and willing to forgo back wages.
He invites attention to paragraph No. 4 of his submissions filed today in this respect.
8.
Advocate Moharir, for petitioner states that the submissions are filed today only and they contain reference to certain subsequent event about which he has no instructions.
He therefore, seeks time to obtain instruction in this respect.
However, considering the facts of the case, the request for grant of time is rejected.
9.
A perusal of the impugned award clearly reveals that the learned Labour Court has found that the issue to be decided was whether the respondent No. 1 joined employment in September, 1981 or October, 1981 and for that purpose only the application vide Exh.
8 was given for direction to the employer to file muster register of September, 1981.
It has further found that the employer did not file any muster registrar and what is filed vide Exh.
10 is the attendance certificate referred to by the Labour Court as muster register from July, 1981 to October, 1981The Labour Court has perused all those documents and found that these are not the copies of the muster register, but they are prepared subsequently by some officer who has just written name of the respondent No. 1 on it and has shown that he is absent.
The Labour Court has therefore, drawn adverse inference on account of refusal on the part of the petitioner to produce muster register of September, 1981.
10.
Advocate Moharir, has relied upon the cross-examination of respondent No. 1 along with the bonus register to show that even as per that register the petitioner has entered the service only in October, 1981.
However, the bonus register is again a secondary evidence which is prepared on the basis of the attendance register and when the date of entry itself is in dispute bonus register cannot be relied upon as primary evidence.
The respondent No. 1 has only admitted that he has been paid bonus and he has no grievance about it.
Advocate Moharir, states that the respondent No. 1 has been paid last bonus and the petitioner calculated the same from October, 1981, he further states that when the respondent No. 1 accepted that he has no grievance about the bonus as paid, he indirectly admits that he has entered the service in October, 1981.
He therefore, contends that in view of this material on record, adverse inference drawn by the Labour Court is unwarranted.
The learned Labour Court has considered even the bonus register and found that it is not a trustworthy document.
The discussion in this respect is contained in para No. 6 of the award.
There is nothing on record and nothing has been shown to this Court to come to the conclusion that this finding is either perverse or erroneous or in any way unsustainable.
11.
Advocate Moharir, argues that the petitioner is an entity which has got no personal grudge or bias against anybody and bonus register or even the attendance certificates produced by it ought to have been accepted by Labour Court.
However, when the Court wanted to see the register for the month of September, 1981, it was incumbent on the part of the petitioner to produce that register and there is absolutely no reason put forth as to why the register was not produced.
If the attendance certificate which is prepared on the basis of the attendance register can be produced, the register could have been and ought to have been produced.
In the circumstances, as observed above, when the said attendance register is not made available the Court below was justified in drawing adverse inference.
12.
Perusal of the attendance certificate which is produced on record reveals that in it there is a mention of the months July 1981, August 1981, September 1981 and October 1981 and it shows that the respondent No. 1 has worked only for 20 days in October 1981.
However, if name of the petitioner did not figure in any attendance register prior to October 1981, why the attendance certificate has been prepared in this fashion, is not clear.
In any case it is not the defence of the respondent No. 1 that he was working in August 1981 or July, 1981 and as such, the said portion of the attendance register, is unnecessary.
Attendance register would have revealed names of all workers with their attendance and would have credibly established that name of respondent No. 1 is not included in it.
The mode and manner in which attendance certificate is prepared it self casts a doubt about the stand of petitioner.
Reasons given by Labour Court for disbelieving bonus register are also not erroneous.
13.
I find that the petitioners have deliberately avoided producing the attendance register for the month of September 1981 for perusal of the Labour Court, and as such the learned Labour Court was justified in drawing adverse inference against the petitioners.
It is to be noted that the finding that the respondent has completed 240 days continuous service has to be drawn on the basis of the material available on record and the Labour Court has evaluated the oral evidence adduced by parties, the material and documents which were produced before it and thereafter, the said finding has been reached.
It is not solely due to adverse inference.
I do not find that the said finding is perverse.
14.
Though the respondent No. 1 has filed his submission today and along with it he has produced some document which shows that his case is being considered by the petitioners.
Said documents cannot be looked into because they are produced at the eleventh hour and the learned counsel for the petitioner has no instructions on the same.
But the statement made therein by the respondent No. 1 that he is ready and willing to give up backwages from the date of his termination till his re-instatement is recorded and petitioner shall be free to act accordingly in the matter while considering his case for regularisation.
15.
Therefore, I do not find any merit in the Writ Petition, the same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.