N Kumar, J - Petitioners have challenged in this writ petition two orders passed by the Government of Karnataka on 24111997 as per Annexures Q and R granting permission to the Assistant Labour Commissioner to prosecute the petitioners for violating Sections 25-T and 33(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 under Section 25-U and Section 31 of the Act.
2.
Petitioners 1 to 3 are directors of the fourth petitioner company.
Fourth Petitioner Company has branches all over India.
The present dispute pertains to its factory at Hubli.
At Hubli they have employed 150 workers and 110 employees.
They have sales offices at Chandigarh, Lucknow, Vadodara, Calcutta, Madras, Delhi, Nagpur, Hyderabad.
Annexure-A is an order of appointment issued by them to its employees.
Clause (6) of the appointment order specifically provides for transfer of the employees from one department or place to another at the discretion of the management.
Transfer is a term of employment.
3.
In the year 1996 after review of manpower when they found there were surplus employees among the staff category at Hubli and there was requirement of additional hands at various branch offices they decided to transfer 27 staff members to various other units.
Accordingly, transfer orders were issued to 27 employees on 1-6-1996.
On the same day they also issued suspension orders in respect of 7 workmen who indulged in obstruction and refusal to report at the re-deployed sections within the factory.
Further 7 workmen were dismissed from service who were chronic absentees after holding domestic enquiry.
These orders were issued on 1-6-1996.
Protesting against this action of the management workmen went on strike from 1-6-996 without issuing any notice which continued up to 6-8-1996 on which date the Government of Karnataka passed an order prohibiting continuation of strike.
The Government of Karnataka also referred the dispute pertaining to transfers, suspension and dismissal for adjudication to the Labour Court, Hubli, as per Annexures-C and D. The Labour Court at Hubli registered the reference as Reference No. 58/1996.
4.
Even after prohibition of strike the workmen did not resume work.
There was a joint meeting between the Secretary, Department of Labour and the management and their employees.
During the course of discussion petitioners agreed that the order of transfer issued in respect of 27 employees will not be given effect too immediately and the said matter should be sorted within 30 days after discussion and negotiations.
It was also agreed that 27 employees will not report for work at Hubli factory and that they will be paid salary for 30 days.
They agreed to withdraw the suspension orders issued to seven workmen and let them off with a warning.
Striking workmen except those 27 transferred employees shall resume work on or before 23-8-1996.
It was mutually agreed that dismissal of seven workmen on the ground of unauthorized absence was not related to the current issue of strike, the law should take its own course.
Accordingly, the workmen called off strike and resumed work with effect from 23-8-1996.
5.
After mutual discussions it was agreed to cancel the transfer orders of six workmen and post them at Hubli only and accordingly they were given the postings.
In respect of the balance 21 employees talks ended in failure.
Petitioner paid wages to all the 27 employees for 42 days ie, up to 4-10- 1996.
It also cancelled the suspension in respect of seven suspended workmen and they were let off with a warning.
Out of 21 balance staff employees, 9 employees submitted resignations during October, 1996 itself which were accepted and they were relieved from their services.
6.
In the course of discussion the management had proposed that the employees who have been transferred will be given promotion and additional emoluments.
They also agreed for change of place i.e., to post them in places within South India.
The management granted additional benefits and directed the remaining 12 employees to report at the transferred places on account of exigencies of work and surplusage at Hubli.
The details pertaining to 12 employees who were transferred to various places are given at Annexure-E, Annexure-F which are 12 in numbers are the transfer orders issued to these employees.
These 12 employees did not report to work.
Therefore, disciplinary action was initiated.
After holding domestic enquiry, in respect of 10 workmen orders were passed on 28-11-1996 dismissing them from services which are at Annexure-G series (10 in number).
An application under Section 33(1) of the Act was filed simultaneously on the date of dismissal seeking permission for action.
They were numbered as S1.
Nos. 1/96 to 10/96 and copies of the same are produced at Annexure-H series (10 in number).
In the meanwhile, the Government on 19-11-1996 passed an order as per Annexure-J cancelling the earlier order of reference dated 6- 8-1996 and made a reference only in respect of dismissal of 7 employees on 19-11-1996.
Therefore, in law on 28-11-1996 there was no reference pending in respect of transfer of 27 employees or in respect of order of suspension.
The workmen filed a writ petition in W P. No. 4603/1997 challenging the second order of reference and an order of stay was granted for a period of four weeks on 19-2-1997.
Subsequently, on 15-2-2001 the said writ petition came to be dismissed.
7.
On 27-1-1997 the Labour Commissioner issued a show cause notice alleging violation of Section 33 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act in the matter of dismissal of 10 workmen as per Annexure-K Petitioners furnished their explanation as per Annexure-L denying any such violation.
On 28-1-1997 the Labour Commissioner issued one more show cause notice alleging unfair labour practice under item (7) of Schedule V read with Section 25(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act alleging that transfer of 27 workmen who belong to cadres of office boys, watchmen, clerical staff to far off places all over India is with a mala fide intention to victimize them and, therefore, it amounts to unfair labour practice as per Annexure-M.
The company gave an explanation denying allegations as per Annexure-N. One more show cause notice was issued on 16-9-1997 in respect of violation under Section 33 (1) of the Act as per Annexure-O for which a detailed explanation was given as per Annexure-P The petitioners contend their explanations show that they have not contravened any law; they were not given a personal hearing to substantiate their contention.
Without hearing, without application of mind, without considering their defence the authorities have proceeded to issue Annexures-Q and R granting permission to prosecute the petitioners.
Therefore the petitioners have preferred these petitions challenging the aforesaid two orders.
8.
This Court after entertaining the writ petition granted an interim order of way on 15-12-1997 staying all further proceedings in pursuance of the impugned orders which is in force even till this day.
9.
The respondents after service of notice have entered appearance.
The employees union which was not impleaded earlier in the Writ Petition was impleaded as second respondent.
They have filed a detailed statement of objections contesting the claim of the petitioners.
The facts are not disputed.
They contend there is no provision in the Certified Standing Orders enabling the management of the company to transfer the employees who are governed by the Standing Orders from one place to another.
Therefore, it is not open to the management of the company to change or alter or vary the conditions of service.
If the management of the company wants to alter, change or vary the service conditions the same can be done only by way of amendment to the standing orders by making the necessary application before the certifying officer.
Therefore, the employees are not liable to be transferred.
The order of transfer of 27 employees is totally illegal and has been done by way of victimization and unfair labour practice.
The contention of the management that the Government had cancelled the earlier order of reference and that the petitioners had filed application under Section 33(c) of the Act seeking permission out of abundant caution and that the company has complied with the provisions of Section 33 are denied.
They admit that they have filed writ petition regarding cancellation of the reference.
They contend the petitioners acts were contrary to law.
After issuing them show-cause notice after hearing and considering the explanation given by them authorities were not satisfied with the said reply and prima facie found violation of the law, have rightly passed the impugned orders granting permission to prosecute the petitioners.
Therefore they contend as the orders passed are legal and valid, no case for interference is made out.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner assailing the impugned order contends when transfer is a term of contract and is effected in exigencies of service, unless the duly authorized authority constituted under the Act adjudicates and finds that such a transfer is mala fide, the question of taking action against the management under the said provision merely on the basis of an allegation from the workmen is illegal and erroneous.
In fact that was the matter which was referred for adjudication before the Labour Court.
The Government had no jurisdiction to go into the said question and pass the impugned order at Annexure-Q Secondly, it was contended violation of Section 33(1) of the Act arise only in the event of a dispute connected with a dismissal order pending for adjudication.
In the instant case when the Government passed an order on 19-11-1996 cancelling the earlier reference dated 6-8-1996 no matter connected with the dispute was pending for adjudication before the Labour Court, on 28-11-1996 when the order of dismissal in respect of 10 workmen were passed.
Therefore, the petitioners were under no obligation to file the application under Section 33 (1).
Merely because they filed an application under Section 33 (1) it does not mean that they have violated the provision of Section 33 (1).
In either event there is absolutely no application of mind, as such the impugned orders passed are arbitrary, without jurisdiction and liable to be quashed.
11.
Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent contended once prima facie it is shown that there is a violation of the statutory provisions and that a person has committed unfair labour practice, authority had the jurisdiction to grant the permission to prosecute and, therefore, the impugned orders passed are in accordance with law and do not call for any interference.
12.
Both the learned counsel in support of their respective contentions has relied on various judgments of the Supreme Court, this Court and other High Courts.
Therefore, in order to better appreciate the facts of this case and the validity of the impugned orders it is necessary to look into the law on the point, first the statutory provisions and thereafter the decisions.
13.
Section 34 of the Act deals with cognizance of offences.
It provides that, (1) no Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or of the abetment of any such offence, save on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government.
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Section 25-T provides that no employer or workman or a trade union, whether registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 or not, shall commit any unfair labour practice.
Section 25 (U) deals wish penalty for committing unfair- labour practices.
It states, any person who commits any unfair labour practice shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
In fact Chapter-VI deals with penalty for illegal strikes, lock outs, instigations, for giving financial aid to illegal strikes and lock out for breach of settlement or award and for disclosing confidential information and closure without notice.
Section 31 deals with penalty for other offences which states, any employer who contravenes the provisions of Section 33 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Sub-section (2) of Section 31 provides that, whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act for such contravention, be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.
Section 20 of the Act deals with commencement and conclusion of proceedings.
Sub-section (3) of Section 20 provides, proceedings before the authorities mentioned therein shall be deemed to have commenced on the date of the reference of the dispute for adjudication and such proceedings shall be deemed to have concluded on the day the award becomes enforceable under Section 17-A.
Item No. 7 of V Schedule which deals with unfair labour practices on the part of employers provides that, to transfer a workman mala fide from one place to another under the guise of following management policy is an unfair labour practice which is punishable under Section 25.
14.
A Division Bench of this Court had an occasion to interpret Section 34 of the Act.
In the case of V Rama Rao v. Commissioner of Labour (ILR 1990 Kar.
1848) it was held that, the authority according sanction is required to decide if there is a genuine dispute between the parties as to the Terms of Settlement for the violation of which the sanction for prosecution is sought.
The Authority must take care to see and must satisfy itself that the dispute as to the Terms of Settlement is genuine.
It is not a mere denial of either the existence of Settlement or true contents of the Terms of the Settlement, that would disable the authority to accord sanction for prosecution; but it is the proof of either the non-existence of the settlement or the contents of relevant terms of the settlement not being true, for the violation of which the sanction for prosecution is sought.
If such a controversy is raised, the authority empowered to accord sanction for prosecution has to decide the same before according sanction.
In the absence of any such decision, the order according sanction for prosecution will be without the Authority of Law or without any basis because the very term of settlement the violation of which is alleged will be under dispute.
In these circumstances, the order according sanction without determining the Terms of the Settlement is not valid in law.
141.
The very same Bench dealing with Section 34 in the case of FK Menzlin v. BP Premakumar, (1991) 1 Lab LJ 55) held that the object of Section 34 of the Industrial Disputes Act is to avoid false and frivolous complaints and thereby save the party from harassment and precisely for that reason the Government is required to apply its mind and determine the propriety of filing the complaint.
The order of sanction should disclose the facts which have a bearing on the question as to whether the offence has been committed and in case such a disclosure was not found in the order of sanction, it could be proved by producing evidence and material necessary for coming to the conclusion that there was a case for according sanction and such relevant material was placed before the authority who accorded the sanction.
It was further held that, it is open to the petitioners to contend before the Court before which they are to be prosecuted that the sanction accorded is not in accordance with law and that the sanctioning authority has accorded sanction without application of mind.
In such an event it is open to the prosecution to prove that sanction was accorded after taking into consideration the material having a bearing on the question.
When the order of sanction refers to the relevant material, though it does not refer to the contents of the same, and the order is passed after issuing show cause notice and obtaining a reply, it would still be open to the party to agitate before the Court during the course of prosecution that sanction accorded is invalid.
A petition under Art. 226 or 227 of the Constitution is not a proper remedy.
142 A single Judge of this Court in the case of Tractors and Farm Equipment, Madras v. State of Karnataka, 1998(1) LLN 928 dealing with Section 34 read with Section 25-T and 25-U held that, the power under S. 34 of the Act vests with the State Government, and it is the State Government that has to take a decision on application of mind to the facts and circumstances of the case not only as regards the materials placed before it pointing to unfair labour practices having been indulged in by the management of TAFE, but also on the question whether it is expedient in the interest of industrial relations and peace and harmony in the industrial field to resort to prosecution.
Significantly, all the instances alleged as unfair labour practices are also industrial disputes within the meaning of S. 2 (k) of the Act.
Therefore, several courses of action were open to the State Government including reference of the dispute for adjudication under S. 10(1) of the Act.
If, on consideration of the materials on record and on application of mind, the State Government had taken a conscious decision to prosecute the management for unfair labour practices, then, the said decision could not have been found fault with.
It was then open to the State Government to pass an order under S. 34 of the Act.
The State Government had to independently consider the matter and then, it had to come to its own conclusion and while doing so, if its ultimate decision accords with opinion expressed by the Labour Commissioner, the, there would be nothing wrong with it.
But the State Government does not even bother to independently consider as to what the material before it is, what the allegations are, as to which of the several alternative courses of action could be taken, and as to whether it is necessary to take recourse to prosecution, and instead, simply acts upon the recommendation of the Labour Commissioner as though it has to simply affix seal to approve to the conclusion reached by the Labour Commissioner.
143 A Full Bench in the case of SN Hada v. Binny Limited Staff Association, 1988(2) Lab LLJ 266 (Kar.
)], has held that, the intent of the Legislature in enacting a provision like S. 34 is to save the party against whom the complaint is to be filed, from harassment, and it is for that reason that the Government is required to apply its mind and to determine the propriety of filing a complaint.
The phrase "under the authority of the appropriate Government" implies a sanction by the Government after it has considered the desirability of prosecution.
If such a provision had not been enacted there could be every likelihood of filing of frivolous complaints indiscriminately.
The appropriate Government was required to apply its mind and satisfy itself before it grants the authority.
It is this satisfaction which is material and sufficient for the purpose and that, once on consideration of the relevant material the State Government finds it to be a fit case for prosecution, then, who should me the complaint is not of much importance.
144 The Supreme Court in the case of Raj Kumar Gupta v. Lt.
Governor, Delhi, AIR 1997 SC 2680, observed that, the provisions of S. 34 are in the nature of a limitation on the entitlement of a workman or a trade union or an employer to complain of offences under the said Act and that, they should not, in the public interest, be permitted to make frivolous, vexatious or otherwise patently untenable complaints, and to this end Section 34 requires that no complaint shall be taken cognizance of unless it is made with the authorisation of the appropriate Government.
145 The Supreme Court while dealing with the aspect of according sanction for prosecution in the case of Mansukhlal Vithaldas Chauhan v. State of Gujarat, 1997(7) SCC 622, held, since the validity of `sanction' depends on the application of mind by the sanctioning authority to the facts of the case as also the material and evidence collected during investigation, it necessarily follows that the sanctioning authority has to apply its own independent mind for the generation of genuine satisfaction whether prosecution has to be sanctioned or not.
The mind of the sanctioning authority should not be under pressure from any quarter nor should any external force be acting upon it to take a decision one way or the other.
Since the discretion to grant or not to grant sanction vests absolutely in the sanctioning authority, its discretion should be shown to have not been affected by any extraneous consideration.
If it is shown that the sanctioning authority was unable to apply its independent mind for any reason whatsoever or was under an obligation or compulsion or constraint to grant the sanction, the order will be bad for the reason that the discretion of the authority "not to sanction" was taken away and it was compelled to act mechanically to sanction the prosecution.
If the authority in whom the discretion is vested under the statute, does not act independently and pass an order under the instructions and orders of another authority, the Court would intervene in the matter, quash the order and issue a mandamus to the authority to exercise its own discretion.
15.
The intent of the Legislature in enacting a provision like S. 34 is to save the party against whom the complaint is to be filed, from harassment, and it is for that reason that the Government is required to apply its mind and to determine the propriety of filing a complaint.
The phrase "under the authority of the appropriate Government" implies a sanction by the Government after it has considered the desirability of prosecution.
The provisions of S. 34 are in the nature of a limitation on the entitlement of a workman or a trade union or an employer to complain of offences under the said Act and that, they should not, in the public interest, be permitted to make frivolous, vexatious or otherwise patently untenable complaints.
The sanctioning authority has to apply its own independent mind for the generation of genuine satisfaction whether prosecution has to be sanctioned or not.
The mind of the sanctioning authority should not be under pressure from any quarter nor should any external force be acting upon it to take a decision one way or the other.
Since the discretion to grant or not to grant sanction vests absolutely in the sanctioning authority, its discretion should be shown to have not been affected by any extraneous consideration.
The State Government has to independently consider the matter and then it had to come to its own conclusion.
The State Government that has to take a decision on application of mind to the facts and circumstances of the case not only as regards the materials placed before it but also on the question whether it is expedient in the interest of industrial relations and peace and harmony in the industrial field to resort to prosecution.
16.
Chapter V, VI and VII of the Act deals with various penalties.
Penalty is prescribed for committing unfair labour practices, illegal strikes and lockouts, instigating a person to strike work or lockout, for persons giving financial aid for illegal strikes and lockouts, for disclosing confidential information, for closure without notice and for other offences.
Penalty is also prescribed under Section 29 for breach of settlement or award.
In all these cases a person accused of any one of those acts is found guilty is punishable with imprisonment or with fine or with both by a Court which is not inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate, First Class.
However a distinction has to be made in this regard between a penalty for breach of settlement or award and the aforesaid other penalties.
In the case of a breach of settlement or award it is in the nature of an execution proceeding.
Parties by agreement have entered into a settlement stipulating the terms and conditions agreed upon.
Therefore the said terms and conditions fully bind the parties and their representatives in interest.
Similarly in the case of an award after contest a competent Labour Court or Tribunal has adjudicated the industrial dispute and has pronounced its judgment.
It is subject to challenge.
But once the award becomes final it is binding on the parties to the said award and the persons who claim under them.
In these two cases the statute has provided in Section 29 a forum for enforcement of the terms of the settlement or award, if any party commits breach.
It is settled law that an executing Court cannot go behind the decree.
The only enquiry which is contemplated by the executing Court is to find out whether the terms of any settlement or award are complied with or is there any breach.
17.
Therefore when any person approaches the Government under Section 34 for authorization to prosecute any person having committed breach of any term of settlement or award, all that the appropriate Government has to consider is whether there is a valid settlement or award, what are its terms and whether it has been complied with or not.
If there is a breach of the terms of the settlement or award, as a rule, authorization is to be granted for prosecuting a person who has committed the breach.
It is open to the persons prosecuted to contend before the Criminal Court that the authorization accorded is not in accordance with law and that the Government has granted authorization without application of mind.
In such an event it is open to the prosecution to prove that authorization was accorded after taking into consideration the materials having bearing on the question.
When the order of authorization refers to the relevant material, though it does not refer to the contents of the same and the order is passed after issuing show cause notice and obtaining a reply it would still be open to the party to agitate before the Court during the course of prosecution that the authorization accorded is invalid.
However, only in exceptional cases it can be refused.
If it is to be refused, then the Government has to set out reasons justifying such refusal.
It is in such circumstances the application of mind by the authority is to be evidenced in the order refusing to grant authorization because such refusal to grant authorization would have the effect of taking away the relief which was granted to the person by way of an award or settlement.
The said order refusing to grant authorization could very well be the subject matter of judicial review.
18.
In respect of acts complained of in other cases other than the case falling under Section 29 the approach of the Government should be altogether different.
When a complaint is made to the authority complaining of violation of the provisions of law, a notice is to be issued to the opposite party enclosing a copy of the complaint to meet the allegations.
If the opposite party appears and contest the claim, dispute the facts alleged, then such a dispute itself would amount to an industrial dispute.
It is while granting authorization in such circumstances the authority has to bear in mind the aforesaid principles, namely that Section 34 is intended to save the parties from harassment preventing frivolous, vexatious and other patently untenable complaints.
If on the same set of facts if sufficient courses are available, authorizing prosecution should be the last resort.
Before it makes up its mind it should come to a definite finding regarding the offences alleged to have been committed.
If the material on record discloses there is a serious dispute regarding the violation complained of and it requires to be investigated and adjudication is necessary in such matters, the Government should not readily grant the authorization sought for.
It would be a proper exercise of discretion, to refer such an industrial dispute, for adjudication before a competent Labour Court.
It should not adjudicate such an industrial dispute by merely going through the complaint and the statement of objections filed.
Therefore, there should be a proper application of mind by the Government in respect of these matters before it grants the authorization, which should be evidenced in the order granting such authorization.
If there is no such independent, proper application of mind and there are no sufficient and satisfactory material on record to come to a conscious decision one way or the other, then the order granting authorization is not valid in law and is liable to be quashed.
In other words granting of such authorization in respect of these matters should be by way of an exception.
The rule is to refer the matter for adjudication as it amounts to an industrial dispute.
19.
In the background of this legal position we have to find out whether the two orders passed by the Government authorizing the Assistant Labour Commissioner to conduct the prosecution against the persons mentioned therein is valid or not.
20.
The first order is at Annexure-Q The said permission is granted on the ground that 27 workers were transferred to far off places in India with a view to break the unity of the workers; under the guise of following organizational policy; with mala fide intention, which constitutes an unfair labour practice under item No. 7 of V Schedule to the Act, which is prohibited under Section 25-T of the Act, which is punishable under Section 25-U of the Act.
When a show cause notice was issued pointing out the said facts the petitioners have given a reply.
The substance of the reply is the Government did refer as per Annexure-D the industrial dispute to the effect whether transfer of 27 employees by the management is justified.
The said reference was on 6-8-1996.
Thereafter, negotiations were there between the management the Government and the workers union.
In the course of the discussion, the management agreed to withdraw the suspension order in respect of 7 employees by just giving a warning to them and out of 27 employees who were transferred they cancelled the transfer order of 6 employees, 9 out of them resigned and only it was confined to 12 persons, they were given promotions and also increase in salary and they were agreed to be transferred in South India itself.
On their agreeing to the aforesaid conditions and implementing it, the union agreed to give up those two disputes.
Therefore, the Government passed an order under Annexure-J withdrawing the earlier reference by an order dated 6-8-1996 and made a fresh reference on 19-11-1996 confining the industrial dispute to the justification of dismissal of only 7 employees.
This order of transfer was passed in terms of the order of appointment which is issued to all the employees without any discrimination.
It was also contended the transfer was necessitated because there was surplus employees of staff category at Hubli and there was requirement of additional hands at various branch offices.
Therefore, it is clear when 27 employees were transferred it was the subject matter of an industrial dispute which was duly referred to by the Government to the Labour Court for adjudication and during the pendency of the said dispute negotiations took place where they agreed to the aforesaid alterations and gave effect to it and therefore the said dispute was withdrawn.
If the Government being satisfied that there is no such dispute existed, went to the extent of issuing an order withdrawing the earlier reference and making a new reference confining it to only one point of dispute and in spite of these facts brought to the notice of the Government, the Government was not justified in granting the authorization to prosecute the petitioners.
In fact a reading, of the impugned order does not show that the Government has taken into consideration these facts.
On the contrary the Government appears to have swayed by the recommendations made by the Labour Commissioner.
Therefore, it is a clear case of non-application of mind by the Government independently and not taking note of the aforesaid facts which are not in dispute and borne out from the record.
Therefore, the impugned order at Annexure-Q cannot be sustained.
21.
The second order which is impugned is at Annexure-R It refers to non-compliance of Section 33(1) of the Act.
The allegation is when industrial dispute Case No. 58/96 was pending before the Labour Court; the 10 workmen mentioned therein were dismissed from service on 28-11-1996 without the express permission of the Labour Court.
In reply to the show cause notice issued the petitioners contended, in the reference made on 6-8-1996 three disputes were referred for adjudication.
First dispute pertains to justification of transfer of 27 employees, second dispute pertains to keeping 7 employees under suspension, thirdly justification of dismissal order of 7 workmen on the ground of unauthorized absence.
The Government by an order dated 19-11-1996 withdrew the said reference and made a fresh reference only in respect of justification of dismissal of 7 employees on the ground of unauthorized absence.
The order of dismissal passed in respect of 10 employees was passed on 28-11-1996.
On the day the said order was passed there was no dispute connected with the dismissal of 10 employees for not obeying the order of transfer was pending consideration before the Labour Court.
Therefore, they were under no obligation to seek any express permission of the Labour Court under Section 33(1) of the Act.
In fact the order of the Government dated 19- 11-1996 was challenged in WP No. 4603/1997 after the order of dismissal dated 28-11-1996.
On 19-2-1997 an order of stay of the Government Order dated 19-11-1996 was granted for a period of four weeks and it was not extended further.
On 15-2-2001 the said Writ Petition came to be dismissed.
Therefore, they contended that there is no violation of Section 33(1).
Further they contended by way of abundant caution they have also made an application under Section 33(1) in respect of all the ten employees and even in the order of dismissal it is made clear that the order of dismissal is subject to the permission being accorded by the Court.
Therefore, they contended that there is no violation of Section 31 of the Act.
Again the Government has not applied its mind to this material on record.
It is swayed by the recommendation of the Labour Commissioner and on the ground that the explanation offered is not satisfactory the Government has proceeded to accord the authorization.
The aforesaid facts clearly demonstrate on the day these ten workmen were dismissed on 28-11-1996 no industrial dispute connected with the said dismissal was pending before the Labour Court.
Therefore, there was no obligation cast upon the management to obtain express permission in writing of the authority before passing the order of dismissal.
If a dispute which was pending on the date of dismissal was not connected with the dispute, in law they were expected to seek only approval not expresses permission in writing for taking action.
Though an application is filed under Section 33(1) (h) of the Act, in the facts of this case it is clear, it is to be treated only as an application under Section 33(2) (b).
It cannot be said that the petitioners have violated Section 33(1) of the Act.
This fact has been overlooked by the Government before according authorization.
In that view of the matter, the order granting authorization at Annexure-R also cannot be sustained.
22.
Under these circumstances, I pass the following order :-  (a) Writ Petition is allowed.
(b) The impugned orders at Annexures Q and R are hereby quashed.
(c) No costs.
Petition allowed