R Gururajan, J - These two writ petitions are directed against the award of the Labour Court passed in KID No. 68/96 dated 22-12-98.
2.
Respondent a driver in the Corporation caused an accident on 2-9-94 which resulted in the death of 3 passengers and injuries to 41 passengers.
He was subjected to disciplinary proceedings.
Charges were held to have been proved in the enquiry.
Consequently, he was dismissed from service on 30-3-96.
The said dismissal was challenged before the Labour Court in KID No. 68/96.
Parties entered appearance and filed their respective statements.
Labour Court raised a preliminary issue with regard to the correctness of the enquiry.
The said issue was held in favour of the Corporation.
Thereafter, Labour Court has chosen to order reinstatement of the workman together with a fine of Rs. 10,000/-.
This award is challenged by the management as well as the workman.
3.
Heard Smt. Renuka, the learned counsel appearing for the Corporation.
She would submit that the matter requires serious consideration by this Court.
According to her, the workman has caused 3 deaths in addition to injuries to 41 passengers on account of his rash and negligent driving.
She says the Labour Court having held that the enquiry was fair and proper ought to have rejected the reference and ought not to have reinstated the workman.
She finds fault with the findings of the Labour Court.
Even otherwise, she says that the Labour Court cannot grant a fine of Rs. 10,000/- despite there being 3 deaths in the case on hand.
She ultimately wants the award to be set aside.
4.
Per contra, Sri Mukkannappa, learned counsel took great pains to say that the material facts did not require any dismissal.
Counsel says that the material on record would support that there is no negligence on the part of the workman.
Even otherwise, learned counsel strenuously relies on a circular dated 6-9-2004 in the matter of punishment.
He further says that the workman has been reinstated pursuant to the interim order and after reinstatement there is no allegation of any accident being caused by him.
5.
After hearing, I have carefully perused the material on record.
Admitted facts would reveal of a charge of rash and negligent driving resulting in an accident that occurred on 2-9-94.
In response to the article of charge, workman submitted an explanation and in the explanation he contended that the vehicle was sick in condition, that the vehicle completed 10 lakh Kms.
ran on the road, brake condition of the vehicle was weak, the bus had over capacity, etc.
Being dissatisfied enquiry was conducted.
Workman participated in the enquiry.
Enquiry officer found the workman guilty of the charges levelled against him.
Management accepting the same, dismissed him from service.
Labour Court has ruled that the enquiry is fair and proper.
Thereafter, the Labour Court has chosen to interfere in the case on hand.
Labour Court says that there is no eye-witness examined by the enquiry officer, Labour Court notices that the criminal proceedings are pending, Labour Court notices that three lives have been lost in addition to injuries to passengers, Labour Court rules that the workman has to be reinstated on humanitarian grounds subject to the condition of the result of the criminal case and also subject to the workman paying Rs. 10,000/- recoverable in 10 monthly equal instalments.
6.
Let me see as to whether the Labour Court is justified in passing the impugned award in the case on hand.
7.
Labour Court as I mentioned earlier held that the enquiry is fair and proper.
In the light of his finding on the preliminary issue, the only issue that requires to be taken into consideration by the Labour Court is as to whether the findings of the enquiry officer are perverse or not.
8.
Labour Court unfortunately has not adverted to this aspect of the matter.
But however, I have gone through the findings of the enquiry officer in terms of the material made available to me.
Enquiry Officer has chosen to examine the witnesses and on the said basis he has chosen to find him guilty.
The findings in the given circumstances cannot be said to be perverse as understood in the eye of law.
In fact, the defence of the workman is one of mechanical failure on account of the brake being weak.
This defence is not available in the light of the motor vehicle's accident report (M.W.
9 before enquiry officer).
The accident report would clearly go to show that the brakes were found to be in good condition.
Inspector of the motor vehicles has certified that the accident was not due to any mechanical defect of the vehicle.
In the light of the report the defence of the workman i.e. of mechanical defects has no legs to stand and the said defence has been rejected by the enquiry officer.
As I mentioned earlier, unfortunately the Labour Court without taking note of these aspects of the matter has chosen to exercise its power under S. 11-A by way of reinstatement subject to the condition of the result of the criminal case and subject to the workman paying Rs. 10,000/- in 10 equal monthly, instalments.
Section 11-A is no doubt available to the Labour Court in the matter of punishment but labour Court cannot lightly interfere with the punishment unless the said punishment shocks the conscience of the Court.
9.
Material on record would show that 3 lives were lost on account of the accident in addition to injuries to 41 passengers.
Labour Court should have been serious in the matter of awarding reinstatement after noticing this ghastly accident wherein 3 deaths and injuries to 41 passengers is caused.
In such circumstances, there cannot be any sympathy by the Labour Court and any such sympathy would be a misplaced sympathy as understood in law.
It is unfortunate that the Labour Court has not chosen to apply its mind in the matter of interfering under S 11-A of the Act.
Labour Court failed to see that admittedly the Corporation is rendering public service and the public servants have to be careful in the larger interest of the travelling public.
Labour Court has failed to see that in service sector apart from employer and employee, there is an invisible third party viz, the public and the interest of third parties is to be taken into consideration while exercising powers u/S 11-A of the Act.
In the case on hand, unfortunately Labour Court has dealt with the case very lightly in granting the relief of reinstatement.
I am also surprised to see that the Labour Court has, subject to the pending criminal proceeding and subject to payment of Rs. 10,000/- ordered reinstatement.
This finding in my view exceeds the power granted under S 11-A of the Act.
Looking from any angle, the learned Labour Court was absolutely not justified in interfering in a matter like this.
10.
Sri Mukkannappa, learned counsel however invites my attention to a circular issued by Law Department in No. KST/CO/LAW/3577 04-05 dated 26/12-9- 2004.
Admittedly it is only an internal circular and such circulars cannot override the regulations of the KSRTC.
It is also seen that the corporation has chosen to provide dismissal only in the event of two fatal cases.
I am unable to understand the logic behind this.
If the workman is guilty of rash and negligent driving then it does not matter as to how many accidents he has to his credit.
Even otherwise, the circular would not come to the rescue of the workman in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case.
Therefore, not much assistance can be derived at by the workman by relying on the circular.
11.
In somewhat identical circumstances, the Supreme Court in 2005 AIR SCW 84 in the case of Cholan Roadways Ltd v. G Thirugnanasambandam has noted as under :  "In the instant case the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal as also the learned single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court misdirected themselves in law in so far as they failed to pose unto themselves correct questions.
It is now well-settled that a quasi-judicial authority must post unto itself a correct question so as to arrive at a correct finding of fact.
A wrong question posed leads to a wrong answer.
In this case, furthermore, the mis-direction in law committed by the Industrial Tribunal was apparent in so far as it did not apply the principle of res ipsa loquitur which was relevant for the purpose of this case and, thus, failed to take into consideration a relevant factor and furthermore took into consideration an irrelevant fact not germane for determining the issue, namely, the passengers of the bus were mandatory required to be examined.
The Industrial Tribunal further failed to apply the correct standard of proof in relation to a domestic enquiry, which is "preponderance of probability" and applied the standard of proof required for a criminal trial.
A case for judicial review as, thus, clearly made out."
The said Judgment is squarely applicable to the facts of this case.
I have also recently in WP 38587/99 held that such death cases cannot be viewed lightly by Courts.
In the given circumstances and in the facts of the case, I am satisfied that a case is made out by the management.
It is needless for this Court to say that if any driver whose act of rash and negligent driving result in death of innocent passengers, unless the workman proves to the satisfaction of the authorities that he is innocent of the matter, dismissal is the only answer.
12.
Before concluding I must notice that this Court has ordered reinstatement at the time of admission.
The workman's counsel argued that he has worked for 5 years and that should be taken into consideration by this Court while providing the relief.
I am not inclined to accept this argument in the light of rash and 'negligent driving of the bus resulting in 3 deaths and injuries to 41 passengers.
This Court has passed that order on 19-3-1999 at this order cannot be taken as a defence in a case like this.
13.
Before concluding I deem it proper to observe that discretionary powers under Art. 226 of the Constitution should be used cautiously.
The orders in granting interim relief in such case would not be in the interest of anybody.
Moreover, any such reinstatement would not be in the interest of the Corporation or the public in general.
I also deem it proper to notice that this Court comes across several instances of deaths on account of rash and negligent driving of the drivers of the Corporation.
I want to remind the Corporation of its essential duty to provide efficient services in the light of laudable object of the Motor Vehicles Act.
In view of frequent death cases reported, the Corporation should see that remedial action is taken in reducing the rising accident cases in the Interest of the general public.
Petition filed by the workman is rejected.
Petition filed by the management is accepted.
Dismissal is upheld.
Ordered accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.