PS Patwalia, J - Petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army as a Naik on 1181965 during the period of proclamation of National Emergency declared by the President of India.
He was discharged after serving the Army for 8 years on 371973.
The petitioner, thus served during the period of Emergency from 1181965 upto 1011968.
After his discharge from the Army, he joined civil service as a Clerk in the Sessions Division, Faridkot on 15.3.1974.
He was promoted as an Assistant Reader in December, 1977 and retired on 3152002 on attaining the age of superannuation.
2.
The petitioner has attached with the writ petition an undated representation said to have been made to the District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot claiming the benefit of military service towards his increments, seniority and pension.
He thereafter claimed to have submitted a legal notice on 2292002 which is attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-2.
The petitioner states that having failed to get the benefit from the respondents, he filed the present writ petition in April, 2004 claiming that the benefit of military service should be granted to him towards his increments and pension.
3.
A written statement has been filed by the District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot.
It has been stated therein that the petitioner had made a representation on 23101978 claiming the benefit of military service towards increments and seniority.
The said claim of the petitioner had been rejected by an order dated 29.3.1979.
Thereafter he had made another representation on 841979 again claiming the same benefit.
On receipt of this representation, by a letter dated 3111989 he was directed to intimate the respondents if he had filed any representation against the refusal of these benefits on 2131979.
The petitioner did not respond to this letter and, therefore, the papers were ordered to be filed.
4.
We have heard Mr. VK Shukla, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab appearing for the respondents and perused the paperbook.
5.
The claim of the petitioner for counting the service rendered by him during the period of emergency towards increments and pension is based on Rule 4 of the Punjab National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter to be referred as `the Rules').
The same is reproduced hereunder :-  "Rule 4.
- Increments, seniority and pension-Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under : (i) Increment - The period spent by a person on military service, after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in Rules 3.9, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority - The period of military service mentioned in Clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii) Pension - The period of military service mentioned in Clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions : (1) the person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question;  (2) any bonus or gratutity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government; (3) the period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service post under the Government shall count for pension, provided period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government."
A perusal of this Rule would show that the period spent by a person on military service after attaining the minimum age shall count towards increments.
Military service has been defined to mean enrolled or commissioned service of any of the three wings of Indian Army rendered by a person during the period of proclamation of Emergency made by the President.
The Rule further provides that the period of Military service counted towards increments shall also count towards pension subject to the rider that the person concerned should not have earned the pension under Military rules and any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of Military service would also have to be refunded to the State Government.
6.
It is the petitioner's categoric averment that he is fully entitled for counting the service rendered by him from 1181965 upto 1011968 as he was more than 21 years of age at that time and on discharge from the Army, he did not earn any pension or bonus etc.  7.
The respondents have contested the claim on the ground that petitioner's case was rejected on 29.3.1979 itself and hence he is not entitled now to claim the benefit of that service towards increments or pension.
The order of rejection dated 29.3.1979 reads as under :-  "Subject :- Counting of Military Service towards increments of Shri Inderjit Ahlmad to the court of Sub Judge, 1st Class, Moga.
Please refer to your Endst.
No. 5663 dated 24.10.1978 on the above subject.
I am to forward herewith a copy of High Court letter No. 5602- E.II/VII.B.4(19) dated 2131979 wherein it has been intimated that in view of proviso to Rule 4 of the National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 Shri Inderjit, Ahlmad of your court is not entitled to any concessions.
He may be informed accordingly under intimation to this office.
His original discharge certificate is returned herewith which may be delivered to him.
Sd/District & Sessions Judge,  Faridkot."
A perusal of the order of rejection would show that the claim was rejected in view of the proviso to Rule 4 of the Rules.
In this regard, it is submitted that after the reorganisation of the State of Punjab in November, 1966, the State of Haryana was one of successor State which was created.
The 1965 Rules were adopted by the State of Haryana also.
The proviso to Rule 4 of the Rules was added by the State of Haryana in the Rules by an amendment made to the said Rules on 22.3.1976 with retrospective effect from 1111966.
As per the said proviso, a person who had availed concession under Rule 3 of the Rules was not entitled to concession under Rule 4 of the Rules.
8.
We had put it to Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Additional Advocate General as to whether the Punjab Government has also amended the Rules to add any other proviso.
Mr. Aggarwal after seeking instructions informed us that no such amendment has been made in the Rules by the State of Punjab.
Since the petitioner had served in the State of Punjab, his case was obviously erroneously rejected in 1979 on the basis of a proviso which had been incorporated by the State of Haryana and had no applicability to the State of Punjab.
As a matter of fact, it may be mentioned that even the proviso added by the State of Haryana had been declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in the case of Ex Capt.
KC Arora and another v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(2) SLR 97 and the employees in the State of Haryana similarly situated as the petitioner had also been granted the benefit of the service rendered by them during the period of Emergency towards increments and pension.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that action of the respondents in rejecting the case of the petitioner for the grant of benefit of military service towards increments and seniority by order dated 29.3.1979 was against law.
The petitioner was entitled to the benefit of military service towards increments and seniority.
9.
However, the present writ petition has been filed in April, 2004.
By the time, the petition was filed, the petitioner had already retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation w.e.f., 3152002 i.e., two years prior to the filing of the present writ petition.
We cannot lose sight of the fact also that the petitioner's claim was rejected as far back as in March, 1979 and no steps were taken by the petitioner to challenge the said order or to redress his grievance.
The counsel for the respondents submits that at this stage, the claim of the petitioner is grossly belated and the petition is liable to be rejected on the ground of delay and lathes.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner had served the Indian Army during the period of Emergency and had risked his life for his country.
Having defended the country in its hour of need, the petitioner contends that the benefit of his service should not be denied to him on the technical ground of delay.
He further contends that in any case, the claim to pension is a recurring claim and every month the petitioner receives less pension, fresh cause of action arises in his favour.
For the proposition learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in MR Gupta v. Union of India and others, 1996(1) SCT 8.
Therein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under :-  ........
The appellant's grievance that his pay fixation was not in accordance with the rules, was the assertion of a continuing wrong against him which gave rise to a recurring cause of action each time he was paid a salary which was not computed in accordance with the rules.
So long as the appellant is in service, a fresh cause of action arises every month when he is paid his monthly salary on the basis of a wrong computation made contrary to rules.
It is no doubt true that if the appellant's claim is found correct on merits, he would be entitled to be paid accordance to the properly fixed pay scale in the future and the question of limitation would arise for recovery of the arrears for the past period.
In other words, the appellant's claim, if any, for recovery of arrears calculated on the basis of difference in the pay which has become time barred would not be recoverable, but he would be entitled to proper fixation of his pay in accordance with rules and to cessation of a continuing wrong if on merits his claim is justified......"  A similar view has also been taken by a Full Bench of this Court in Saroj Kumari v. State of Punjab, 1998(3) SCT 123 whrein it was observed as under :-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties on this point we are of the view that in case where a person invokes the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for fixation of his pay under relevant rules/instructions or even on the basis of a judgment of a competent Court, the question of delay and laches would not come in as it would be a case of a continuing wrong and every month the person is paid the salary which according to him is not in accordance with the relevant rules and instructions a fresh cause of action would arise every month.
Such a case is not a case of one time action like the case of termination or dismissal from service.
As observed by the apex Court in MR Gupta's case (supra) that the Court while granting relief regarding the payment of arrears may apply law of limitation.
Since a civil suit would be maintainable for realising arrears of three years and two months, the writ court would be justified in restricting the payment of arrears to three years and two months perior to the filing of the writ petition."
On a consideration of the matter, we are of the opinion that in view of the fact that the petitioner had joined the service in 1974 and during the period he remained in service he never agitated the claim for grant of benefit of military service towards increments and pension.
He made a representation for grant of the aforesaid benefit which was rejected in 1979.
He has since retired on 3152002 and is now drawing pension.
This writ petition has been filed in April 2004, about two years after his retirement.
Even though, on merits we have held that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of military service towards increments, seniority and pension but on account of the delay in approaching this Court, we will restrict the relief to the petitioner for counting the said period towards his pension.
10.
In view of the aforementioned, the writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The respondents are directed to grant to the petitioner the benefit of military service while calculating the total service rendered by him for computing his pension.
The pension of the petitioner shall be revised accordingly.
Normally for the view we have taken we would have allowed arrears to the petitioner for a period of 38 months prior to the date of filing of this writ petition.
However, in the present case since we have restricted the relief to the revision of the petitioner's pension and the petitioner actually retired on 3152002 we will also restrict the grant of arrears to the petitioner on account of revised pension from the date of his retirement.
This would be for a period of about 23 months perior to the filing of this writ petition.
We may clarify that the present writ petition was filed on 2142004.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
In the circumstances of this case there shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.