Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - An order of transfer of the petitioner from Head Office at Bankura to its branch office at Narazole in Paschim Medinipur issued by the Manager (Personnel & Establishment) appearing at page 81 of this writ petition, is under challenge in this writ petition on the ground that the impugned order of transfer was issued by the concerned authority with a mala fide intention to stall the trade union activities in the Head Office.
The said order of transfer was also challenged on the ground of discrimination, as several other employees who were there in the Head Office even since prior to the petitioner, has been retained at the Head Office while the petitioner was transferred in violation of the transfer policy which prescribes for first-cum-first go rule.
2.
To show the mala fides on the part of the respondents, Mr. Dutta, learned Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, has drawn the attention of this Court to the chain of events leading to the issuance of the transfer order.
3.
Mr. Dutta submitted that since the petitioner is involved in various trade union activities, the respondents being annoyed with the petitioner, issued show cause notice on 21st, April 2005, whereby the petitioner was called upon to explain his conduct with regard to the serious lapses as mentioned in the said notice within seven days from the date of the said notice.
The petitioner replied to the said show cause notice on 22nd April 2005.
No proceeding has been initiated against the petitioner even after receipt of the said reply which gives an indication that the respondent authority was satisfied with the reply.
4.
Mr. Dutta further pointed out that again on 3rd May, 2005, another show cause notice was issued to the petitioner alleging misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
The petitioner duly replied to the said notice also.
Mr. Dutta further pointed out that again on 4th May, 2005, the Chairman of the respondent Bank by his letter being annexure `P-17' to this writ petition advised the petitioner to restrain from interfering with the administrative matters and advised the petitioner to observe the code of discipline.
5.
By referring to the transfer order being annexure `P-21' to this writ petition at page 81, Mr. Dutta submitted that the said order of transfer which was issued by the concerned authority, immediately thereafter on 8th June, 2005, gives sufficient indication as to the reason for which the said order of transfer was issued.
Mr. Dutta submitted that the only reason for which the said transfer order was issued is to stall the trade union activities in the Bank.
6.
Mr. Dutta further submitted that the transfer of the petitioner from the Head Office to Medinipur by retaining the others who were posted in the Head Office since long before the posting of the petitioner at the Head Office, also indicates that the said order of transfer was issued not only with a mala fide intention but also in violation of the transfer policy which provides for first-cum-first go rule.
7.
By referring to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Public Service Tribunal Bar Association v. State of U.P, reported in AIR 2003 SC 1115, Mr. Dutta submitted that the transfer being an incident of service can be made in administrative exigencies.
Thus, when transfer is made in the administrative exigencies, it cannot be interfered with by the Court.
But there are some exceptions to the general rule.
What are those exceptions?
The exceptions have been indicated in the said decision wherein it is indicated that interference can be made in a case of transfer which was made in a vindictive manner.
8.
By relying upon another decision of this Court in the case of CC Kar reported in 1985 (II) CHN 20, Mr. Dutta submitted that the situation in which an order of transfer can be interfered with, was crystallised in paragraph 8 of the said decision, the relevant part of which is set out hereunder as follows :.
"8 ........................................................  a) for a collateral purpose in the garb of ostensible purpose of public interest or passed with improper motives or actuated with bias;  b) if the transfer was intended or motivated to operate as a punishment;  c) if it was passed in violation of any statutory rules or instructions;  d) entails any penal consequences or reduces in rank or status; and in such a case the Court can go behind the order of transfer for lifting the veil and to see what was the operative reasons for such transfer and that the Government should place full materials before the Court to determine for itself whether order was bona fide or not.
H is true that when order of transfer is passed by way of punishment the Court can certainly declare it to be invalid ..................................... "  By relying upon the said two decisions, Mr. Dutta submitted that the impugned order of transfer was issued actuated with bias and in violation of transfer policy and as such the said order of transfer should be quashed.
9.
Mr. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the respondents refuted the submission of Mr. Dutta by submitting that the petitioner is admittedly in transferable service.
When transfer is a condition of service of the petitioner, the petitioner has no vested right to remain in a particular place of posting for any period of his choice.
Mr. Gupta submitted that the petitioner was posted at the Head Office as a clerk-cum-cashier on 30th March, 1998.
Since then, he is there at the Head Office in the said post.
10.
Mr. Gupta pointed out from various correspondences between the Bank and the petitioner which are part of the record that the petitioner has organised a reign of indiscipline in the Head Office of the said Bank in the name of trade union activities.
The respondent Bank is a Gramin Bank carrying on banking activities.
Mr. Gupta contended that the customers of the Bank are gradually losing confidence in the Bank as they are found to be scared to transact business with the Bank because of the reign of indiscipline in the Head Office.
11.
Mr. Gupta submitted that indulgence in indiscipline in the name trade union cannot be promoted at the cost of liquidation of the business of the Bank.
However, the respondent on repeated occasion not only requested the petitioner to restrain himself from creating any atmosphere of indiscipline in the Bank premises but also advised the petitioner not to interfere with the day-to-day administrative decision of the Bank officials.
All the efforts of the Bank officials were found to be in vain.
But still then, the Bank tolerated the petitioner for all these years since 1998 though the normal tenure of his posting at the Head Office has long expired.
12.
Mr. Gupta further submitted that subsequently when a vacancy was created in Narazole branch of the said Bank, the petitioner was transferred to the said Narazole branch in Paschim Medinipur as per the transfer rules which provide that the employees should be posted nearer to his residence as far as practicable.
Mr. Gupta further submitted that the petitioner is a resident of Paschim Medinipur and as such he was transferred to his home district at a place which is nearer to his residence, so that the petitioner can stay with the members of his family at his village residential house.
13.
Thus, Mr. Gupta submitted that the said transfer was made in the administrative interest of the respondent Bank and also by keeping the transfer policy in mind.
Mr. Gupta repeatedly submitted that the said transfer has nothing to do with his trade union activities of the petitioner.
The said order of transfer has no link with the previous misconduct of the petitioner.
14.
By relying upon a decision of this Court in the case of RCG Club v. TI Tribunal, reported in 64 CWN 186, Mr. Gupta submitted that an employer has the right to re-organise his business in any fashion he likes for the purpose of economy or convenience, and nobody is entitled to tell him how he should conduct his business.
Mr. Gupta further submitted that only limitation is that the employer should do it bona fide and not for the purpose of victimising his employees and/ or to get rid of their services.
However, if the employer acts within these limits, it is not for the Court or the Tribunal to tell him how he should conduct his business.
15.
By relying upon another decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Shilpi Bose v. State of Bihar reported in 1991 Supp.
(2) SCC 659, Mr. Gupta submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the said decision has laid down the principle as to when the order of transfer can be interfered with by this Court.
Reliance was placed by Mr. Gupta on paragraph 4 of the said decision which is set out hereunder:  "4.
In our opinion, the courts should not interfere with a transfer order which is made in public interest and for administrative reasons unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any mandatory statutory rule or on the ground of mala fide.
A government servant holding a transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to the other.
Transfer orders issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal rights.
Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions or orders, the courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party approach the higher authorities in the department.
If the courts continue to interfere with day-to-day transfer orders issued by the government and its subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the administration which would not be conducive to public interest.
The High Court overlooked these aspects in interfering with the transfer orders."
To strengthen his submission, Mr. Gupta also relied upon another decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Nova Steel (India) Ltd. v. MCD reported in AIR 1995 SC 1056, in paragraph 4 whereof the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:  "4.
It is contended for the respondent that the respondent had already worked at Jagdalpur from 1982 to 1989 and when he was transferred to Bhopal, there was no justification to retransfer him again to Jagdalpur.
We cannot appreciate these grounds.
The Courts or Tribunals are not appellate forums to decide on transfers of officers on administrative grounds.
The wheels of administration should be allowed to run smoothly and the Courts or Tribunals are not expected to interdict the working of the administrative system by transferring the officers to proper places.
It is for the administration to take appropriate decision and such decisions shall stand unless they are vitiated either by mala fides or by extraneous consideration without any factual background foundation.
In this case we have seen that on the administrative grounds the transfer orders came to be issued.
Therefore, we cannot go into the expediency of posting an officer at a particular place."
Thus, Mr. Gupta submitted that since the transfer order was made in the administrative interest of the Bank and also by following the transfer policy of the Bank, it cannot be said that such order of transfer was issued with malafide intention and in a discriminatory manner.
16.
Pursuant to the order passed by this Court on the last occasion, the administrative order of the Chairman pursuant to which the order of transfer of the petitioner was issued has been produced before this Court by Mr. Gupta at the time of hearing of this writ petition which speaks as follows :-  "NOTE  Date: 03.06.2005  Re: Deployment of Manpower at our Narazole Branch.
This may kindly be noted that as per manpower requirement according to business, one more clerk is required at our Narazole Branch.
The Branch is suffering since long due to shortage of one clerk.
Therefore one clerk is to be posted at that Branch on urgent basis.
Sri Biplab Kr Das, Clerk-cum-Cashier is posted at Head Office since 30/03/98.
His recorded permanent address is Bidhannagar (East), PO Midnapore which is approx.
105 km.
away from his present posting and his wife is reportedly serving there as a school teacher.
It will be convenient for him if he is posted nearer to his home town to look after his family.
Moreover it is observed that Sri Das is not working properly at HG and he is not getting salary for many days for not rendering proper service at Head Office.
In view of the above, the undersigned, without prejudice, recommend that Sri Biplab Kr Das may be transferred to our Narazole Branch which is 38 Kms.
Only from his residence.
Placed before the Chairman for kind perusal and approval.
Manager (Personnel & Establishment).
To  The Chairman,  Mallabhum Gramin Bank.
Head Office, Bankura."
A copy of the said administrative order has also been given to Mr. Dutta in course of hearing of this writ petition.
17.
Thus, Mr. Gupta ultimately submitted that no interference is necessary in the facts of the instant case.
18.
Heard the learned Advocates of the parties.
Considered the materials on record.
19.
It appears that the petitioner was posted as clerk-cum- cashier in the Head Office at Bankura on 30th March, 1998.
The petitioner is there in the Head Office since then.
Admittedly the normal tenure of posting of the petitioner at the Head Office has long expired.
In this background, when the petitioner was transferred to a place nearer to his residence in the native village where the other members of the family of the petitioner reside, this Court cannot smell any scent of malice and/or vindictiveness on the part of the respondent authorities in issuance of the said order of transfer.
The said order of transfer which was issued in consonance of the transfer policy cannot be held to be invalid and unlawful.
20.
Mr. Dutta, however, submitted that at least that part of the transfer policy which provides for first-cum-first go policy has not been followed in the instant case.
Even the said argument does not appear to this Court as satisfactory as the said policy provides that the said principle will be followed as far as possible.
Thus, strict compliance of the said rule has not been made mandatory.
Any deviation in this regard cannot be a matter for interference with the order of transfer, particularly when the order of transfer was issued in administrative reason.
21.
Mr. Dutta submitted that since the petitioner is involved in trade union activities, the petitioner was transferred from Head Office.
According to Mr. Dutta, such a transfer is nothing but a penal transfer.
22.
This Court, however, finds no substance in such submission of Mr. Dutta, as admittedly no disciplinary proceeding has yet been initiated against the petitioner in spite of his involvement in trade union activities for such a long time.
23.
Thus, this Court does not find any justification for interfering with the order of transfer which is impugned in this writ petition as the said transfer was made for administrative reason and in consonance with the transfer policy.
24.
Accordingly, the writ petition deserves no merit for consideration.
The writ petition thus stands rejected.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Later  After passing of the judgment, Mr. Bhattacharya, learned Advocate for the petitioner, prays for stay of operation of this judgment and/or order.
Considered the submission of Mr. Bhattacharya.
This writ petition was filed challenging the legality and validity of the order of transfer of the petitioner.
Thus, if this order is stayed, the petitioner will not be benefited in any way because the order of transfer of the petitioner will still remain valid which the petitioner is obliged to respect, even in spite of grant of stay as prayed for.
Accordingly, the prayer for stay cannot be allowed.
Simultaneously, after the dismissal of the writ petition, this Court cannot pass any interim order restraining the authorities from giving effect to the order of transfer.
Accordingly, such prayer for interim injunction cannot be allowed.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this judgment and/or order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocate for the petitioner within three days from date.
Petition dismissed.