Arvind Kumar, J - By this judgment, we propose to dispose of CWP Nos. 16096, 16107 and 16186 of 2005, involving common questions of law and facts.
These petitions have been preferred by the petitioner-department questioning the legality of the award dated 2752005 passed by the Labour Court.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of the instant petitions are that on 1241991 the respondents-workmen namely Man Singh, Sewa Ram and Mani Ram raised an industrial dispute challenging the action of the department in terminating their services by serving demand notices separately.
Workmen Sewa Ram and Man Singh alleged that their services were terminated illegally by the department on 8.7.2006 whereas in the case of workman Mani Ram, the date of termination was March 1986.
It was their allegation that prior to terminating their services, provisions of Sections 25-F and 25-G were violated by the department.
No retrenchment compensation or any notice was given while terminating their services irrespective of the fact that they had to their credit service for a period of more than 240 days.
The department had also recruited fresh hands after their termination.
Their claim was contested by the department on the ground of delay and laches.
It was further alleged that the workmen worked with them as casual labourers on daily wages during the year 1984-85 at Yamunanagar.
Thereafter due to non-availability of work, they were asked to work under D.E.T.
(Installation), Panipat.
But instead of joining there, the workmen themselves abandoned the job.
On failure of reconciliation proceedings, the appropriate Government referred the disputes to the Labour Court for adjudication.
3.
It is apposite to mention here the industrial disputes of the workmen Man Singh, Mani Ram and Sewa Ram were registered by the Labour Court as ID 81, ID 82 and ID 83 of 1993 respectively.
The Labour Court vide the common award dated 2752005, impugned before us, disposed of all the three above-referred disputes by ordering reinstatement of the workmen on the same post which they were holding at the time of their termination on daily wage basis with other service benefits including continuity of service, but without any back wages.
4.
Dissatisfied with the same, the petitioner-Department has filed the instant petitions.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the paper book carefully.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner-department has questioned the completion of 240 days of workmen preceding 12 months from the date of their termination, however, has miserably failed to convince us to substantiate the same.
No doubt, it is now well settled that burden of proof is on the workman to show that he had in fact worked for more than 240 days in the year preceding his termination.
This burden is discharged upon the workman adducing cogent and sufficient evidence.
However, in the cases, termination of the services of daily-waged earners, there will be no appointment or termination order.
Thus, in most cases workman can only call upon the employer to produce before the Court the nominal muster roll for the given period, the wager register, the attendance register etc., if any.
Drawing of adverse inference ultimately would depend thereafter on the facts of each case.
However, in the instant case, in response to some provisions in the rules for destruction of record of more than 5 years old, the petitioner-department claims to have destroyed the relevant record being more than 5 years old.
This handicapped the respondent-workmen to prove the record which was required to be maintained by the petitioner-department.
In this backdrop the Labour Court has rightly concluded that, for want of any orders for the destruction of the record and certificate to the effect that the record relating to more than 5 years old has been destroyed, the inference can be drawn that the record was not produced by the department deliberately.
7.
Moreover, there is only a bald plea taken by the petitioner-department that the workmen themselves had abandoned the job.
The petitioner-department is heavily burdened to prove the said plea by leading cogent and convincing evidence.
But nothing has been produced either before this Court or before the Labour Court to substantiate the said plea.
8.
Further, in the instant cases, impugned award shows that during the course of the evidence, the petitioner-department had examined MW-2 Subhash Chander, who admitted the document Ex. W-2 i.e. the attendance card bearing the stamp of the department, though was unable to identify the signatures bearing thereupon.
The Labour Court upon calculation, found respondent-workmen to have completed 240 days.
There is another feature which has impressed the Labour Court to conclude that the respondent-workmen had completed more than 240 days.
Annexure P-3 (in all the petitions) is the report of the Assistant Labour Commissioner made during conciliation proceedings, between the parties.
The report shows that Assistant Labour Commissioner, in his report, on the basis of record, had opined that the workmen had worked for 240 days in the year preceding their termination.
The petitioner-department, at no juncture, has disputed the said findings of fact by the Assistant Labour Commissioner.
Thus, on the basis of the said evidence coupled with the report of Assistant Labour Commissioner, the Labour Court has rightly drawn conclusion that the workmen had completed 240 days within one year preceding the date of their termination.
The petitioner-department, in the written statement, has also not been able to show that for how many days, the respondent-workmen had put in service, if not 240 days.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-department has not referred to or led any evidence to deviate us from the said observations made by the Labour Court.
Whether a person had worked for more than 240 days or not is a disputed question of fact, which can be examined by the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal, as the case may be, under the Act, on the basis of the evidence and then conclusion can be arrived at.
The High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution will not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the Labour Court unless they are perverse.
However, as discussed above findings of the Labour Court are neither perverse or based on no evidence.
9.
No doubt the respondent-workmen raised the industrial dispute after about 5 years of their termination.
The conduct of the workmen in raising the demand notice after a period of five years, can be considered to be a relevant factor in refusing to grant any relief to them.
However, in the instant case, there was a clear-cut averment of the respondent-workmen in the demand notices Annexure P-1 (in all the petitions) that they had been approaching the SDO many times, requesting him to take them on duty but of no use and ultimately they were told that their services are no more required by the department.
Ordinarily, mere assertions may not suffice, but the petitioner-department in reply to the demand notice had not controverted the said stand of the respondent-workmen.
They have also not raised any such grouse of delay before the conciliation officer.
Not only this, the petitioner-department had not challenged the reference on the question of limitation.
Therefore, it can be concluded that the workmen had been pursuing their grievance in between.
When dispute had been kept alive by them, it does not cause the dispute to wane into total eclipse.
Therefore, in this particular case, when the averment of the workmen had not been controverted by the petitioner-department, it cannot be concluded that dispute ceased to exist after some time.
In view of what has been stated above, we are of the opinion that the Labour Court has rightly answered the reference.
We do not find any infirmity with the award passed by the Labour Court, which is just and reasoned.
Accordingly, the petitions being without any merit are dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.