AK Shrivastava, J - By this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner is challenging the validity of impugned orders Annexure P-5, dated 1-3-2000 passed by respondent No. 5, Annnexure P-7, dated 25-10-2001 passed by respondent No. 4 in departmental appeal and Annexure P-9, dated 7-3-2003 passed by respondent No. 3 dismissing the revision petition of the petitioner.
2.
No exhaustive statement of facts is necessary for the disposal of this petition.
Suffice it to state that at the relevant point of time the petitioner was serving on the post of Constable/Bugler.
He remained absent w.e.f.
3-8-1999 to 2-9-1999 and his past record was also found to be bad as he remained unauthorizedly absent for 274 days on two earlier occasions.
Therefore, he was subjected to a departmental inquiry and two charges were framed against him which read thus :  ARTICLE-I That, the said No. 920990014 Ct/Bug.
N Hanumantha of HQ/107 Bn.
RAF/CRPF while functioning as Ct/Bug.
committed disobedience of orders/neglect of duty/remissness in discharge of his duty in his capacity as a member of Force in that he deserted from HQ/107 Coy lines on 3-8-99 without sanction of leave or prior permission from competent authority.
Thus he acted in a manner unbecoming of a Government Servant which is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the Force and punishable under Section 11(1) of CRPF Act, 1949.
ARTICLE-II That, the said No. 920990014 Ct/Bug.
Hanumantha of HQ/107 Bn.
while functioning in the aforesaid capacity during the aforesaid period, repeated his acts of misconduct in his capacity as a member of Force by deserting from lines on 3-8-99 of which he had become habitual.
Thus he acted in a manner unbecoming of a Government Servant which is prejudicial to good order and discipline of Force and punishable under Section 11(1) of CRPF Act, 1949."
The imputation in regard to the charges is also the part of Annexure P-1, which is entire charge-sheet.
3.
Needless to emphasise, the petitioner refuted the charges as a result of which the departmental witnesses were examined.
According to the petitioner, opportunity to lead evidence and to cross-examine the departmental witnesses was not provided to him.
However, learned Assistant Solicitor General, appearing for the respondents submits that the department gave opportunity to cross-examine departmental witnesses as well as allowed opportunity to petitioner to examine himself.
On completion of the departmental enquiry since both the charges were found to be proved against the petitioner, the disciplinary authority passed the impugned order Annexure P-5 of removal of the petitioner from the service which was ultimately affirmed in appeal and revision.
Hence this petition has been filed.
4.
Shri Ghildiyal, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised two submissions.
First submission of his is that the charge No. 1 is in respect to desertion and it cannot be framed in view of Section 10(m) of the Central Reserve Police Act, 1949 (for brevity, 'the Act').
By inviting my attention to Rule 31 of the Central Reserve Police Rules, 1955 (in short 'the Rules'), it has been put forth by the learned counsel that the term "desertion" as emphasized in Section 9(f) would mean only that an employee if he does not return of his own free will or is not apprehended within sixty days of the commencement of the desertion, absence or overstay of leave.
By inviting my attention to Clause (c) of Rule 31, it has been contended that if the employee remains absent more than sixty days, then the Commandant shall publish in the Force Order the findings of the Court of Enquiry and the absentee shall be declared a deserter from the Force from the date of his illegal absence.
The contention of learned counsel is that if the imputation regarding charges against Article-I is read in proper perspective, it is gathered that the petitioner appeared in the Unit on 3-9-1999 which would mean that he remained absent w.e.f.
3-8-1999 to 2-9-1999 and if that would be the position as per Rule 31(a) and (c), the petitioner cannot be said to be deserter.
By inviting my attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in Capt.
Virendra Kumar v. The Chief of the Army Staff, New Delhi, 1986(1) Services Law Reporter 422 : (AIR 1986 SC 1060), it has been contended that provisions of Sections 38 and 39 of Army Act are akin to that of Sections 9 and 10 of the present Act.
In this decision the Supreme Court has clarified the word "desertion" and has explained that it would mean that the employee who had not come to join his service.
According to the learned counsel since the petitioner himself appeared in the Unit on 3-9-99, therefore, he cannot be said to be a deserter.
5.
So far as second charge is concerned, the contention of learned counsel is that the past conduct and misconduct of the petitioner may be taken into account in regard to inflict the punishment, but, it cannot be made the foundation stone in regard to framing of a charge.
In support of his contention, learned counsel has placed reliance on the decision of Single Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court, Satpal Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(2) SCT 231 (P&H) : 1999(2) SLR 320.
On these premised submissions, it has been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that both the charges are bad in law and if that is the position, punishment order passed by the disciplinary authority and affirmed by the appellate and revisional authorities cannot be allowed to remain stand.
6.
Lastly, it has been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that even if the entire case of the department is accepted in toto, the punishment of removal from service is shockingly disproportionate and in that regard he has placed reliance on a latest pronouncement of the Supreme Court Bhagwan Lal Arya v. Commissioner of Police, Delhi, 2004(2) SCT 253 (SC) : 2004 SCSR 632 : (2004 Lab IC 1748).
7.
Per contra, Shri Dharmendra Sharma, learned Assistant Solicitor General by inviting my attention to the averments made in paras 51 to 55 of the return has submitted that the disciplinary authority as well as the appellate and revisional authorities found the charges to be proved, as a result of which the petitioner was rightly punished by removing him from service.
The said order was inflicted on account of incorrigible attitude of the petitioner.
It has also been put-forth by the learned Assistant Solicitor General that lenient view has been adopted by the authorities and, therefore, this petition is sans substance and deserves to be dismissed.
8.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to be allowed.
9.
So far as first charge is concerned, it is in regard to desertion.
How the term "desertion" would constitute under the Act, the provisions of Section 9(f) is required to be read.
This section, pertains to more heinous offences and in Clause (f) desertion is there which reads as -  "(f) deserts the Force."
At this juncture it would be apposite to read Section 10 which pertains to "Less heinous offences" and Clause (m) speaks about an employee absent himself without leave, or without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him.
It would be profitable to read Rule 31(a) at this juncture only.
This rule deals about "Desertion and Absence without leave" which reads thus : "31.
Desertion and Absence without leave.
- (a) If a member of the force who becomes liable for trial under Clause (f) of Section 9, or Clause (m) of Section 10 or for deserting the Force while not on active duty under Clause (p) of Section 10 read with Clause (f) of Section 9, does not return of his own free will or is not apprehended within sixty days of the commencement of the desertion, absence or overstayal of leave, then the Commandant shall assemble a Court of Inquiry consisting of at least one Gazetted Officer and two other members who shall be either superior or subordinate officers to inquire into the desertion, absence or overstayal of leave of the offender and such other matters as may be brought before them."
Thus it is clear that for the purpose of Clause (f) of Section 9 if a member of the Force who becomes liable for trial under this clause of Section 9, or Clause (m) of Section 10 or for deserting the Force while not on active duty under Clause (p) of Section 10 read with Clause (f) Section 9, does not return of his own free will or is not apprehended within sixty days of the commencement of the desertion, absence or overstayal of leave, then the Commandant shall assemble a Court of Inquiry against him.
Clause (c) of Rule 31 reads thus :  "(c) The Commandant shall then publish in the Force Order the findings of the Court of Enquiry and the absentee shall be declared deserter from the Force from the date of his illegal absence, but he shall not thereby cease to belong to the Force.
This shall, however, be no bar to enlisting another man in the place of a deserter."
On bare perusal of the imputation of misconduct, it is gathered that the petitioner remained absent w.e.f.
3-8-1999 to 2-9-1999.
As per case of department the petitioner appeared on 3-9-1999 and if that would be the position, the view of this Court is that the petitioner cannot be said to be a deserter as envisaged in Section 9(f) of the Act.
Thus the charge against the petitioner is bad in law on bare perusal of Sections 9(f), 10(m) and Rule 31 (1)(c).
In this context I may profitably rely on the decision Capt.
Virendra Kumar (AIR 1986 SC 1060) (supra) wherein the similar provisions of Army Act were there and the Supreme Court has clarified that who will be said to be a deserter.
10.
So far as Charge No. II is concerned there is sufficient force in the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that past misconduct can be taken into consideration in order to inflict punishment.
But, that itself cannot be made subject-matter of a charge.
In the case of Satpal Singh (supra) it has been held that once the employee has been awarded punishment for his absence for the earlier period, the same cannot be made the subject-matter of the enquiry and he cannot be dismissed from service taking into consideration the earlier absence.
I too do agree with the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner as well as decision of Satpal Singh (supra) and for this reason also the second charge is bad in law.
Since both the charges are found to be bad in law, the punishment inflicted on the said charges cannot be allowed to remain stand.
11.
For the reasons stated hereinabove, this petition succeeds and is hereby allowed.
The impugned orders Annexure P-5, dated 1-3-1990 passed by respondent No. 5, Annexure P-7, dated 25-10-2001 passed by respondent No. 4 in departmental appeal and Annexure P-9, dated 7-3-2003, passed by respondent No. 3 dismissing the revision petition of the petitioner are hereby set aside.
The respondents are directed to take petitioner back in service.
However, looking to the facts the petitioner will not be entitled for any back wages.
Looking to the facts and circumstances, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.