HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This appeal arises out of the following facts :-  2.
The respondents-workmen were employed as Clerks/Peons with the appellant Bank when their services were terminated in August, 1979.
This action was challenged by the workmen in the labour Court, which, in its award dated 6111985, pertaining to 17 workmen, set-aside the termination of the services of the workmen and ordered that they be reinstated in service with continuity thereof and full back wages for the period of their unemployment.
The bank thereafter challenged the award of the Labour Court by way of a Civil Writ Petition before this Court.
The learned Single Judge in his judgment dated 12.10.1990 rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 1196 of 1986, maintained the award of the Labour Court, reiterating that the action of the appellant in terminating the services of the workmen was an unfair labour practice and as such, could not be justified.
The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant that the plea of unfair labour practice had never been raised by the respondents was rejected by observing that this plea had been specifically raised in the replication filed by the workmen before the Labour Court.
The present Letters Patent Appeal was thereafter filed by the employer Bank.
This matter came up before a Division Bench on 1511998 and the Bench maintained the judgment of the learned Single Judge with regard to the wrongful termination of the services of the respondents but on the question of back wages observed as under :-  "Resultantly, the appeals are allowed to the extent that the finding that the Bank was guilty of unfair labour practice is reversed.
However, we do not interfere with the order of reinstatement with continuity of service.
It is, however, clarified that the workmen shall not be entitled to any payment beyond the amounts already received by them.
No costs".
3.
Aggrieved by this direction of the Division Bench, the workmen filed a Special Leave Petition in the Hon'ble Supreme Court, which was allowed on 21.2.2005 with the direction that the High Court should re-hear the matter and dispose it of afresh in accordance with law.
It is in this situation that this appeal has come up before us yet again.
4.
It has been pointed out by Mr. JC Verma, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the respondent-workmen, that in similar matters pertaining to the Kapurthala Central Cooperative Bank Limited and the Ferozepore Central Cooperative Bank Ltd, full back wages had been granted to the workmen and there was absolutely no reason as to why the same relief should not be granted to the present workmen, the moreso the decision in those matters has become final.
We accordingly, on this statement, requested the learned counsel for the appellant to get instructions as to whether a similar compromise could be arrived at in these proceedings.
The learned counsel has informed us today that the appellant Bank was not willing to compromise the matter and seek a decision from this Court.
5.
We have accordingly heard the learned counsel for the parties on merits.
As a matter of fact, it is not open now at this stage to the appellant to argue that this matter is still open for discussion in the light of the fact that they had accepted the judgment of the LPA Bench dated 11.1.1993 and it was the workmen, who had gone to the Supreme Court against the findings of the Court, whereby full wages had been denied to them.
Nevertheless, we have still heard both the parties and we endorse the finding that the services of the workmen had been wrongly terminated.
We find that the matter is concluded in favour of the workmen as pointed out by Mr. Verma, in view of The Kapurthala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Kapurthala v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Jullundur and others, 1984(1) SLR 435 and The Ferozepore Central Co- operative Bank Ltd, Ferozepore v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1985(2) SLR 437.
It is also conceded before us that a Special Leave Petition filed in Kapurthala Central Cooperative Bank Ltd's case (supra), was also dismissed vide order dated 1531984.
In this view of the matter, without going into the larger principle as to whether the workmen are entitled to full wages, we find that the workmen herein must get full benefits with respect to their wages as no justifiable reasons can be spelt out as to why they be adversely singled out vis-a-vis the Kapurthala and Ferozepore Banks.
In this view of the matter, we dismiss the appeal.
We also direct the appellant to comply with the directions issued by this Court within a reasonable time.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.