JS Khehar, J (Oral) - A set of twelve writ petitions bearing Nos. 12920, 15071, 15528, 15538, 15808, 19709, 19725, 19956, 19957 of 2003 and CWP No. 630, 648 and 720 of 2004 have been filed, raising a common question of law.
In each one of the aforesaid writ petitions the impugned order is an order passed by the appropriate Government on failure of conciliation proceedings.
Through the impugned order the appropriate Government has declined to refer the dispute raised by the petitioners for adjudication before an appropriate Labour Court.
2.
While disposing of the claim of the petitioners, three kinds of orders were passed.
First set allegedly comprises of those employees who were permanent i.e. the petitioners in CWP Nos. 12920, 15071, 15528, 15808 and 15838 of 2003.
The order passed in respect of such employees is extracted hereunder:-  "In reference to the above subject, you are informed that the Government does not consider your case fit for reference to the Labour Court for judicial decision because from the investigations it has revealed that there was strike in the industry from 4102001 and the Government banned this strike and the dispute of the workmen was referred to the Labour Court.
The management issued general information in Dainik Bhasker on 22112001 to join your duties and when you did not join your duties a registered letter was issued on your permanent address to you informing you to join your duties within three days.
But even then you did not join your duty.
It shows that you are not interested in joining your duties and you have yourself lost your services.
Therefore, yours is not the case of termination rather it is the case of self abandonment.
In the above circumstances your demand letter is rejected".
The second set allegedly comprised of seasonal employees.
A slightly different order was passed in respect of these employees.
These employees have filed CWP Nos. 19709, 19725, 19956 and 19957 of 2003 and 648 and 720 of 2004.
The order passed in respect of the alleged seasonal employees is as under :-  "In reference to the above subject, you are informed that the Government does not consider your case fit for reference to the Labour Court for judicial decision because from the investigations it has revealed that there was strike in the industry from 4102001 and the Government banned this strike.
Thereafter, the management got published in Dainik Bhaskar on 22112001 for joining of employees on strike and other employees.
But your did not join despite the opportunity of joining given to you.
You were appointed by the Management on seasonal basis.
You yourself did not join you duties in the sympathy of strike employees.
Therefore, yours is not the case of termination rather it is the case of self abandonment.
In the above circumstances your demand letter is rejected".
A separate and distinct order was passed in respect of those employees who were alleged to be employees of a contractor.
The order, passed for such employees, are petitioners in CWP No. 630 of 2004.
The same is extracted hereunder :-  "You are hereby informed that your case has not been considered fit to refer for adjudication to Labour Court because after due enquiry it has been established that you were not working with the management but working with their Contractor Randhawa Associate Security Services.
Therefore, there is no relation of master servant directly exist with the management.
Under these circumstances this demand notice is rejected due to non-maintainability against the management".
A perusal of the aforesaid orders reveal that there was a strike by the employees of respondent No. 3 on 4102001.
The management raised an industrial dispute in respect of the aforesaid strike by the workmen.
The dispute arising out of the strike of the workmen was referred to an appropriate Labour Court for adjudication (as is apparent from the impugned order itself).
3.
Despite the pendency of the aforesaid reference before the Labour Court, the respondent-management (respondent No. 3) Issued a public notice requiring the petitioners to resume their duties.
It is the claim of the petitioners that despite their efforts to resume their duties, they were not allowed to join their employment.
On the aforesaid basis, it was alleged by the petitioners that their services had been terminated.
As against the aforesaid claim, the assertion of the respondent-management (respondent No. 3) was that the petitioners had not resumed their duties despite the issuance of a public notice and despite intimation through registered post, and thus, all such employees (petitioners in the first set) must be deemed to have abandoned their duties.
4.
The situation noticed hereinabove qua permanent employees is substantially similar to the one relating to those described as seasonal employees, by the respondent-management (respondent No. 3), inasmuch as, almost an identical order was passed by the appropriate Government while declining their claim for reference to an appropriate Labour Court.
5.
Insofar as the third set comprising of persons allegedly employed on contract is concerned, the appropriate Government recorded a finding of fact, namely, that the petitioners were deputed to discharge duties with the respondent-management (respondent No3) by an independent contractor i.e. Randhawa Associate Security Services.
6.
The primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners in all the aforesaid writ petitions is that the issue of adjudication of disputes between the parties, must be left for finalisation to an appropriate Labour Court, as it is not the function of the appropriate Government to record findings on disputed facts.
In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance on a decision rendered by the Apex Court in The M.P. Irrigation Karmachari Sangh v. State of Madhya Pradesh and another, AIR 1985 SC 860, wherein the Apex Court observed as under :-  "While conceding a very limited jurisdiction to the State Government to examine patent frivolousness of the demands, it is to be understood as a rule, that adjudication of demands made by workman should be left to the Tribunal to decide.
Section 10 permits appropriate Government to determine whether dispute "exists or is apprehended" and then refer it for adjudication on merits.
The demarcated functions are (1) reference (2) adjudication.
When a reference is rejected on the specious plea that the Government cannot bear the additional burden, it constitutes adjudication and thereby usurpation of the powers of a quasi-judicial Tribunal by an administrative authority namely the Appropriate Government.
There may be exceptional cases in which the State Government, on a proper examination of the demand, come to a conclusion that the demands are either perverse or frivolous and do not merit a reference.
Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline reference and Courts will always be vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of valid disputes.
To allow the Government to do so would be to render Section 10 and Section 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act nugatory".
While recording the aforesaid observation, the Apex Court had relied upon its earlier decision rendered in Bombay Union of Journalists v. State of Bombay, AIR 1964 SC 1617.
7.
Additionally, learned counsel for the petitioners had invited our attention to the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh and another v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1565, wherein the Apex Court observed as under :-  "It is true that in considering the question of making a reference under Section 10(1), the Government is entitled to form an opinion as to whether an industrial dispute "exists or is apprehended", as urged by Mr. Shanti Bhusan.
The formation of opinion as to whether an industrial dispute "exists or is apprehended" is not the same thing as to adjudicate the dispute itself on its merits.
In the instant case, as already stated, the dispute is as to whether the convoy drivers are employees or workmen of TELCO, that is to say, whether there is relationship of employer and employees between TELCO and the convoy drivers".
"It is now well settled that, while exercising power under Section 10(1) of the Act, the function of the appropriate Government is an administrative function and not a judicial or quasi judicial function, and that in performing this administrative function the Government cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of the power conferred on it by Section 10 of the Act.
See Ram Avtar v. State of Haryana, (1985)2 SCR 1019 : (AIR 1985 SC 860); Shambu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, Jullundur, (1978)2 SCR 793 : (AIR 1978 SC 1088)".
"Applying the principle laid down by this Court in the above decision, there can be no doubt that the Government was not justified in deciding the dispute, where, as in the instant case, the dispute is whether the persons raising the dispute are workmen or not, the same cannot be decided by the Government in exercise of its administrative function under Section 10(1) of the Act.
As has been held in MP Irrigation Karamchari Singh's case (supra), there may be exceptional cases in which the State Government may, on a proper examination of the demand, come to a conclusion that the demands are either perverse or frivolous and do not merit a reference".
Relying on the aforesaid judgment, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that reference can be declined only in case where the demand raised by the workmen is perverse or frivolous, and since the demand raised by the petitioners in the instant case has neither been described as perverse nor frivolous, it was not within the purview of the appropriate Government to determine disputed issues between the parties.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has also placed reliance on a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Radhey Shyam and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(2) SCT 1 : 1998(2) PLR 1, wherein this Court laid down the following parameters delineating the situations wherein the appropriate Government could decline to make a reference :-  "Held, on the analysis of the entire matter : (1) The appropriate Government can go into the merits of the dispute prima facie for the purpose of finding out whether an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended and whether the Government should make a reference or not.
(2) But in doing so, the appropriate Government cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of the lis.
(3) If the claim is patently frivolous and vexatious then the appropriate Government may refuse to make the reference.
(4) In deciding whether to make a reference or not, the Government may take into consideration whether the impact of the claim on the general relations between the employer and the employees in the region is likely to be adverse disturbing industrial harmony understood in its larger sense.
(5) While the appropriate Government can examine the patent frivolousness of the demands, it shall not itself adjudicate on the demands made by the workman, which should be left to the Labour Court/Tribunal concerned.
The Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline the reference".
8.
In order to controvert the contentions noticed hereinabove (based on the judgments of the Apex Court as well as a Full Bench of this Court), learned counsel for respondent No. 3 has placed reliance on a later judgment of the Supreme Court in The Secretary, Indian Tea Association v. Ajit Kumar Barat and others, 2000(2) SCT 14 : 2000(2) RSJ 3.
In the aforesaid judgment, the Apex Court had considered an order passed by the appropriate Government declining to refer a dispute raised by a workman by arriving at the conclusion that the alleged workman did not satisfy one of the basic ingredients to raise an industrial dispute, namely, that the respondent was not a "workman" within the meaning assigned to the said terms under Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for respondent No. 3 that by taking into consideration relevant facts, the appropriate Government is fully justified in making a reference when an industrial dispute is not made out.
9.
There is some justification in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondent.
Be that as it may, we are satisfied that the judgment rendered by the Apex Court cannot be applied to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The appropriate Government, while declining to make a reference in the case relied upon by the counsel for respondent No. 3, passed the following order :-  "I am directed to say that in terms of the Hon'ble High Court, order dated 24.11.1997 in Writ Petition No. 22878(w) of 1997 in the case of Shri Ajit Kumar Barat v. State of West Bengal Government has examined the matter in details.
After examination, it reveals that you were first appointed as Assistant Secretary in the Indian Tea Association and subsequently promoted to the post of Joint Secretary.
Besides the basic pay you are given, child allowance, house rent subsidy, Furnishing allowance, House maintenance charges, Entertainment expenses, Reimbursement of servant's wages, monthly subscription, Leave Travel Allowance and Re-imbursement of Hospitality Expenses.
Your duties also included power of sanction of expenses on behalf of Indian Tea Association.
So your pay and perquisites and the status enjoyed by you in the Organisation and also the power of sanction of expenses suggest that your were a part of the management.
Hence you cannot be treated as a workman within the purview of the Industrial Disputes Act".
In paragraph 11 while dealing with the claim raised by the parties, the Apex Court arrived at the conclusion, that the facts taken into consideration by the appropriate Government were not disputed by the concerned workman, and therefore, it was not possible to record a finding contrary to the determination rendered by the appropriate Government that concerned employee was not a "workman" within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
10.
A distinction, therefore, that has to be made while adjudicating upon the validity of an order passed by the appropriate Government, declining to refer a dispute raised by an employee for adjudication to an appropriate Labour Court; i.e. whether there was sufficient material with the appropriate Government to record a finding, that an industrial dispute was not made out.
In all the cases which had been clubbed together for disposal through the instant order, it is apparent that conclusion have been recorded by the appropriate Government by asserting : that the workmen had either abandoned their duties, or were seasonal workmen, or had been engaged by a contractor and not respondent No. 3.
The aforesaid conclusions were not based on any factual matrix, nor can they be considered to be based on admitted or undisputed facts.
Thus viewed, the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in The Secretary, Indian Tea Association case (supra), is clearly inapplicable to the controversy raised in the instant writ petitions.
11.
We are satisfied that the appropriate Government took upon itself the onerous task of adjudicating disputed facts between the parties.
This is clearly not the function of the appropriate Government under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as the same would amount to the adjudication of the lis between the parties, despite the fact that the said lis is based on disputed facts; and even though the claim of the petitioners cannot ex-facie be described as perverse or frivolous.
Having transgressed the limits which are subject to determination at the hands of the appropriate Government, it is inevitable to record that the impugned orders in the instant cases traversed beyond the jurisdiction vested in the appropriate Government under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The same are liable to be set aside, and are accordingly set aside.
The conclusions recorded by appropriate Government in the impugned orders need to be adjudicated upon by an appropriate Labour Court.
We accordingly direct respondent No. 1 to make a reference of the dispute raised by the petitioners to an appropriate Labour Court within two months from today.
Allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petition allowed.