S Ravindra Bhat, J - These proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India involve common questions of fact and law, therefore, they were heard together.
The petitioners question orders issued by the common respondent (hereinafter called "the DTC"), which is their employer, cancelling their appointment as Assistant Store Keeper.
2.
The petitioners were working as conductors with the DTC.
The latter called for applications from amongst monthly rated conductors, on 28.2.2005, to fill up the post of Assistant Store Keeper.
The last date prescribed for receipt of applications was 11.3.2005; all the petitioners applied for the post.
The DTC received about 600 applications.
It carried out the process of short-listing candidates and inviting those found eligible.
By adopting this procedure, the DTC sent interview letters to about 259 employees, including the petitioners.
The process of holding interviews was undertaken on the 30th and 31st May, 2005.
The petitioners too, were interviewed.
The successful candidates were intimated about their selection and asked to report for duties, in the first week of June, 2005.
The petitioners were also similarly asked to report for duties, which they did.
3.
The DTC issued a memorandum containing the list of all 61 persons appointed as Assistant Store Keepers, on 16th of June, 2005.
The letter indicated that the candidates, who were working as conductors, had been found suitable for the post of Assistant Store Keeper and were being appointed in that capacity, with immediate effect, in the pay scale of Rs. 3200-85-4900.
The appointment order also contains the following stipulation : -  "They will be on probation for a period of one year.
They can be reverted to their substantive post at any time without notice and without assigning any reason therefor."
4.
The petitioners are aggrieved by identically phrased orders, issued on various dates during the third week of September, 2005, withdrawing/cancelling the orders of appointment issued to them, to the post of Assistant Store Keeper.
It is alleged that these cancellation/withdrawal orders are illegal and arbitrary, since they are not based on any reason and also because they were not preceded by any notice and opportunity of hearing to the petitioners, which is an essential and integral part of the fair procedure.
It is alleged that the impugned orders of cancellation/withdrawal are punitive in character.
They can be sustained only if DTC had followed the proper procedure of putting the allegations levelled against the petitioners, to them, hearing their version and considering the cases individually.
No such procedure was adopted.
The orders are therefore void.
5.
The DTC has filed its return in WP 19076-80/2005; the statement was made during the course of hearing that this affidavit would be relied upon, in the other proceedings also.
It is alleged that the withdrawal/cancellation orders were not issued in an arbitrary manner, but after due consideration and examination of the entire issue.
It is alleged that the President of the DTC Employees Congress had complained to the Chairman and Managing Director of DTC, soon after the appointment of the petitioners, alleging that the appointees did not have the requisite experience of stores, as they had never worked in that capacity.
It was also alleged, in the complaint, that Depot Managers of the DTC had wrongly certified the working experience of such conductors, and the selection committee had chosen the wrong candidates.
It was alleged that the matter was taken up for further investigation.
During the course of investigation it was found that 10 conductors appointed as Assistant Store Keepers had given the experience certificate from private organizations for periods which overlapped with their period of study.
This led to suspicion and it was decided to scrutinize the experience certificates issued and furnished in all cases.
A committee of three officers was constituted for the purpose, on 22.7.2005.
This committee scrutinized the certificates and furnished its report on 2872005 and further submitted a case study report on 13.9.2005.
The committee pointed out to instances where the certifying agencies namely, previous employers of the conductors, had in certain cases, endorsed the certificates but also mentioned that the certificates had been issued recently at the asking of the concerned candidate although the certificate was made to look as if it was issued earlier.
On the basis of these materials, the DTC decided to withdraw/cancel the appointments.
It was further alleged that the matter was handed over to the Vigilance Department, which conducted physical verification/visits to the places/addresses given in the experience certificates between the 4th and 6th October, 2005, to check the status and genuineness of the documents.
The 19 instances verified showed that the certificates in four cases were found to be false; in two cases, the information was genuine; and in other cases, proper verification would not be carried out since the firm or concern no longer existed.
6.
The DTC has also taken the position that the initial appointment order, issued to the petitioners, had clearly indicated that they could be reverted any and that they were on probation.
The DTC has also averred that the time Recruitment Rules for the post of Assistant Store Keeper mandated possession of a higher secondary qualification with the two years' experience of handling store and maintenance of its connected records.
The advertisement, pursuant to which petitioners were recruited, however, required the candidates to hold higher secondary qualification with at least two years experience of store keeping.
It was also alleged that the petitioners had not filled form No. 17 which is mandatory on employment in the corporation, at the time of joining/appointment.
This document contains a column with regard to the office/firm with full details where the applicant had previously worked.
None of the petitioners, it is alleged, had filled up those forms when they joined the DTC.
7.
The DTC has also produced relevant extracts of the notings in its files, relating to the constitution of the committee in July 2005.
The minutes of the committee, recommending further investigation by the Vigilance Department, read as follows :  "Reference memo No. PLD-II (ASK)/2005/1987 dated 22.7.2005 vide which a Committee of the following officers has been constituted to scrutinize the experience certificates of recently appointed ASKs -  (i) Shri GK Popli, Manager (Mech) MS-1.
(ii) Sh. Beg Ram, Dy.
Manager (A/cs) HQ.
(iii) Sh. Manohar Lal, Dy.
Manager (Admn), HQ.
(2) The committee met on 23.7.2005, 25.7.2005 and 26.7.2005 in the Office of Dy.
Manager (Admn) HQ and after going through the record of 61 ASKs, the observations of the Committee are as under :  (a) On scrutiny of the experience certificates, it is revealed that the ASKs have provided the experience certificates on various fields other than Auto field for which no criteria has been fixed.
(b) On scrutiny of the ACRs it is revealed that Unit Officers have not mentioned the work carried out in DTC Stores in the respective column or ACR form.
(c) The experience prior to joining the Corporation is not available with the file except at S. No. 48 which can be scrutinized from the personal file of the concerned employee.
(d) The employees mentioned at S Nos. 3 and 12 of list placed opposite produced the experience certificate from M/s. Mangalam Motors, Munirka, Mobile No. 9810617239. the firm was contacted on the said Mobile No. and enquired about the experience certificate.
The firm representative informed that both the employees had worked with them in the year 1980-1982 but the certificate was issued to them about three months ago, whereas the date of issuance of certificate is 30121982 which requires the investigation by the Vigilance Deptt.
Similarly one more firm M/s. Diamond Rubber was contacted and they also informed that they had issued experience certificate about three months back.
(e) In some of the cases, the Unit Officers have not mentioned the period of their working as the minimum period of experience in store keeping is 2 years for the post of ASK.
(f) Out of the 61 ASKs, 12 experience certificates have been issued from Kashmere Gate and from M/s. Mangalam Motors and it cannot be said that the employees had actually worked for got the certificate for the sake of showing the experience.
3.
In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that there is a need to get the matter investigated from Vigilance Deptt.
Submitted please.
GK Popli (Beg Ram) (Manohar Lal) Manger (M) MS-I Dy.
Mgr.
(A/c) HQ Dy.
Mgr.
(Admin) HQ" 8.
The copy of the Vigilance Committee's report/observations, submitted on 7th October, 2005, were also produced along with the counter affidavit.
They read as follows :  "Please refer to minutes of Dy.
CGM (A&CP) and CVO dated 3092005 (Page 55/N) regarding examination of experience certificates of the Petitioners in the matter of conductors/ASKs.
In this regard, in accordance to the reference of record of Court case available at Page 88 & 127/Cr.
In respect of following 19 petitioners (conductors) who were appointed as ASK vide letter No. PLD-II/ASK/05/1636 dated 662005 (page 165/Cr), different teams were entrusted on 4th, 5th, 6th October, 2005 to examine the status of said concerned experience certificates from the mentioned addresses :  S.No.
Name B No. T. No.  1.
Sh. Jagadish Singh 20418 44926 2.
Sh. Rajinder Prasad Arya 21061 46752 3.
Sh. Khem Chand 16892 36099 4.
Sh. Sharwan Kumar 13306 23542 5.
Sh. Raman Kumar Sharma 22600 49788 6.
Sh. Jai Kumar 22728 50038 7.
Sh. Subhash Chand 22275 49226 8.
Sh. Sumer Singh 17013 36226 9.
Sh. Ziley Singh 15208 30346 10.
Sh. Dinesh Kumar 21422 47472 11.
Sh. Rakesh Kumar Sharma 22402 49415 12.
Sh. Rati Ram 23174 51084 13.
Sh. Ram Chander 17822 37822 14.
Sh. Siri Kishan 21479 47548 15.
Sh. Nagesh Sharma 19264 41663 16.
Sh. Charanjit Kumar 22011 48504 17.
Sh. Virender Singh 21542 47686 18.
Sh. Satya Vart 19260 41659 19.
Sh. Surender Singh  18882 40605 On going through the record of statement gathered/observed during enquiries/examination of the said experience certificates, the following informations were found made available by the persons concerned at the firms/shops and their recorded comments provided on the letter heads and also on the face of the photocopies of the concerned certificates which were shown to the individuals during inquiries are placed opposite at page 137 to 159/Cr.
The details are as follows :  "1.
The matter as regard to employees concerned (as above at S.Nos.
8, 7, 3, 9 and 13) namely S/Shri Sumer Singh, Subhash Chand, Khem Chand, Ziley Singh and Ram Chander has already been scrutinized at the level of already constituted committee at PLD HQtrs.
comprising of S/Shri GK Popli, Mgr.
(M), Beg Ram, Dy.
Mgr.
(A/Cs) HQ, Manohar Lal, Dy.
Mgr.
(Admn) HQ.
The contents of their report are available at Page 80 to 82/Cr.
The record of 11 employees were examined by the Committee and out of these 11, 5 are in the list of petitioners in this case.
Out of these 5, the experience certificates of 3 employees concerned namely S/Shri Sumer Singh, Subhash Chand & Ziley Singh are stated to be noticed as false and for the remaining 2 in respect of Shri Ram Chander and Shri Khem Chand the details of the certificates could not be verified as true or also on the basis of informations, gathered during enquiries.
The details of recorded statements of enquiries are available at pages 74 to 79/Cr.
2.
The details of the enquiries made at the level of different vigilance teams carried out on 4th, 5th, 6th October, 2005 are as follows :  (a) The experience certificate in respect of Shri Sharwan Kumar (at S. No. 4 as above) has been denied by the shop owner Shri Man Mohan Singh on behalf of M/s. Mohan Trading Corporation K. Gate for issuance of any such experience certificate in the year 1978 to Shri Sharwan Kumar and stated this certificate as false/bogus.
This firm is stated to has been established in Delhi since 1993.
The copy of recorded statement in this regard is available at 144/Cr.
(b) As regard to S/Shri Dinesh Kumar, Charanjit Kumar, Nagesh Kumar and Jai Kumar (at S Nos. 10, 16, 15 & 6), it has been observed during inquiries that the concerned shops/firms owners/representatives agreed with the matter of said experience certificate and confirmed it as genuine issued in the name of person concerned as is shown in the photocopies of the certificates.
The copy of recorded statement in this regard is available at 157, 155, 153 & 141/Cr.
(c) As regard to Shri Surender Singh and Shri Virender Singh, the said experience certificate were issued by the DM, Maya Depot against their working in Depot Store as per their records of attendance.
(d) As regard to S/Shri Siri Kishan, Raman Kumar, Satya Vart, Rakesh Kumar and Rajinder Prasad (S Nos. 14, 5, 18, 11 & 2 as above), during inquiries at the concerned addresses as is mentioned in the photocopies of the certificates in question, it has been observed that : (i) Sh. Siri Kishan : At this stage no existence of shop in the name of M/s. SS Traders is found as per the mentioned address in the certificate as the owner of the said shop has expired 6 years ago as informed by the nearby shopkeepers.
At present a juice shop is there on the said address (details available at page 156/Cr.).
(ii) Shri Raman Kumar : At this stage another firm in the name of M/s. HS Engineering is there and the owner informed that he purchased this shop in the year 1992-93.
He does not know the exact present whereabouts of the earlier shop owner (details available at page 154/Cr.).
(iii) Shri Satya Vart : Shri Rajinder Nath Nag Pal the owner of the said building/complex as per the mentioned address stated that the purchased this is b!
1 building in 1990 and he does not know the earlier position of the firm/shop in question.
But at present there is no shop running in the name of M/s. New Geeta Automobiles mentioned on the photocopy of the experience certificate (details available at page 149/Cr).
(iv) Shri Rakesh Kumar : At the time of visit the construction work of new building in the name of Magic Auto was found going on and there was no existence of M/s. Atlas Adhesive Pvt. Ltd.
Since January, 2005 when the earlier owner Mr. Kochhar was seen there at the said address, as it stated by a construction worker Shri Surender Kumar Pareda (details at page 143/Cr.).
(v) Shri Rajinder Prasad : The manager of M/s. RKG Pharma Pvt. Ltd., clarified that being quite old information required for the said certificate he has no related record available with him at this stage (details available at page 137).
(vi) Shri Jagdish Singh : The nearby shopkeepers informed that they have not seen this shop open since long and at the time of visit this shop was also found closed and has no reference in the name of M/s. Motor Care Centre, 37, South Patel Nagar, Delhi-110 008 as is mentioned in the experience certificate (details available at page 150/Cr.).
(vii) Shri Rati Ram : The mentioned address of the said shop appears to be noticed as incomplete and thus was not traceable to get it verified.
The nearby shopkeepers at Azad Pur, GT Karnal Road dealing with the business of Automobile and Motor shops informed that they have not heard of this shop namely M/s. Baljeet Auto Store, 49/1, Azad Pur, GT Karnal Road since 20-30 years (details available at page 147/Cr).
In view of above it has been observed that out of the total 19 cases of the concerned petitioners, the 4 cases (S Nos. 4, 7, 8 and 9 as above) are stated to be in the list of false position, and in another 4 cases (S Nos. 6, 10, 15 & 16 as above) are in the list of position where the shop/firm owners or representatives have admitted for the issuance of said certificates in the name of person concerned whose photocopies of experience certificates have been shown to them during inquiries.
As regard to the rest of 9 cases (S.Nos.
1, 2, 3, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 18 as above) the authenticity of the details of experience certificate were not verified as the confirmed informations were not made available by the person concerned of the establishment at the mentioned addresses.
The remaining 2 cases at S Nos. 17 & 19 in the above list as per the letter No. PLD-II/ASK/05/1636 dated 662005 have been issued by the Maya Puri Depot itself.
May kindly see for information and further necessary action please."
9.
Ms. Jyoti Singh and Ms. Rekha Palli, Counsel appearing for the petitioners, submitted that the impugned cancellations/withdrawal orders are ex facie arbitrary and unsupportable in law.
The petitioners applied for the posts advertised by the DTC, supported their applications with the necessary documents and certificates, which were considered/ verified; in many cases certificates had been issued by the authorities within the DTC.
This entire process took about four months; shortlisting was carried out and the petitioners were considered, found fit and appointed as Assistant Store Keepers.
The selection was merit-based.
The petitioners worked for about three months, during which period they discharged all the duties and responsibilities attached to the posts.
In these circumstances, the en masse withdrawal/cancellation orders, without granting any notice or opportunity of hearing to the petitioners, was alien to fair procedure.
Even if there were certain allegations of malpractices, which emerged after scrutiny of documents pursuant to a complaint, the DTC was duty-bound to consider the cases of individuals before taking a decision to cancel/withdraw the promotion orders.
10.
Counsel for the petitioners relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court reported as Union of India v. Rajesh PU, 2003(3) SCT 840 (SC) : VII(2003) SLT 507 : (2003)7 SCC 285 and Benny TD v. Registrar of Coop.
Societies, V(1998) SLT 4 : (1998)5 SCC 269, in support of the submission that even if allegations of large-scale improprieties in the selection process surfaced at a later date, the magnitude of the task of having to enquire into each allegation did not relieve the executive agency viz. the DTC from resorting to a fair and reasonable procedure before passing any adverse orders against the petitioners.
It was also submitted that the facts of this case showed that DTC acted first and later decided to hold a vigilance inquiry.
The petitioners were not ever associated with any of the inquiries held by the DTC; nor was any material adverse to them, even furnished, with a view to elicit their comments.
It was further submitted that the materials made available in the course of these proceedings disclose that the DTC was itself in a position to discern who among the candidates had indulged in objectionable practices; the fact that out of 19 cases, there was no finding of irregularity or fraud in as many as 15 cases, showed that the surmise about widespread irregularity was ungrounded.
The decision, therefore, smacked of complete arbitrariness and a predisposed mind, which had condemned the petitioners unheard, ignoring relevances, and considering extraneous allegations.
It was lastly submitted that the stand of the DTC that the petitioners could be terminated any time, since they were mere probationers, is untenable, since the order is founded on objectionable conduct, which amounts to tampering of documents, and misleading the employer, which are misconduct; the reversion orders are not innocuous, and result in penal consequences.
11.
Ms. Saroj Bidawat, learned Counsel for DTC, resisted the claim in these proceedings, and submitted that the petitioners could not be heard to complain.
Having produced and relied upon dubious documents, the genuineness of which came to be discovered later by DTC, which also discovered that the selection process was riddled with irregularities, and underlying fraud by the candidates, a decision was taken to cancel the appointments.
The decision, being a policy one, meant to strike at an irremediable malaise, was taken in the larger public interest, and in bona fide exercise of power.
It did not result in any penal consequences; the petitioners were free to apply afresh, and were not debarred from participating in any future selection.
As far as the contention regarding obligation to issue notice, and grant opportunity was concerned, the Counsel submitted that when the entire selection was tainted, there was no question of following any procedure.
Counsel relied upon the adage "fraud unravels all" to submit that once the entire selection process, and appointments were cancelled, there can be no allegation of discrimination, or arbitrariness.
12.
Learned Counsel for DTC relied upon the decision in Krishan Yadav v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 581 (SC) : (1994)4 SCC 165; Hanuman Prasad & Ors. v. Union of India & Anr, 1996(4) SCT 608 (SC) : 1996(10) SCC 742; Ajay Kumar Minz v. State of Bihar & Ors., 1993(6) SLR 664 (Patna); Biswa Ranjan Sahoo & Ors. v. Sushanta Kumar Dinda & Ors., AIR 1996 SC 2552; Pritpal Singh v. State of Haryana & Ors., 1994(4) SCT 591 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 414 and the decision of this Court in Uday Shankar Sinha v. Shipping Corporation of India, 2000(1) SCT 443 (Delhi) : 2000 VI AD (Del) 679 to submit that in such situations the employer can resort to a mass termination/cancellation of selection process, or even appointments, and even if there are some among selected candidates, who deserved selection and who would, consequently, suffer as a result of the cancellation, that cannot be a circumstance to set aside the withdrawal/cancellation order, since the public interest outweighs their personal interest.
13.
The factual matrix in this case lies in a narrow compass.
All petitioners were selected, and appointed in respect of the 61 vacancies in the grade of Assistant Store Keepers.
They reported for duties; and continued to function for three months.
The DTC received certain complaints, investigated into the matter, and later decided to refer the matter to the Vigilance Department.
Even before the Vigilance Department commenced with its task, the DTC resorted to mass reversion, based on the materials made available by the committee.
The vigilance note was received after the reversion/withdrawal/cancellation orders.
The question here is whether the allegations of fraud/widespread irregularity were of such magnitude as to support a decision to cancel all the appointments.
The issue, therefore, is whether the allegations and the materials found were indicative of such deep rooted malaise as to lead the employer to conclude that the entire process was vitiated, and that it was neither possible nor feasible to sift the chaff from the grain, and protect the innocent, while not sparing the guilty.
14.
The decision in Uday Shankar Sinha (supra) had considered the judgments of the Supreme Court in Hanuman Prasad & Ors. v. Union of India & Anr, 1996(10) SCC 742; Ajay Kumar Minz v. State of Bihar & Ors., 1993(6) SLR 664 (Patna); Biswa Ranjan Sahoo & Ors. v. Sushanta Kumar Dinda & Ors., AIR 1996 SC 2552; Pritpal Singh v. State of Haryana & Ors., AIR 1995 SC 414 (supra) and other decisions on the issue, and held as follows :  "12.
The matter was at the stage when the selection process was still underway.
No final selection had been made so far.
Even if the selection is made and a candidate's name appears in the merit list, he does not acquire any indefeasible right of appointment as a Government servant even if a vacancy exists [Refer : State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha & Ors., 1974(1) SCR 165; Miss Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana & Ors., 1986(4) SCC 268 and Jitendra Kumar & Ors. v. State of Punjab & Ors., (1985)1 SCR 899].
13.
In Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 555 (SC) : 1991(3) SCC 47, Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court, speaking through Lalit Mohan Sharma, J spoke on this principle in the following words :  "It is not correct to say that if a number of vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied.
Ordinarily the notification merely amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to apply for recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire any right to the post.
Unless the relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies.
However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
And if the vacancies or any of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted."
14.
Thus while petitioner does not have any right acquired (accrued ?)
in his favour, when it is not even known as to whether he stands selected or not, the only onus which the respondents are required to discharge are that they have not acted in an arbitrary manner in scrapping the selection process and this onus they have discharged, in the instant case, successfully, In fact respondents by cancelling the selection process have nipped the mischief in the bud itself.
Law has gone to the extent by declaring that even if appointments are made but later it is found that the appointments were the result of some fraudulent or malpractices being adopted, such appointments can be cancelled and the incumbents i.e. beneficiaries of such malpractices, can be shown the door without even any show-cause notice, etc. as show-cause notice, departmental inquiry, etc. and principles of natural justice are foreign to such situations.
[Refer : Hanuman Prasad & Ors. v. Union of India & Anr, 1996(10) SCC 742, Ajay Kumar Minz v. State of Bihar & Ors., 1993(6) SLR 664 (Patna) and Biswa Ranjan Sahoo & Ors. v. Sushanta Kumar Dinda & Ors., AIR 1996 SC 2552 (supra)].
15.
One may also usefully quote the following observations of Supreme Court in the case of Pritpal Singh v. State of Haryana & Ors. (supra) : "Para 19 : It is in the public interest that members of the police force should be selected objectively and fairly.
The factors that we have enumerated above satisfy us that the selection made by the Board was not objective and fair.
It is, therefore, in the public interest that the selections and the appointments made consequent thereon be quashed forthwith.
Para 20 : We appreciate that it may be that there are among those selected some who deserved selection and who will, consequently, suffer as a result of this order.
There is, regrettably, considering the state of the selection records, no way in which such men can be identified.
The public interest outweighs their interest.
The directions that we shall now give shall enable them to compete once again with those who had sought selection with little or no dis-advantage as a result of the years that have passed."
In this case, the Court quashed the selection which was found to be infected with impurities.
15.
In Krishan Yadav v. State of Haryana (supra), also cited on behalf of the respondent, the Supreme Court was concerned with the legality of appointment to 96 posts, on direct recruitment basis.
On allegations of serious irregularities in the conduct of examination, investigation had been handed over to CBI, which submitted an elaborate report.
Based upon the report, the selection process and the appointments, were cancelled.
This action was upheld on the basis that the entire process was riddled with illegalities, and though a few innocent candidates could suffer, nevertheless larger public interest required the selection and appointments to be quashed.
16.
The petitioners have relied upon another set of decisions to say that even if mass action is required, principles of fairness demand that the authority apply its mind to the materials regarding individual cases.
In Union of India v. Rajesh PU (supra), the Supreme Court held as follows :  "In the light of the above and in the absence of any specific or categorical finding supported by any concrete and relevant material that widespread infirmities of an all-pervasive nature, which could be really said to have undermined the very process itself in its entirety or as a whole and it was impossible to weed out the beneficiaries of one or the other irregularities, or illegalities, if any, there was hardly any justification in law to deny appointment to the other selected candidates whose selections were not found to be, in any manner, vitiated for any one or the other reasons.
Applying a unilaterally rigid and arbitrary standard to cancel the entirety of the selections despite the firm and positive information that except 31 of such selected candidates, no infirmity could be found with reference to others, is nothing but total disregard of relevanceis and allowing to be carried away by irrelevancies, giving a complete go-bye to contextual considerations throwing to the winds the principle of proportionality in going farther than what was strictly and reasonably to meet the situation.
In short, the competent authority completely misdirected itself in taking such an extreme and unreasonable decision of cancelling the entire selections, wholly unwarranted and unnecessary even on the factual situation found too, and totally in excess of the nature and gravity of what was at stake, thereby virtually rendering such decision to be irrational."
In the earlier decision, viz. Benny TD v. Registrar of Coop.
Societies (supra), at page 284, it was held as follows :  "20.
Apart from the aforesaid questions which are common in respect of recruitment in both the Banks, in case of Kottayam Bank, the Division Bench of the High Court had categorically found that the recruitment itself is vitiated on account of large-scale malpractice.
It maybe stated that the Registrar while issuing notice under Rule 176 of the Rules to the Board of Directors of Kottayam District Cooperative Bank by letter dated 2471986 did not indicate about any large-scale malpractice adopted in the test conducted by the Bank excepting to the effect : "The marks awarded and the consolidated marks recorded are corrected and manipulated."
Some of the candidates were given less marks and some others were given higher marks.
But while considering the legality of the resolutions passed by the Bank appointing several persons, the Registrar took into consideration the so-called report of the Kerala Public Men's (Corruption, Investigation and Inquiries) Commission who had directed for a detailed inquiry and on that basis came to the ultimate conclusion that the appointment of candidates made by the Kottayam District Cooperative Bank is vitiated.
The learned Single Judge came to the conclusion, and in our opinion rightly, that in the absence of any detailed particulars of the alleged irregularities in the notice issued to the Bank under Rule 176 and in the absence of the report of the Kerala Public Men's (Corruption, Investigation and Inquiries) Commission being made available to the Bank or the persons appointed, it is not open to the Registrar to come to the conclusion about the irregularity and the said conclusion is vitiated on account of gross violation of the principle of natural justice.
The Division Bench, however, disagreed with the conclusion of the learned Single Judge on this score and relied upon the report of the Commission and came to hold that the entire selection process was vitiated by illegality and irregularity and therefore there is no other option than to cancel the appointments of all the candidates.
The Division Bench was conscious of the fact that the persons to be adversely affected by the impugned decision had not been given an opportunity inasmuch as the relevant documents had not been put to them nor even to the Bank who made recruitment but yet brushed aside the principle of natural justice and did not focus its attention to the same and on the other hand came to the conclusion that the process of selection got vitiated on account of alleged irregularity and illegality.
In our considered opinion, the Division Bench patently committed an error in relying upon the report of the Commission and in recording a finding that irregularities have been committed in the selection notwithstanding the fact that the said report had not been made available to the Bank or to the affected parties.
That apart, as stated earlier in the notice that was issued by the Registrar, there were no particulars given and on such vague assertions made, it was not permissible to record a conclusion that there has been any irregularity in the process of selection.
The said conclusion of the Division Bench must accordingly be set aside."
17.
In the decision reported as Onkar Lal Bajaj v. Union of India, (2003)2 SCC 673, the Court was concerned with validity of an order cancelling, en masse, allotments in over 3700 cases on grounds of grave irregularities.
It was held as follows :  "42.
The contention of the learned Solicitor-General that in order to uphold the probity in governance, ensure fair play in action and in larger public interest, the Government took a decision to cancel the allotments is clearly an after-thought besides untenable even otherwise.
43.
The mere reason that a 'controversy' has been raised by itself cannot clothe the Government with the power to pass such a drastic order which has a devastating effect on a large number of people.
In governance, controversies are bound to arise.
In a given situation, depending upon facts and figures, it may be legally permissible to resort to such en masse cancellation where the executive finds that prima facie a large number of such selections were tainted and segregation of good and bad would be difficult and a time- consuming affair.
That is, however, not the case.
Here the controversy raised was in respect of 5 to 10%, as earlier indicated.
In such a situation, en masse cancellation would be unjustified and arbitrary.
It seems that the impugned order was a result of panic reaction of the Government.
No facts and figures were gone into.
Without application of mind to any of the relevant considerations, a decision was taken to cancel all allotments.
The impugned action is clearly against fair play in action.
It cannot be held to be reasonable.
It is nothing but arbitrary.
44.
Regarding the probity in governance, fair play in action and larger public interest, except contending that as a result of media exposure, the Government in public interest decided to cancel all allotments, nothing tangible was brought to our notice.
On 582002 the only reason was that "a controversy" had been raised.
In the order dated 982002 the reasons given are that facts and circumstances considered and to ensure fair play in action and in public interest, it was passed.
In the counter-affidavit, the aspect of probity in governance has been brought in.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that admittedly, no case was examined, not even from a prima facie angle to find out whether there was any substance in the media exposure.
None examined the impact that was likely to result because of en masse cancellation.
Many had resigned their jobs.
It was necessary because of such a stipulation in LOI.
Many had taken huge loans.
There were many Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, war widows and those whose near relation had died as a result of terrorist activities.
The effect of none was considered.
How could all those large number against whom there was not even insinuation be clubbed with the handful of those who were said to have been allotted these dealerships/distributorships on account of political connection and patronage The two were clearly unequals.
The rotten apples cannot be equated with good apples.
Under these circumstances, the plea of probity in governance or fair play in action motivating the impugned action cannot be accepted.
The impugned order looked from any angle cannot stand the scrutiny of law.
45.
The solution by resorting to cancellation of all was worse than the problem.
Cure was worse than the disease.
Equal treatment to unequals is nothing but inequality.
To put both the categories - tainted and the rest - on a par is wholly unjustified, arbitrary, unconstitutional being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
18.
A discerning analysis of the seemingly conflicting strands of judicial reasoning, would show that en masse action has been upheld to maintain the purity of the selection process, where it is not possible for the employer to separate the guilty from the innocent.
This has been particularly so in case of direct (open market) recruitment.
This emerges from the lament in Prithpal Singh that there was no way the innocent could be identified ("no way in which such men can be identified").
However, where the employer can reasonably identify the innocent, or blameless, from the blameworthy, cancellation of the entire process would result in "equal treatment of unequals" and ignoring of relevant factors, which has been held arbitrary (See Rajesh P.U).
19.
The facts available with DTC, at the time it took the decision and passed the impugned cancellation/withdrawal orders, enabled it to take a nuanced decision, whereby the guilty and the innocent could be discerned.
In such an eventuality, it was not open to the DTC to contend that no procedure was required to be followed.
This was not a case of recruitment of a large number of candidates; only 61 persons were promoted.
A prima facie view was possible, and was indeed indicated.
The Counsel for DTC submitted that the vigilance enquiry is still underway.
The evidence and materials gathered, and made available did not point to overwhelming fraud, of such magnitude so as to impel the DTC to withdraw the promotions, without following any procedure.
As remarked in Benny's case, the minimum requirement of supplying the adverse material to the suspect employee, and considering his explanation, had to be followed, after such documents had been gathered.
Sadly, not even the presence of an inquiry or fair procedure was resorted to; all appointed candidates were condemned unheard.
20.
The quintessence of non-arbitrariness, and rule of law is fair procedure, which implies adherence to natural justice, whenever adverse orders are contemplated.
The exceptions to the rule are few; mostly justified on ground of inexpedience, essentially in public interest, where security of the State or having regard to the sensitivity of the case is involved.
None of those exceptions emerge from the facts of this case.
Fair procedure was the casualty in the haste to show action.
The stand of DTC therefore, that the withdrawal/cancellation orders were issued on a general policy determination which did not require any hearing, cannot be sustained; the impugned orders are arbitrary.
21.
The second contention about the orders being valid since the petitioners did not have any right to the post, being probationers, and therefore liable to termination or reversion any time, in my opinion is without force.
Such stand is usually advanced to justify the decision in the case of an individual, where the employer usually contends that the order is not punitive, since in his assessment, the employee's continuation in the organization would not be in its best interests.
However, here such is not the case; the order is based on a decision to en masse revert all the incumbents, upon allegations of deceiving the authorities, in the course of a recruitment process.
It has been often said that if the foundation of the order is premised on some misconduct, even if it is facially innocuous, the Court can lift the veil, to discern its true nature, and set it aside as punitive, if not preceded by an inquiry.
Facially, the impugned orders are innocuous; yet, the materials on record point at the determination of DTC that they were based on wrongful conduct, to wit, misleading and practising deceit during the recruitment process.
Hence, on this ground too, the orders are not sustainable, as not being preceded by any notice, and inquiry as prescribed by rules.
22.
In the light of the foregoing conclusions, the impugned cancellation/withdrawal orders issued in respect of the petitioners are set aside.
They shall be entitled to continuity, and full benefits as if those orders had not been issued.
The DTC is however at liberty to initiate such proceedings, as it may deem appropriate, including departmental proceedings, to enquire into the allegations against all petitioners.
The writ petitions are allowed to the extent indicated above; all pending applications are disposed of in the light of the judgment in the writ petitions.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.