Nirmal Yadav, J - Vide this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner is seeking issuance of writs of certiorari, mandamus and prohibition for quashing the impugned order dated 532004 (Annexure P-6) dismissing him from service, being illegal, ultra vires and without jurisdiction.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Assistant Foreman in the Haryana State Electricity Board on 11.4.1973 and was promoted as Junior Engineer on 1521982.
On 2822001, F.I.R. No. 6 under Sections 7 and 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act was registered against him on the complaint of one Mohd.
Tohsin alleging that petitioner had demanded and accepted a sum of Rs. 1,500/- as illegal gratification.
Petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated 132001 (Annexure P-1).
Subsequently, he was reinstated vide order dated 2342001 (Annexure P-2).
But he was again placed under suspension on 1862002 as per order Annexure P-3.
Petitioner was convicted under Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and was acquitted under Section 13 of the Act vide order dated 1792003 (Annexure P-4) passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Yamuna Nagar at Jagadhri.
He was sentenced to imprisonment of 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 2,000/-.
The petitioner filed appeal against the judgment and order of the Additional Sessions Judge in the High Court bearing Criminal Appeal No. 1851-SB of 2003.
The said appeal was admitted vide order dated 9102003 (Annexure P-5) and sentence was suspended during the pendency of the appeal.
3.
According to the petitioner, he was falsely implicated at the instance of one Ranbir Singh whose Atta Chakki meter was found defective and his servant Mohd.
Tohsin (complainant) was found stealing electricity by putting strips in the meter.
A penalty of Rs. 61,140/- was imposed by the Electricity Board on the recommendation of the petitioner which was deposited by Ranbir Singh.
Similarly, petitioner had checked Atta Chakki run by Mohd.
Tohsin under the tenancy of Ranbir Singh on 2622001 and found the M&T seals tampered with.
Therefore, a penalty of Rs. 1,497/- was imposed upon him.
The petitioner was, therefore, got falsely implicated by Ranbir Singh through his servant Mohd.
Tohsin as he was bearing a grudge against the petitioner.
It is further pleaded that for about six months after the conviction, no action was taken by the authorities, however, vide order dated 532004 (Annexure P-6), the respondents have passed the impugned dismissal order without application of mind to the facts of the case and without examining the conduct of the petitioner, which led to his conviction.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that departmental punishment of removal or dismissal from service is not an automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge.
The authority competent to take disciplinary action against the government servant convicted of a criminal charge has to be consider all circumstances of the case and then to decide whether the conduct of the delinquent official which led to his conviction is such as to render his further retention in public service undesirable and to further consider whether to dismiss him or to remove him from service or to compulsorily retire him.
Learned counsel argued that the impugned order has been passed in a mechanical manner solely on the ground that the petitioner stands convicted in a criminal case.
Respondent No. 2 has not applied his mind to the facts of the case in which the order of sentence was passed against the petitioner and also failed to consider as to whether the allegations against the petitioner and his conduct is such which render his detention in service undesirable.
The learned counsel referred to a Full Bench decision of this Court in Om Parkash v. The Director Postal Services (Post & Telegraphs Deptt.
), Punjab Circle, Ambala and others, AIR 1973 P&H 1.
He also relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court Rajinder Singh v. Board of School Education Haryana and another, 1996(4) RSJ 417.
Relying on the above judgments, the learned counsel argued that the conduct of the delinquent employee is most relevant to be considered before imposing the punishment of dismissal from service and in case, his conduct, which led to his conviction, is such which will render his retention in service undesirable, then only, before passing the dismissal order, the competent authority has to apply its mind as to whether the conduct of the delinquent employee which led to his conviction is such as to render his retention in public service undesirable, and also have to take into consideration the relevant factors, viz., past record of the employee, length of service and nature of crime committed by him.
5.
The learned counsel further argued that the impugned order passed by the authorities is discriminatory as one Mahesh Kumar Gupta, S.D.O.
(Operation) convicted under Sections 7/13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and suspended during the trial, was subsequently reinstated and is still in service.
Similarly, one Randhir Singh, JE had been convicted under Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and yet he continues to be in service.
6.
On the other hand, in the written statement filed by the respondents, it is pleaded that petitioner was found to be guilty of accepting illegal gratification from the complainant and as such, he was convicted under Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 2,000/-.
His conduct of accepting illegal gratification is such which renders his continuance in service undesirable.
It is further pleaded that in appeal, only the sentence has been suspended and not the conviction.
Moreover, conduct of the petitioner is such which deserves the major punishment to be awarded as mentioned under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
It is further submitted that competent authority has passed the impugned order after applying its mind and considering the conduct of the petitioner which led to his conviction, as the offence for which he has been convicted tantamount to moral turpitude.
It is stated that Mahesh Kumar Gupta, S.D.O.
has been dismissed from service by the respondents vide order dated 872004, a copy of which is at Annexure R/1.
Randhir Singh, Junior Engineer, has also been dismissed from service vide order dated 17112004.
Copy of the said order is at Annexure R/2.
The impugned order in case of petitioner is not at all, discriminatory.
7.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
8.
The impugned order has been passed in terms of Rule 7(2)(d)(ii) of the HSEB (P&A) Regulations, 1990, which reads as under :-  "(ii) the provisions of the foregoing Sub-Regulation, shall not apply where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which had led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove him, or reduce him in rank is satisfied that, for some reasons to be recorded by him in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to give him an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him, or where in the interest of the security of the Board, it is considered not expedient to give to that person such an opportunity."
The above provisions clearly speak of conduct which leads to the conviction on a criminal charge.
It, of course, does not speak of sentence or punishment awarded.
Merely because the sentence has been suspended, the conviction does not cease to be operative.
Section 389 of the Code of Criminal Procedure empowers the appellate Court to suspend the imposition/execution of sentence and also to release the accused on bail.
In view of above, we are of the opinion that any order passed for dismissal or removal of a government servant, who has been convicted by criminal Court, is not barred merely because the sentence or the order of sentence has been suspended by the appellate Court during the pendency of the appeal before it.
In our view, the usual and more appropriate course should be that in such like cases, action should be taken against the government servant convicted of a charge of accepting illegal gratification and not to wait for final decision of appeal or revision.
If, ultimately, a government servant is acquitted in appeal, the order of punishment can always be revised and if the government servant is reinstated, he will be entitled to the consequential benefits.
This issue has been considered by the Apex Court in the case of Union of India v. VK Bhaskar, 1998(7) SLR 370 and also in The Deputy Director of Collegiate Education (Administration), Madras v. S Nagoor Meera, 1995(2) SCT 717 (SC) : 1995(2) SLR 379.
The Apex Court in the case of The Deputy Director of Collegiate Education (Administration), Madras (supra), observed as under :-  "9.
The Tribunal seems to be of the opinion that until the appeal against the conviction is disposed of, action under clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) is not permissible.
We see no basis or justification for the said view.
The more appropriate course in all such cases is to take action under clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2).
Once a government servant is convicted of a criminal charge and not to wait for the appeal or revision, as the case may be.
If, however, the government servant- accused is acquitted on appeal or other proceeding, the order can always be revised and if the government servant is reinstated, he will be entitled to all the benefits to which he would have been entitled to had he continued in service.
The other course suggested, viz., to wait till the appeal, revision and other remedies are over, would not be advisable since it would mean continuing in service a person who has been convicted of a serious offence by a criminal Court.
It should be remembered that the action under clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) will be taken only where the conduct which has led to his conviction is such that it deserves any of the three major punishments mentioned in Article 311(2).
As held by this Court in Shankardass v. Union of India, (1985)2 SCR 358) : [1985(2) SLR 109 (SC)] : "Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution confers on the government the power to dismiss a person from service "on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge."
But that power like every other power has to be exercised fairly, justly and reasonably.
Surely, the Constitution does not contemplate that a government servant who is convicted for parking his scooter in a no- parking area should be dismissed from service.
He may perhaps not be entitled to be heard on the question of penalty since clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) makes the provisions of that article inapplicable when a penalty is to be imposed on a Government servant on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
But the right to impose a penalty carries with it the duty to act justly."
10.
What is really relevant thus is the conduct of the government servant which had led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
Now, in this case, the respondent has been found guilty of corruption by a criminal Court.
Until the said conviction is set aside by the appellate or other higher Court, it may not be advisable to retain such person in service.
As stated above, if he succeeds in appeal or other proceeding, the matter can always be reviewed in such a manner that he suffers no prejudice."
On going through the impugned order as a whole, we are of the opinion that the authorities have rightly passed the impugned order as the conduct of the petitioner i.e. accepting illegal gratification is such that it would render his continuance in service undesirable.
The petitioner has been found guilty of corruption by the criminal Court.
Until the said conviction is set aside by the appellate Court, it may not be advisable to retain such a person in service.
There can be no two opinions in view of judgment of the Apex Court in The Deputy Director of Collegiate Education (Administration), Madras (supra), that such a person who has been accused of accepting illegal gratification, is undesirable to be retained in service.
Consequently, we find no illegality or infirmity in the impugned order passed by the respondent-authorities.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.