SP Talukdar, J - This application under Article 226 of the Constitution is directed against the Judgment dated 7th October, 2002 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal, in OA No. 1317 of 2001.
2.
Grivances of the petitioners may briefly be stated as follows :-  The respondent, as applicant, approached the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal, hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal', with his grievance for not being included in the trial list for promotion to the post of Inspector of Police.
3.
The said case was contested by the present petitioner and it was the specific stand before the Tribunal that the present respondent could not be included in such selection list in view of pendency of the departmental proceeding against him.
4.
Learned Tribunal after due consideration of all relevant facts and materials by the impugned judgment, allowed the application and directed the present petitioners to consider the name of the present respondent for his promotion to the post of Inspector of Police if found otherwise eligible.
Direction was also given for giving him seniority on promotion on notional basis with effect from the date his immediate junior was promoted.
5.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said judgment, the said authorities have filed the instant application.
6.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner authorities, Mr. Amal Baran Chatterjee, at the very outset invited our attention, to the circumstances which stood in the way of promotion of the present respondent.
It appears that the West Bengal Human Rights Commission with J Chittatosh Mookerjee as its Chairperson made certain recommendations in connection with police atrocities causing bullet injuries to Sk.
Sayed and his mother-in-law, Meherjan Bibi.
The said letter dated 31011997 was addressed to the Principal Secretary, Home Department, Government of West Bengal.
The Commission recommended that "(i) S.I.
Somnath Chakraborty shall be prosecuted by Government for unwarranted, unjustified and unprovoked firing from his service revolver at Sk.
Sayed and Munwara Bibi in the morning of 15th February, 1996 and, also for giving an untrue version of the incident.
The investigation of this case shall be entrusted to the CID West Bengal; (ii) the Commission further recommends that departmental proceedings be started also against SI Paresh Chandra Sarkar for having given a fabricated story and for abetting the illegal acts of Somnath Chakraborty; and ....  7.
It appears from the submission made by Id Counsel for the parties as well as from the materials on record that a case was started against the present respondent.
Somnath Chakraborty, being Panskura PS.
Case No. 33 of 1998.
It appears that the said case was endorsed to CID West Bengal, for investigation.
8.
It was submitted on behalf of the present respondent that the said criminal case was ordered to be stayed by Hon'ble Single Bench of the High Court.
With the communication of such order of stay of the criminal case, the Enquiring Officer stayed the departmental proceeding even without any prayer from the present respondent in that regard.
Such departmental proceeding which was started against the present respondent could not be completed within a period of three years.
9.
Relying upon the Memorandum No. 224-P&AR (Vig.)
dated 12061980, Home Department, Personnel and Administrative Reforms Branch it was urged that promotion of the present respondent cannot be held up merely on the ground that the departmental proceeding against him is still pending.
The relevant portion of the said Memorandum is as follows :-  "(ii) The confirmation/promotion/efficiency bar crossing/Selection Grade appointment of a Government servant or recruitment of in-service candidates to higher posts should not be held up in case, where disciplinary proceedings having been started, have continued for more than three years, unless the delay in the disposal of the disciplinary proceedings is due to any dilatory tactics employed by the Government servant concerned or due to proceedings in a Court of Law started at the instance of the officer concerned."
10.
Learned Counsel Mr. LK Gupta, appearing for the respondent submitted that the departmental proceeding initiated against the respondent could not be completed within a period of three years and he was due to no fault on the part of the said respondent.
It was submitted that the present respondent as the Charged Officer did not seek `stay of further proceeding' of the said departmental enquiry.
It was done by the enquiry authority on its own and in such circumstances the present respondent cannot be held responsible for continuation of the said proceeding even for a period of more than three years.
Mr. Gupta then submitted that pendency of such proceeding cannot also be a ground for non-consideration of the name of the respondent for his promotion to the post of Inspector.
11.
Mr. Gupta referred to the decision in the case of Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr. v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors., reported in AIR 1978 SC 851 wherein it was held that "when a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may by the time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out."
12.
Reference was also made to the decision in the case of Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, reported in AIR (39) 1952 SC 16.
In the said case it was held that "public authorities cannot play fast and loose with the powers vested in them, and persons to whose detriment orders are made are entitled to know with exactness and precision what they are expected to do or forbear from doing and exactly what authority is making the order."
13.
The facts and circumstances of the present case are, however, significantly different Matter relating to promotion of Sub-Inspectors of Police was taken up in a conference of the Director General of Police with 18 other Police Officers.
The various aspects relating to performance of the officers concerned were taken into consideration.
The minutes of the said conference as referred to by Id Counsel for the respondent indicate that while considering the individual cases of selection the conference unanimously decided to take into account the question of seniority combined with merit and overall performance and efficiency honesty, integrity of the individual officers who qualified for consideration in the conference, judging overall performance of the preceding five years.
It appears that the "conference also considered professional competence and suitability or otherwise of the offices for higher responsibility."
14.
In such circumstances, it appears that it will be an attempt to read more than what meets the eyes in submitting that mere pendency of the enquiry proceeding was a sole ground.
15.
According to Mr. AB Chatterjee, learned Counsel for the petitioners/State Authorities, the department concerned being the Home Department, Government of West Bengal, could not afford to ignore the recommendation made by the Human Rights Commission.
Following such recommendation, the departmental proceedings was started against the present respondent.
A criminal proceeding was also started, as referred to earlier and it was also the specific recommendation of the Human Rights Commission.
Mere fact that such criminal proceeding was stayed by an order passed by Learned Single Bench of this Court by itself does not mean that the present respondent could not have had anything to do with it.
After all, criminal proceeding was stayed in response to the prayer, of the present respondent and, thereafter, staying of further disciplinary proceeding, though not directly made at the instance of the present respondent, could not by itself be sufficient reason to hold that the respondent was in no way responsible for the same.
16.
It appears that the Memorandum dated 12061980 issued by the Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal has been strongly relied upon by Id Counsel Mr. Gupta, appearing for the respondent.
It is true, as is found from the materials on record that the present respondent was declared unfit for promotion by the Board in view of the "enquiry" proceeding dated 19061998 pending against him.
17.
Learned Counsel for both the parties referred to the typographical error in mentioning the number of the proceeding.
The fact, however, remains that the present respondent was not considered for promotion in view of the proceeding as referred to therein.
18.
After giving due regard to the submission made by Id Counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the Memorandum dated 12061980 issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal, apparently speaks volume in favour of the respondent.
But the Court while placing reliance upon a document is not expected to pick and choose but must consider the same in its entirety.
It can't afford to miss the woods for the trees.
It is clearly mentioned in the said Memorandum that "(iii) the confirmation/promotion/efficiency bar crossing/Selection Grade appointments or recruitment of in-service candidates to higher posts should be held up in a case where the Government servant has been placed under suspension pending disciplinary proceedings, or Government has started criminal proceedings against such Government servant in Court of Law."
19.
In the present case, as contended by Id Counsel Mr. Gupta, this Court is not required to look for anything more than what was indicated by the Board while considering the matter for promotion of the respondent and others.
But the Court cannot afford to be unmindful to the instructions contained in the relevant Memorandum and proper appreciation of the spirit of the said Memorandum as well as its entire contents, we are afraid, does not lend much support to the respondent.
20.
So, to sum up, the present respondent was recruited as Sub-Inspector of Police.
In connection with an enquiry conducted by the Human Rights Commission, there were prima facie findings of acts of atrocity committed by the said respondent.
The said Commission did not stop then and there but recommended starting of a criminal case against such respondent and further directed that investigation of the same was to be done by the CID, West Bengal.
The case of the present respondent need be weighed in the contest of the aforesaid facts and circumstances while considering his promotion to a superior rank.
It is not in dispute that a criminal case was started though subsequently it was stayed by an order of this Court Disciplinary proceeding was also initiated and the same was stayed suo motu in view of the order of stay passed in connection with the criminal proceeding.
With out most difficulty this Court restrains itself and does not make any comment in regard to justifiability of staying further disciplinary proceeding.
It is also difficult to appreciate as to what prevented the Board headed by none other than Director General of Police of the State to specifically point out the reason for non inclusion of the name of the respondent in the selection list.
21.
Be that as it may, as discussed earlier, we are of the view that pendency of the departmental proceeding cannot be dissociated and it cannot be held by any stretch of imagination that such respondent was in no way responsible for continuation of the said proceeding for a period of more than three years.
Besides a criminal case is also pending as against the respondent.
22.
Having regard to all such circumstances, we are of the view that the Tribunal was not justified in directing the authority concerned to consider the case of the respondent for promotion to the post of Inspector in terms of the circular of the Chief Secretary being No. 224-P&AR(Vig) dated 12061980.
23.
The present application filed by the petitioners/State authorities be allowed on contest and the judgment impugned dated 7th October, 2002 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal, in OA No. 1317 of 2001, be set aside.
24.
Application filed by the respondent before the Tribunal also stands dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the parties after due compliance with the legal formalities.
Aloke Chakrabarti, J - I agree.
Petition allowed.