The ten petitioners were initially employed in Orissa Composite Boards Ltd, in the year 1986-87 on daily wage basis.
The Orissa Composite Board Ltd merged with the Orissa Forest Development Corporation Ltd with effect from 141991.
The petitioner submitted representations to the Managing Director of the Orissa Forest Development Corporation Ltd, for regularizing their services.
But the services of the petitioners were not regularized.
The petitioners have filed writ petition No. OJC 8633 of 1998 praying for a direction to the opposite parties to regularize their services and to extend the benefits of the provisions of equal pay for equal work in Article 39 read with Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
On 971998, the Court while issuing notice in the writ petition passed an interim order in Misc. Case No. 8107 of 1998 directing that if the petitioners are still in service as on that day, they shall continue in service.
Pursuant to the said order dated 971998, the petitioners are continuing in service.
3.
A counter-affidavit has been field by opposite party No. 3 stating therein inter alia that after the merger of the Orissa Composite Boards Ltd, the Similiphar Development Corporation and the Orissa Forest Corporation with the Orissa Forest Development Corporation Ltd, (for short the OFDC) the manpower position of the OFDC has increased manifold and has become surplus and there is dearth of work in the OFDC and the financial condition of the OFDC is in a deplorable state and the OFDC has already taken steps to retrench all the daily rated employees working under the organization including those senior to the petitioners.
In the said counter-affidavit, the OFDC has therefore taken a stand that it is not possible to regularize the services of the petitioners.
The OFDC has also filed Misc. Case No. 8614 of 2002 praying for vacating the aforesaid interim order dated 971998.
4.
When the writ petition and misc. cases were taken up today, learned counsel for the parties agreed that the writ petition itself be taken up for final disposal and for this reason we have taken up the hearing of the main writ petition along with two misc. cases.
5.
Mr. Choudhury, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the OFDC while refusing to regularize the services of the petitioners on the ground of surplus staff in the OFDC has regularized the services of Rabindra Kumar Sahu by order dated 1621994, copy of which has been annexed to the rejoinder-affidavit as Annexure-10.
He further submitted that Goswami Mahananda and RK Shahu were also engaged on daily wage basis with effect from 1.12.1989 and 111990 and Sanjib Ranjan Boxi was engaged on 2841987 and the services of these three persons engaged on daily wage basis after the petitioners have been regularized since 1990, but no step has been taken to regularize the services of the petitioners.
Mr. Choudhury further submitted that the facts and circumstances of the case would go to show that the OFDC has shown discriminatory attitude towards the petitioners in the matter of regularization of services of daily wage employees and for this reason, the Court can in exercise of its power under Article 226 of the Constitution direct the opposite parties to regularize the services of the petitioners.
6.
Mr. Mohapatra learned counsel for the OFDC, on the other hand, submitted relying on paragraph 4 of the reply affidavit failed on behalf of the OFDC that Shri R K Sahu was terminated from service on 30.4.1988 and he raised an industrial dispute (Industiral Dispute Case No. 34 of 1991) which was referred to the Labour Court, Bhubaneswar and the dispute was settled on 16.6.1992 and on the basis of the said settlement, an award has been passed by the Labour Court on 23.7.1992 and on the strength of the award, the services of RK Sahu was regularized without any back wages.
Regarding Sri RK Sahu, Sri G Mahananda and SR Boxi, Mr. Mohapatra, submitted that these three employees had been directly appointed in the Orissa Composite Board Ltd on regular basis on being sponsored by the Employment Exchange and after they were selected in an interview and after they complied with all necessary formalities prior to the merger of Orissa Composite Board Ltd, with the OFDC and at the time of their appointment on regular basis in the Orissa Composite Board Ltd, the petitioners did not raise any dispute.
Mr. Mohapatra argued that the petitioners therefore, stood in a different footing than Shri RK Sahu, who was regularized on the strength of ID Case No. 34 of 1992 and RK Sahu, GMohananda and SR Boxi who were appointed on regular basis in the Orissa Composite Board Ltd, prior to the merger of OFDC and no case of discrimination against the petitioners in the matter of regularization has been made out by the petitioners.
7.
We agree with Mr. Mohapatra, learned counsel for the opposite parties that regularization of the aforesaid employees are on different footing and the petitioners cannot complaint of discrimination on the ground that the aforesaid four employees were regularized in service while the petitioners were not regularized in service.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, they have claimed regularization in service of the OFDC after the Orissa Composite Board Ltd, got merged in the OFDC The OFDC as stated in the counter-affidavit, already has surplus staff and has taken a decision to retrench all daily wage employees including those who are senior to the petitioners.
So long as the regular staff of the OFDC are surplus, the Court cannot possibly direct the OFDC to regularize the services of the 10 petitioners.
8.
Mr. Choudhury, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that it is provided in Sec. 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 that where any workmen are retrenched, and the employer proposes to take into his employment any person, he shall have to give opportunity to retrench workmen, who offer themselves for re-employment shall have preference over other persons.
He further submitted that in a very recent decision in the case of SM Nilajkar v. Telecom District Manager, Karnataka, 2003 AIR SCW 2196 the Supreme Court found that the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Bangalore by a common award dated 21.6.1999 had directed reinstatement with benefit of continuity of service and consequential benefit but not back wages and the Supreme Court has observed that since the project in which the workmen were engaged has come to an end the Government may consider that the workmen may be accommodated in some other projects or schemes or regular employment, if available by issuing suitable instructions or guidelines and if this is no possible the Telecom District Manager shall be at liberty to terminate the employment of the appellants therein after reinstating them as directed by the High Court and after complying with Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He submitted that similar directions be given in the present case to the OFDC  9.
Mr. Mohapatra, learned counsel for the Corporation on the other hand, cited a decision of the Supreme Court in Notified Area Council, Pipili v. Gahar Mohd., 2001(4) Supreme Court 347 in which it has been held that continuance or abolition of posts is within power of employer and such decision is not to be interfered with by the Court unless it is held vitiated by mala fide or arbitrary.
10.
We have considered the aforesaid two decisions of the Supreme Court cited by Mr. Choudhury and Mr. Mohapatra and we find that such decisions do not apply to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
This is not a case where any award has been passed by the Tribunal for reinstatement of the workmen on the ground that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act were not complied with before the petitioners were retrenched from service.
In this case, the petitioners continued to be daily wage employees and are yet to be regularized in service and their case is that they should be regularized in service.
This is not a case where some posts were created by the OFDC and the said posts are sought to be discontinued or abolished.
As indicated in the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of OFDC, the OFDC has now surplus staff in the regular roll and therefore, is not in a position to take more staff on its regular roll.
Its financial condition also does not permit regular employment of further staff for the time being.
In these facts and circumstances, this Court cannot issue mandamus to the OFDC to regularize the services of the petitioners.
But in case the OFDC disengages the petitioners as daily rated employees, the petitioners will have a preference for re-employment in the OFDC in terms of Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
11.
With these observations, the writ petition and the misc. cases are disposed of and the interim orders passed on 971998 are vacated.
Petition dismissed.