JS Narang, J. - It is the case of the petitioner that he was found fully eligible and qualified for appointment as a JBT teacher to teach in the Government Schools and also the schools run by the Government of Rajasthan.
He was posted at Government Middle School Hinjrasir (Sriganganagar) and he joined on the said post on April 11, 1996.
He served in the aforestated school from the aforestated date to January 1, 2002.
He resigned from the aforestated post so as to join as JBT teacher with the Government of Punjab.
2.
Government of Punjab vide letter No. 2902-BOV-60/21433 dated 951960, took a policy decision in regard to recognition of the diplomas/certificates awarded by the institutions situated outside the territorial jurisdiction of the State of Punjab.
The Government had taken the decision in consultation with the Punjab State Public Service Commission that the JBT certificate or similar diploma granted by any other Government or public institution situated within the jurisdiction of the State Government will be equivalent to the JBT certificate of the Punjab Education department, if the following conditions are fulfilled :-  (i) it has been awarded after two years training; (ii) in the event of it being awarded by any institution, such institution stands recognised by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the institution is situated.
Copy of the aforestated has been appended as Annexure P-6.
It has been averred that the qualification, acquired by the petitioner from the institution controlled and governed by the Department of Rajasthan, stood recognised for appointment of JBT Teacher (Primary) in the schools run either under the Government of Punjab or the aided schools throughout India, as this qualification had been recognised by National Council of Teachers Education (NCTE).
3.
The Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee (Primary), Punjab, Chandigarh, had issued an advertisement published in the Punjabi Tribune dated 4122001, vide which applications had been invited for 331 posts of JBT/ETT Teachers in the Department of Education (Primary) in the grade of Rs. 4550- 7220.
The last date of receiving the application was fixed as 10122001.
The educational qualification disclosed in the advertisement was Matric, 10+2 from recognised Board/University with Punjabi upto Matric and two years diploma in Elementary Teachers Training/JBT course.
4.
The petitioner being eligible and qualified to be appointed against the post of JBT/ETT teacher, as per he qualifications prescribed and described in the advertisement and also as per the government instructions and the Punjab State Education Class-III (Primary School Cadre) Service Rules, 1997, had applied to be considered for the posts.
Upon having been interviewed by the Selection Committee and recommended accordingly, the petitioner was issued a letter of appointment vide letter No. EI/appointment-2001/7449-52 dated 26122001.
Copy of the letter of appointment has been appended as Annexure P-8.
In view of this letter, the petitioner submitted his resignation from the post of JBT Teacher in Government Middle School Hinjarsir (Sri Ganganagar) and submitted his joining report with respondent No. 5 on 212002 as JBT teacher in Government Primary School, Rehana Jattan, Block Phagwara, District Kapurthala.
He continued to teach to the satisfaction of his superiors when to his surprise, he received communication dated April 3, 2003, vide which his services as JBT/ETT Teacher have been terminated with immediate effect without giving any opportunity of being heard.
The reason given is that the petitioner had produced a certificate of having passed the examination of JBT/ETT from Rajasthan Education Department in the year 1994 whereas, the Government of Punjab had de-recognised such diploma with effect from August 16, 1990.
Therefore, the petitioner having been found ineligible, being not qualified, the services of the petitioner were terminated.
5.
A detailed representation was submitted by the petitioner to respondent No. 2 on the premises that the petitioner holds the qualifications which are duly recognised.
It has also been contended by the petitioner that some of the candidates who had passed two years ETT Diploma Course from Union Territory, Chandigarh after June 27, 1996 and from Haryana after 2951984, had filed CWP Nos. 16436 of 1998 and 15581 of 1998, which have been allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated February 25, 2000.
It is the contention that such candidates, who had acquired such qualifications from Union Territory, Chandigarh and State of Haryana have been accepted to hold such qualifications equivalent to the qualification in the State of Punjab.
It is contended in those cases that the Government of Punjab had issued advertisements dated April 2, 2000 and also December 4, 2001, vide which the condition that the candidate must have passed two years ETT course from Union Territory, Chandigarh w.e.f.
May 29, 1984.
This similar condition was made applicable in the case of the petitioner that he should have acquired the equivalent qualification before August 16, 1990.
This would have no relevance in view of the judgment rendered by this Court in the aforestated petitions.
Additionally, National Council of Teachers Education has accorded recognition to the Elementary Teachers Training (ETT) course/STC Rajasthan from where the petitioner has passed the aforestated diploma.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the National Council of Teachers Education had been constituted under the National Council of Education Act, 1993.
Pursuant thereto the NCTE became the statutory body in controlling the teachers' education for the school level teacher education and university level.
Under the Act, the NCTE has been empowered to grant recognition to the institution, which offers the course in teachers education.
The aforestated diploma, granted by Rajasthan State, having been recognised by NCTE, which has been acquired by the petitioner, the petitioner is eligible for employment under the Central Government, State Government, University or any school cadre or other educational body aided by the Central Government or any State Government.
6.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the aforestated diploma should have been passed by a candidates from Rajasthan before August 16, 1990, is of no consequence or has any relevance in view of the decision rendered by this Court in Kuldip Kaur's case (supra).
A reference has also been made to another judgment rendered by this Court in CWP No. 911 of 1998, by a Division Bench of this Court, decided on 3072001.
7.
The action of the respondents has been challenged on the ground that NCTE is the only statutory body to grant recognition to the institution imparting teacher's training/education in India and that the two years ETT course from District Institute of Education and Training, Chunawadh, Sri Ganga Nagar Rajasthan, has been recognised and such recognition is applicable all over India.
Thus, the respondents were not justified in terminating the services of the petitioner on the ground that the aforestated course imparted by Rajasthan is not recognised by Government of Punjab.
8.
The termination order is violative of principles of natural justice as no opportunity of being heard had been granted by the respondents to the petitioner before passing the order of termination.
9.
It is also contended that removing the petitioner from the service, after he has already put in 15 years of regular service, would not be justified and that the respondents would be stopped from committing such act in view of the dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in re : Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 SC 376.
10.
On the other hand, the stand of the Government is that the respondents had verified the certificate submitted by the candidates, who has been appointed as teachers on the basis of the diploma i.e. ETT Teachers.
During such verification, it had been found that the petitioner has passed JBT/ETT course from Rajasthan Government after 1681990, whereas under the head "Educational Qualifications" it had been specifically provided and indicated in the advertisement made on 4122001, that the candidate should have passed such course before 1681990.
A specific reference has been made, the excerpt of which reads as under:-  "xxx xxx xxx xxx (b) must have passed two years JBT course from Rajasthan State before August 16, 1990."
11.
The petitioner had been appointed on probation and that the period of probation was to expire on 112003.
Before the petitioner could be confirmed, the factual position came to the notice of the respondents and the order of termination dated 342003, has been passed.
The petitioner had been given the opportunity vide communication dated 422003, endorsed on 432003, to produce the qualifying certificate.
The petitioner produced the certificate which is indicative that he had passed the examination of ETT from Rajasthan Education Department in 1994, whereas, the said course stood de- recognised by the government of Punjab with effect from 1681990.
The services of the petitioner have been correctly terminated as he was not qualified on the date of advertisement of the posts, which fact had been clearly and categorically mentioned in the advertisement under the head "Educational Qualifications".
A reference has been made to a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein almost such similar situation had been examined and their Lordships have categorically observed that if a person had joined the course in 1990, i.e. prior to August, 1990 and that the course was completed subsequently, such candidate would not be governed under the rule of disqualification, despite having acquired the qualification after 1681990.
Their lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India have enunciated the principle while rendering judgment in Suresh Pal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027.
12.
The relevant extract contained in para 3 of the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court reads as under :-  "We are of the view that since at the time when the petitioners joined the course, it was recognised by the Govt. of Haryana and it was on the basis of this recognition that the petitioners joined the course, it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now though at the time of their joining the course it was recognized, yet they cannot be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course it was de-recognized by the State Government on 9th January, 1985.
We would, therefore, allow the appeal and direct the State Government to recognize the certificates obtained by the petitioners and to other similarly situated persons as a result of completing the certificate course in Shri Hanuman Yayayam Prasarak Mandal Amravati for the purpose of appointment as Physical Training Instructor in Govt. Schools in Haryana.
Of course, if any person has joined the certificate course after 9th January, 1985, he would not be entitled to the benefit of this order and any certificate obtained by him from the said Institute would be of no avail.
There will be no order as to costs of the appeal."
13.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and have also perused the paper book as also the factual status relating to the job of the petitioner as also the judgments quoted by the learned counsel for the petitioner as also the learned Additional Advocate General.
14.
We are of the considered opinion that the petitioner would not be entitled to the relief by way of quashing the order dated April 3, 2003, copy Annexure P-9, vide which the services of the petitioner have been terminated.
The rule of equivalence as claimed by the petitioner vis-a-vis the qualifications acquired from the institution situated in the State of Rajasthan and that of the qualifications acquirable in the State of Punjab, cannot be accepted.
The respondents had categorically indicated in the advertisement dated December 4, 2001, that the candidates who have passed two years JBT Course from the Rajasthan State before August 16, 1990, shall be eligible and shall be taken as qualified for the post.
Admittedly, the petitioner acquired this qualification in the year 1994 and that the said qualification is a two years diploma course, obviously the petitioner must have joined in the year 1992 and not prior to August 16, 1990.
The reliance placed upon the dicta of the Full Bench of this Court rendered in re : Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) SCT 770, whereby the letter dated May 9, 1960 of the Government of Punjab had been interpreted and it has been held that the Government of Punjab had taken the aforestated decision by way of aforestated letter after consulting the Punjab Public Service Commission to the effect that the diplomas granted by other State Government or any institutions situated within the jurisdiction of that State Government, would be equivalent to Junior Basic Training Course offered by the Education Department of Government of Punjab but of course subject to the two conditions i.e. such course was of two years training and that the diploma awarded by the institutions are recognised by that Government.
In view of that communication, the certificate of training obtained from an institution controlled and run by Govt. of Haryana stood recognised by the State of Punjab.
It shall be apposite to notice the relevant paragraphs No. 6 and 7 from the judgment which read as under :-  "6.
If Annexure P/16, extract of which has been reproduced above, is read closely, the position has been made abundantly clear that the State of Punjab had taken the decision after consulting the Punjab Public Service Commission that the similar Diplomas granted by other State Governments or any Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of that State Government would be equivalent to Junior Basic Teachers Training Course of the Punjab Education Department if two conditions are fulfilled i.e. such course was of two years training and the Diplomas were awarded by the Institutions recognised by the government.
If these instructions had been brought to the notice of the Division Bench the decision would have been different and the judgment relied upon could not be distinguished."
"7.
Although in the present case it was not disputed that the Haryana Government had issued the Diploma Certificate in Fine Arts and Crafts Teacher Training Examination, to be more (sure ?
), we called upon both the parties to produce the Diploma Certificate produced by the petitioner before the State seeking appointment.
The petitioner has produced photocopy of such certificate and she also procured a photocopy of the Examination Roll of all the candidates from the Department of Industrial Training, Haryana.
It is now quite clear that the certificate was issued by the Comptroller (Controller ?)
of Examination, Department of Industrial Training, Haryana, in favour of the petitioner Neelam Kumari, daughter of Purshotam Singh, having passed final Arts and Crafts Teachers Examination, 1981, and Annexure P/1 produced in the case another certificate issued from Arya High and Training School, Gohana, that this Course taken by the petitioner was of two years session 1979-81.
The name of this institution is also mentioned in the certificate issued by the Controller of Examination Department of Industrial Training, Haryana.
In view of the instructions Annexure P/16, this certificate of training taken in Haryana stood recognised by the State of Punjab.
When the petitioner completed this course and applied for job, such certificates were recognised by the State of Punjab and if subsequently the State of Punjab decided to de- recognise such certificates, the same would be applicable prospectively and not retrospectively.
In this context, reference may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal v. State of Haryana (supra).
In para 3 of the judgment, wherein it has been observed as under :- "xx xx since at the time when the petitioners had joined the course, it was recognised by the Govt. of Haryana and it was on the basis of this recognistion that the petitioners joined the course, it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that though at the time of their joining the course it was recognized, yet they cannot be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course it was de-recognized by the State Government.
xxx xxx xxx xxx The aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court was also cited in Harpal Singh's case, but was not relied upon on the ground that the State of Punjab had never recognised certificates of JBT obtained from the State of Haryana.
In view of the instructions of the State of Punjab contained in Annexure P-16, the view expressed in Harpal Singh's case cannot be accepted as correct.
Net result would be that the said training course diploma obtained by the petitioner from the Haryana State which was recognised by the State of Punjab in view of the instructions contained in Annexure P-16, would continue to be recognised as such and the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Arts and Crafts teacher on compassionate grounds under the State Government instructions dated April 18, 1973, could not be denied."
15.
It has also been mentioned that at the time of cut off date, the petitioner had completed the course and had applied for the job.
Since such certificate was recognised by the State of Punjab and if subsequently State of Punjab decided to de-recognise such certificates, such act would be prospective in approach and would not be applicable retrospectively.
This principle has been enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Suresh Pal's case (supra).
This judgment would not be of any help to the petitioner.
Admittedly, the petitioner had acquired the qualification after the de-recognition of the course offered by Government of Rajasthan.
16.
Another judgment of this Court rendered in re : Manjit Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1995(1) SCT 306, has been relied upon.
The contention is that the diploma course coupled with six months Condensed Course passed from Chandigarh Institution has been treated as equivalent to Junior Basic Training (General) course offered by Government of Punjab.
The ratio of this judgment would not be applicable to the case of the petitioner as in that case the reliance has been placed upon the policy decision dated May 9, 1960, issued by Government of Punjab, the perusal of which shows that the case of the petitioner in that case stood governed by virtue of the said instructions and that the claim of the petitioner was not denied by the Government of Punjab while submitting the written statement before this Court.
Resultantly, the petitioner in that case had been granted the relief.
In this context, the reference may be made to the following paragraphs 2 and 3 from the aforestated judgment :-  2.
"On notice of motion, written statement has been filed by the official respondents, contesting the petition inter alia asserting that the Diploma Course done by the petition from Chandigarh Institute is not recognised by the Punjab State."
"3.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the stand taken up by the respondents is not in accordance with the policy decision taken by the Punjab Government, as contained in Annexure P/3.
A specific assertion was made in the writ petition that the Diploma Course coupled with completion of six months' Condensed Course was recognised by the State of Punjab vide instructions Annexure P/3.
To this fact, there is no specific denial in the written statement.
Reply in the written statement refers to only non-recognition of simple Diploma Course certificate issues by the Chandigarh Institute.
Reference to Annexure P/3, the instructions issued by the Punjab State would be necessary to appreciate the point in dispute.
The policy decision is quoted as under :- "It has been decided in consultation with the State Public Service Commission that the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate or similar Diploma granted by any other State Public Government or by any Institution situated within the jurisdiction of that State Government will be equivalent to the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate of the Punjab Education Department provided the following conditions are fulfilled :- (i) It has been awarded after two years' training.
(ii) In the event of its being awarded by any institution it is recognised by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the institution is situated.
It is further pointed out that if any such certificate/Diploma has been awarded after the period of training which may be less than two years but has been recognished by the State Government concerned, the holder thereof will be eligible for appointment as Teacher under the Punjab Government if he/she possesses two years Course examination of the Punjab Education Department even though privately."
17.
Reference has also been made to a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in re : Sukhjinder Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 11654, decided on March 31, 2000, wherein reference and reliance has been made to the aforestated judgments of this Court.
It may also be mentioned that by virtue of the aforestated judgment two such other similar petitions were decided in re : Ms. Ritu v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 212 of 1998 and Kanta Rani v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 1968 of 1998.
The perusal of the aforestated judgments shows that the point at issue is not similar to the one which has been raised by the petitioner.
It has been categorically observed that those persons possessing the qualification of JBT/ETT from the institution recognised by the State of Punjab, are eligible for appointment as JBT Teacher with the exception that those who have done two years Home Craft Course from the State of Haryana and Union Territory, before April 29, 1984 and had passed six months in Services Training Course from the Centre located in the State of Punjab could also be considered.
The observations made by the Bench read as under :-  "A bare persual of the qualifications stipulated in the advertisement shows that only those possessing the qualification of JBT/ETT from the institutions recognised by the State of Punjab are eligible for appointment as JBT Teacher with the exception that those who have done two years Home Crafts course from the State of Haryana and Union Territory before 2941984, and have passed six months in-service training course from the centres located in the State of Punjab could also be considered."
"We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions.
The confusion which has been prevailing in the Education Department on the issue of recognition of the qualifications is writ large on the face of the record.
Due to lack of clear cut policy on the issue, the recruiting agencies have not been able to determine as to whether the candidates who have passed JBT Home Crafts from Chandigarh (U.T.)
and Haryana with six months condensed course are to be treated eligible for appointment as JBT Teacher.
The affidavit filed by Shri Lakhanpal is of little help to clear the cloud of confusion.
In paragraph 1 of the affidavit, Shri Lakhanpal has referred to the instructions contained in the circular letter dated 951960.
In paragraph 2, he has made reference to the decision taken by the government to de-recognise two years JBT (Home Science) Course from Haryana.
In paragraphs 3 to 9, he has referred to the various circulars issued by the government and Director, SCERT, Punjab and in paragraph 10, he has made a mention of the circular letter dated 2761996.
For the sake of convenience, the contents of paragraphs 1 and 2 and extracts of paragraph 10 of the affidavit of Shri Lakhanpal are reproduced below :- "1.
That Punjab Govt. vide its letter No. 2092-EDV-60/21435 dated 951960 (Copy Annexure R/1) and its letter No. 6272-EDV-6/26328 dated September 1961 (Copy Annexure R/2) took a policy decision that JBT Certificate or similar Diploma granted by any other State or by an Institute situate within the jurisdiction of that State Govt. will be equivalent to that of JBT of Punjab State with the following two conditions : (a) It has been awarded after two years training.
(b) In the event of any such certificate/Diploma has been awarded after a period of training which may be less than two years but has been recognised by the State Government concerned, the holder thereof will be eligible for appointment as teacher under the Punjab Govt, if he/she passed two years course examination of the Punjab Education Department even though privately."
In conclusion, the Division Bench of this Court had directed the government for reviewing the entire issue relating to recognition and de-recognition of the claims of JBT/Home Craft awarded by Chandigarh Administration UT and the Government of Haryana vis-a-vis JBT/ETT awarded by the Education Department of Punjab and also whether the de-recognition had taken place before the petitioners had acquired the qualifications from Union Territory, Chandigarh/State of Haryana and thereafter decide their claim of appointment on the basis of recommendations made by the Selection Committee.
The direction contained in the judgment reads as under :-  "xx xx xx xx We may have delved upon the issue at greater length but in order to avoid further confusion, we consider it proper to direct the government to review the entire issue relating to recognition and de-recognition of the qualifications of JBT Home Crafts awarded by the Chandigarh Administration (UT) and the Government of Haryana vis-a-vis the JBT/ETT awarded by the Education Department of Punjab and also whether the de-recognition had taken place before the petitioners had acquired qualifications from Union Territory, Chandigarh/State of Haryana and then decide their claim for appointment on the basis of the recommendations made by the Selection Committee."
The aforestated judgments referred to at the bar are not at all applicable to the case of the petitioner.
The petitioner has acquired the required qualification from the institute at Rajasthan in the year 1994, whereas the recognition granted to the said course was de-recognised by the State of Punjab with effect from August 16, 1990.
It had been categorically mentioned in the advertisement published in the newspaper for recruitment of JBT teachers that the qualification as offered by the State of Rajasthan must have been acquired before August 16, 1990.
However, in view of the dicta of the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal's case (supra), the petitioner could have been given the benefit if he had joined the course prior to the aforestated date and completed the same after August 16, 1990.
This is not so.
The petitioner admittedly joined the course after the aforestated date and completed the same in the year 1994 as nothing has been stated in this regard nor has been mentioned.
In all other cases, the rule of equivalence was being considered in view of the letter dated May, 1960, issued by the Government of Punjab.
It has been mentioned in all the aforestated judgments that if the requisite qualification had been acquired before the publication of the de-recognition of such course, the benefit could be awardable to the concerned claimants.
18.
In the given facts of this case, we do not find any merit in the petition and that the stand of the government is absolutely correct.
19.
It may also be mentioned that the petitioner had been granted appointment probably on account of a mistake or otherwise and that this fact was examined by virtue of a direction of this Court made in CWP No. 7346 of 2002.
It is upon certification of the qualifications of such employees that the orders had been passed.
The case of the petitioner falls within the aforestated ambit.
20.
A reference had also been made to the dicta of the Full Bench judgment of this Court rendered in re : Neelam Kumari's case (supra).
The point at issue was entirely different as the letter dated may 9, 1960 issued by the Government of Punjab was under consideration whereby the State of Punjab had taken the decision after consulting the Punjab Public Service Commission for similar diplomas granted by the other State Governments or any other institution situated within the jurisdiction of that State Government would be equivalent to the Junior Basic Teacher's Training course of the Punjab Education Department if the two conditions incorporated in the aforestated communication were fulfilled.
Reference was also made to the dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court judgment rendered in re : Suresh Pal's case (supra) but the same has been distinguished on the ground that though it had been cited in Harpal Singh's case but was not relied upon on the ground that the State of Punjab had never recognised the qualifications of JBT teachers, obtained from the State of Haryana.
The matter relating to appointment on priority basis on compassionate ground was in issue as is evident from the observation of the Hon'ble Full Bench.
The relevant para 8 of the said judgment reads as under :-  "8.
The present case was tossed from one department to another for a number of years and because of technical objections having been raised by such departments, the petitioner was not appointed on priority basis on compassionate grounds, as stated above.
The writ petition is allowed with costs of Rs. 3,000/-.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Arts and Craft teacher forthwith if vacancy exists, otherwise to appoint her by creating another post."
21.
The cumulative view pursuant to the aforestated discussion is that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
Admittedly, the petitioner had joined the course in question after August 16, 1990, and had acquired qualification in the year 1994.
The respondents had categorically indicated in the advertisement that such course should have been acquired before August 16, 1990.
The petitioner was aware of the status and yet applied for the post but due to the incorrect appraisal on the part of the Government, the petitioner has been given the appointment.
This fact came to the notice, when all the appointments made pursuant to the aforestated developments were re-examined.
In this process, the petitioner continued on the post for a period of 15 months but this would not give any right to the petitioner when the petitioner did not fullfil the basic qualifications for being appointed on the post.
Resultantly, we find no merit in the petition, which is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.