SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8457, 8458 and 8489-CAT of 2000 as common questions of law are involved in all these petitions.
2.
The private respondents were working as Signal Khalasi with the petitioner-Indian Railways.
On 591986, they were given ad hoc promotion on the post of Material Checking Clerk (hereinafter referred to as "the MCC"), in the grade of Rs. 260-400 on purely ad hoc basis against existing vacancies (Annexure P-1).
In the order of promotion (Annexure P-1), it was specifically provided that the order of promotion will not confer upon them any right for future promotion.
They will be reverted on arrival of selected candidates.
On being so promoted, the respondents continued on the promoted posts.
Thereafter, they participated in the viva voce test and were duly placed on provisional panel of MCC by order dated 24101997 (Annexure P-5).
The names of the respondents appear at Sr. Nos. 10, 11 and 12 in the order (Annexure P- 5).
The aforesaid selection had been made on the basis of the Viva Voce Test conducted on 2051996 and 24.5.1996.
On 4111997, the services of the respondents were regularised as MCC by order (Annexure P-6).
In the meantime, the petitioner had issued a policy of regularisation on 851987 under Item No. 53/86.
In the aforesaid policy decision, it was provided as under:-  "Item No. 53/86 :- Cancellation of selection for the post of MCC on DLI DIVN.
After discussing it was decided by the GM that all these staff who are working continuously as MCC on ad hoc basis for the period of three years or more may be regularised on the basis of their service record and viva voce duly observing the extent (extant ?)
instructions on the subject as a special case not to be quoted as a precedent in future.
If there are still more vacancies after regularising the said staff as per para 1 above, to fill up these normal selection may be held and completed very early."
3.
According to this policy decision, all the staff working continuously as MCC on ad hoc basis for a period of three years or more, were to be considered for regularisation on the basis of their service record and viva voce.
Since these respondents had, however, not completed three years service, they were not granted the benefit of this policy.
The respondents, therefore, represented to the petitioner.
Since no relief had been granted, the respondents approached the Central Administrative Tribunal by filing the OAs.
During the pendency of the proceedings in the Central Administrative Tribunal, the petitioner granted the benefit of service to the respondents w.e.f.
1081988.
The respondents filed the OAs claiming the benefit of service with effect from the date they were initially appointed on 591986.
The Central Administrative Tribunal, by judgment dated 1122000 (Annexure P-8) allowed the applications and directed the petitioner to grant the normal benefits to the respondents like seniority, fixation of pay etc. with effect from the date they were promoted on ad hoc basis i.e. 591986.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid decision by filing these three writ petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
5.
Mr. Jindal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that a perusal of the order of initial promotion of the respondents would show that it was a stop-gap arrangement which could not have given any rights to the respondents.
He further submits that the petitioner has already granted the respondents the benefit of service from the date of first panel of ad hoc MCC was regularised in Delhi Division.
He submits that the decision rendered by the Central Administrative Tribunal is erroneous and is contrary to the rules.
Mr. Jindal further submits that the respondents could not have been granted any relief in view of the law laid down by the Delhi High Court in the case of Union of India v. Badri Prasad and others, CWP No. 5057 of 2001, decided on 1382002.
He also relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in the case of MK Shanmugam and another v. Union of India and others, 2000(2) SCT 954 (SC) : 2000(4) Supreme Court Cases 476.
6.
On the other hand, Mr. Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the private respondents submits that the matter is squarely covered by the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of L Chanderkishore Singh and others v. State of Manipur and others, 1999(8) Supreme Court Cases 287.
He also relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of T Vijayan and others v. Divisional Railway Manager and others, 2000(2) SCT 470.
He submits that the aforesaid judgment considers the effect of the rule contained in paragraph 216 of the Railway Establishment Manual.
7.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
We are unable to accept the submissions of Mr. Jindal, learned counsel for the petitioner that the promotion of the petitioners would not create any legal rights as the procedure of selection was not followed.
A perusal of the order (Annexure P-1) passed on 591986 clearly shows that the respondents had been promoted against existing vacancies.
Under Rule 174 of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual, the posts of Office Clerks are to be filled from two sources - (i) 66-2/3% by direct recruitment and (ii) 33-1/3% by promotion by selection of specified Group "D" Staff.
The order dated 591986 (Annexure P-1) states that the respondents had been promoted against existing vacancies.
Thus, it is clear that the respondents had been promoted against the vacancies which fell in the quota of promotees.
The only reason as to why the respondents were not regularly promoted, was due to the selection process not being initiated at that time.
Subsequently, when the selection process was initiated, the respondents were duly selected.
Furthermore, the petitioner-Indian Railways have themselves granted the benefit of service to the respondents w.e.f.
1081988.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that it would be wholly unjust to deny the benefit to the respondents with effect from the date they were initially appointed.
If the condition of three years service which is required for regularisation was strictly adhered to by the petitioner, then the promotion of the respondents could not have been regularised before 591989.
Having already done part justice to the respondents, the petitioner was not justified in denying the benefit of service from 591986 to 1081988.
The judgment rendered by the learned Tribunal cannot be said to be either erroneous or contrary to the rules.
In the case of T Vijayan (supra), the Supreme Court considered Rule 216-A which deals with ad hoc promotion against selection and non-selection posts.
The aforesaid rule provides as under :-  "216-A.
Ad hoc promotion against selection and non-selection posts.
(i) Ad hoc promotions should be avoided as far as possible both in selection and non-selection posts, and where they are found inescapable and have to be made in the exigency of service, they should be resorted to only sparingly and only for a short duration of 3 to 4 months.
The ad hoc promotion should be ordered only from amongst senior-most suitable staff.
As a rule a junior should not be promoted ignoring his senior."
8.
After considering the aforesaid Rule, it has been clearly held by the Supreme Court that ad hoc promotion is permissible pending regular selection.
Once ad hoc promotion is found to be permissible under the rules, it has to be held that the respondents who had been promoted on ad hoc basis in the existencies of service pending regular selection, are entitled to the benefit of ad hoc service for reckoning their seniority and fixation of pay etc.
The learned Tribunal has rightly relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in L Chanderkishore Singh's case (supra).
The judgments relied upon by the Mr. Jindal are not applicable in view of the facts and circumstances of the present case.
9.
In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the aforesaid writ petitions and the same are dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.