SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - Additional Affidavit of petitioner No. 1 is taken on record.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners at length.
3.
All the petitioners were absorbed in the Wireless Wing from the District Police cadre in the year 1988.
In the year 1988 itself the respondents made certain promotions on the basis of the B-1 test in which all the eligible candidates both of the Telecommunication Wing and that of the Constables absorbed from other Wings were permitted to appear.
In the year 1989, those who had qualified the B-1 test were given promotions in the rank of Head Constables.
At that time there were no rules or instructions setting out a criteria to be followed in making promotions.
In the year 1991, a criteria for promotions was proposed giving three options, as follows:-  "1.
After conducting B-1 test of eligible candidates as was done in the past.
2.
As directed by the DIG/A&T(H), Chandigarh that all constables of wireless section should have completed 3 years of service and should be basic RT Course pass.
All constables permanently absorbed in wireless section from other units should have completed 2 years service in wireless section after absorption and should be basic RT course pass (One year relaxation given).
4.
The option at serial No. 3 was approved i.e. all the eligible Constables were to be promoted on the basis of the date of the enlistment in the Police Department as Constables.
The aforesaid criteria became a subject matter of litigation in this Court which culminated in a decision firstly rendered by the learned Single Judge, on 10.9.1993.
The learned Single Judge held that the promotions made on the basis of the instructions dated 1261991 were not arbitrary as the instructions were not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The two Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10253 of 1991 and 3678 of 1992 were dismissed.
Against the aforesaid judgment of the learned Single Judge, the aggrieved Constables filed Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 25 and 147 of 1994.
The two appeals were dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court by order dated 2111998.
In the opening part of the judgment, the Division Bench has noticed that the dispute in these two appeals is regarding inter se seniority of persons working as Constables in the Telecommunication Operator cadre in the State of Haryana.
Not satisfied by the judgment rendered by the Division Bench in the aforesaid letters patent appeals, the aggrieved Constables filed Civil Appeal No. 3183 of the 1999.
The Supreme Court dismissed the appeal against the aforesaid judgment with the following observations:-  "On examining the impugned judgment of the High Court and all other materials which are before us as well as the relevant provisions of Punjab Police Manual which is said to have been adopted by the State of Haryana, we do not find any substance in the arguments advanced by the counsel for the appellants.
It is true that in 1988 the criteria for determination of seniority was different than the criteria which have been evolved in June, 1991.
In the absence of any statutory rules there cannot be any bar for altering and amending one administrative order by another administrative order.
The only law embargo would be that issuing of a subsequent order must be by the competent authority.
The question that arises for consideration therefore is whether the Superintendent of Police can be said to be the competent authority for governing the service conditions of the constables and the head constables.
On looking at the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules, more particularly 12(1) thereof, it is clear that the Superintendent of Police is the competent authority in respect of constables and head constables being the Appointing Authority.
Appointing Authority would have the right of governing the service conditions of the employees employed by him.
In the case in hand, the order that was finally passed was only on approval of the Inspector General of Police (Telecom.).
We find no infirmity with the issuance of the aforesaid order dated 1261991 which in fact alters the service conditions of the absorbed operators and the direct recruit wireless operators.
In accordance with the said order of 1261991 the date of enlistment in the Police Department being the basis for determination of inter se seniority, there is no infirmity with the seniority, that has been determined nor there is any infirmity with the order of promotion to the post of Head Constable, the criteria for promotion being seniority-cum-merit, we, therefore, do not find any merit in the appeal which is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to cost."
Relying on the aforesaid enunciation of law by the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of this Court, which has been confirmed by the Supreme Court, the respondents have passed a speaking order on the claim of the petitioners on 9122002.
5.
During the course of arguments, Mr. CM Chopra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has submitted that the petitioners ought to have been considered for promotion in the year 1989 on the basis of the date of enlistment.
They were not permitted to appear in the B-1 test as they had not completed three years service in the Wireless Wing.
The respondents had promoted the juniors of the petitioners simply because they had completed three years service in the Wireless Wing and were eligible to appear in the B-1 Test.
The instructions dated 1261991 had to be made applicable uniformly and, therefore, the petitioners are entitled to be considered for promotion from the date persons junior to them have been promoted on the basis of their initial date of enlistment in the District Police cadre.
6.
We have considered the entire matter at length.
We are unable to accept the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
It has been very fairly submitted by Mr. CM Chopra that all the petitioners had been promoted in the year 1991.
Their claim now is restricted only to consequential relief of retrospective promotion from the year 1989, when the constables junior to them were promoted.
We are unable to accept the aforesaid submission for a number reasons.
Firstly, the petitioners were aware of their supersession by the juniors in the year 1989.
They, however, did not care to challenge the action of the respondents.
Secondly, they were given promotions in the year 1991.
Even at that stage the petitioners did not raise any objection.
Rather, they accepted the promotions under the very instructions dated 1261991.
Thereafter, they waited quietly till the year 2002 when they started making representations.
When the representation did not evoke any response, the petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 15360 of 2002.
The petition was disposed of on 2492002 by a Division Bench of this Court in which one of us (SS Nijjar, J) was a party by giving directions to the respondents to take a decision on the representation made by the petitioners by passing a speaking order.
It is pursuant to the aforesaid order passed by the Division Bench that the respondents have now passed the order dated 9122002.
Even after the aforesaid order was passed the petitioners did not care to file the present writ petition till 12.3.2005.
The validity of instructions dated 1261991 has been upheld upto the Supreme Court.
The petitioners have accepted the promotions after the aforesaid instructions came into operation.
In such circumstances, it would be wholly inappropriate for this Court to entertain the present writ petition.
It would merely unsettle the settled matter.
In the case of P Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 2271, the Supreme Court has categorically held that in case of supersession, the employees who are superseded by the juniors ought to approach the Court for redressal of their grievances within a period of six months of the date when the cause of action arises.
This period can at best be extended upto one year.
The Supreme Court has observed as follows :-  "It is not that there is any period of limitation for the Courts to exercise their powers under Article 226 nor is it that there can never be a case where the Courts cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length of time.
But it would be a sound and wise exercise of discretion for the Courts to refuse to exercise their extraordinary powers under Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief and who stand by allow things to happen and then approach the Court to put forward stale claims and try to unsettle settled matters."
7.
In the present case, the petitioners have waited for 11 years before making a representation.
Merely because this Court had issued directions to the respondents to pass a speaking order on the representation submitted by the petitioners, although belatedly, by passing a speaking order, would not condone the lapse of delay and laches on the part of the petitioners.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, we are of the considered opinion that the petition is devoid of any merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.