JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Darshan Singh, respondent No. 2 (hereinafter referred to as the respondent-workman) was inducted into the service of the New Tibba Cooperative Agricultural Service Society Limited, Tibba, District Ludhiana (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner-management) as a salesman on 1911980.
In a survey conducted by the officers of the Co-operation department, it was concluded that salesmen were in excess of the sanctioned strength.
The petitioner being the junior-most was, therefore, issued a notice dated 1021981 proposing his termination from the employment of the petitioner-management.
Consequent thereupon the services of respondent No. 2, Darshan Singh, were terminated on 1031981.
2.
In order to impugn the action of the petitioners-society in terminating his services with effect from 1031981, the petitioner first approached this Court by filing Civil Writ Petition No. No. 72 of 1981.
The aforesaid writ petition was, however, dismissed by this Court in limine on 1131981 with a simplicitor order, "Dismissed".
3.
Respondent No. 2, Darshan Singh, then initiated proceedings under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, so as to impugn the action of the petitioner-management, in terminating his services with effect from 1031981.
It seems that the dispute raised by the respondent-workman was referred to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana (hereinafter referred to as Labour Court, Ludhiana) as well as, to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court, Patiala).
Incidentally, the reference to both the labour Courts was made by the same endorsement number, namely, ID/7/605-A-81/73352-56.
The facts depicted in the pleadings reveal that both the labour Courts adjudicated upon the same controversy and arrived at divergent conclusions.
4.
In the proceedings which took place before the labour Court, Ludhiana, the respondent-workman appeared as WE-1 and his statement was recorded to the following effect :-  "WE-1 Statement of Shri Darshan Singh workman on SA.
My claim Ex. A-1 is correct and may be computed.
It is correct that at the time of my appointment as salesman two other salesmen were also working in the Society.
I do not know whether this society was inspected by Addl.
Registrar R.S.
Grewal, Ludhiana.
I also cannot say that the observation made by the Addl.
Registrar stating that the number of salesmen is higher than the sanctioned strength of the staff.
It is correct that before terminating my services I was served with a notice dated 1021981.
It is correct that I had filed a writ in the Hon'ble High Court at Chandigarh.
It is correct that my aforesaid writ was dismissed.
Certified copy of the order dismissing the writ is Ex. M1.
It is correct that when I had filed the writ interim stay was granted in my favour restraining the management from the termination of my service till the disposal of writ petition.
It is correct that salesmen who were appointed earlier to me were retained in service and I was the junior- most at that time as salesman.
I was given also my dues by money order which I accepted.
I cannot say whether quantum of work was also reduced in the society.
It is incorrect to suggest that I am deposing falsely."
5.
The Labour Court, Ludhiana primarily basing its conclusion on the statement of the respondent-workman arrived at the conclusion that the respondent- workman had received all his dues at the time of termination of his services, and as such, the action of the petitioner-management in terminating his services with effect from 1031981 was upheld.
6.
Proceedings before the Labour Court, Patiala were conducted against the petitioner-management ex parte, allegedly on account of the fact, that the petitioner-management despite having been served had not entered appearance before the Labour Court, Patiala.
Relying on the claim statement tendered by the respondent-workman and his statement recorded by the Labour Court, Patiala, in support thereof, the Labour Court, Patiala answered the reference on 18101983, in favour of the respondent-workman.
7.
The primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management before this Court is, that the decision rendered by the Labour Court, Ludhiana, through its award dated 861983 was binding on all the parties, and that the subsequent determination at the hands of the Labour Court, Patiala through its award dated 18101983 was inconsequential.
8.
Darshan Singh, the respondent-workman made a statement to this Court on 6.10.2004, to the effect that he did not have financial resources to engage a counsel to defend himself.
Mr. Dheeraj Chawla, Advocate was accordingly requested to represent respondent No. 2, Darshan Singh before this Court.
It was in the aforesaid circumstances, that Mr. Dheeraj Chawla, Advocate has assisted this Court in the controversy in hand.
9.
The primary contention of the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 is, that it was not open to the petitioner-management to impugn the award of the Labour Court, Patiala, after a challenge raised by the petitioner-management against the aforesaid award before the Civil Court had been rejected.
In so far as the instant contention of the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 is concerned, it would be pertinent to mention that the petitioner-management moved an application before the Labour Court, Patiala itself, seeking the setting aside of the ex parte award of the Labour Court, Patiala, dated 18101983.
The said application moved on behalf of the petitioner-management was, however, dismissed on 23.4.1986.
The order passed by the Labour Court, Patiala on April 23, 1986 was challenged by the petitioner-management by filing civil suit at Patiala.
The civil suit filed by the petitioner-management was dismissed by the trial Court on 3121984.
Dis-satisfied with the order passed by the trial Court, the petitioner-management preferred an appeal.
The said appeal was partly allowed, inasmuch, as by an order dated 29.8.1985, the appellate Court remanded the matter for readjudication to the trial Court.
On readjudication of the controversy by the trial Court, the trial Court, the trial Court again dismissed the suit filed by the petitioner-management on 14161986.
Dis- satisfied with the instant determination at the hands of the trial Court, the petitioner-management again preferred an appeal which was dismissed on 2571986.
In order to challenge the said appellate order, the petitioner- management approached this Court by filing Regular Second Appeal No. 3373 of 1986, which was dismissed on 1621987.
On the basis of the factual position noticed herein above, it is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for respondent-workman, that the proceedings initiated by the petitioner- management against the award of the Labour Court, Patiala dated 18101983 had attained finality, and as such, it was not open to the petitioner-management to impugn the same, by approaching this Court through the instant petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
10.
It is not possible for me to accept the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the respondent-workman.
The aforesaid submission, in my view, is based on a fallacious premises.
The order of the Labour Court, Patiala dated 23.4.1986 had attained finality with the dismissal of Regular Second Appeal No. 3373 of 1986 on 1621987.
It is essential to keep in mind, that by the order dated 23.4.1986 the Labour Court, Patiala, had declined to set aside the ex parte award dated 18101983.
It is also essential to keep in mind, that the award dated 18101983 had not been challenged by the petitioner before the civil Court proceedings, reference to which has been made in the preceding paragraph.
It is, therefore, clear that the petitioner- management after having failed in its challenge to the ex parte proceedings initiated against it by Labour Court, Patiala, filed the instant writ petition to challenge the award dated 18101983 on merits.
This was undisputedly the first challenge at the hands of the petitioners-management to the award dated 18101983 on merits.
In view of the above, I find no merit in the instant contention/objection of the learned counsel for the respondent-workman.
11.
Out of the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner-management, too need to be adverted to.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management that the proceedings emerging out of the reference made vide notification bearing No. ID/7/605-A-81/73352-56 dated 3131981, culminated before the Labour Court, Ludhiana after evidence of the rival parties were duly recorded.
After the aforesaid award was rendered by the Labour Court, Ludhiana the same came to be published in the Punjab Government Gazette dated 2391983.
On the publication of the award of the Labour Court, Ludhiana the controversy raised by the respondent-workman initiated through a demand notice came to be settled.
At the aforesaid juncture it was imperative for the respondent-workman to inform the Labour Court, Patiala about the conclusion of the controversy initiated by him against the order of his termination dated 1031981.
Since the respondent- workman did not bring the aforesaid factual position to the notice of the Labour Court, Patiala, it conducted the ex parte proceedings against the petitioner-management and finalised the same issue through an award dated 18101983.
The award rendered by the Labour Court, Patiala was also published in the Punjab Government Gazette dated 9121983.
A bare reading of the aforesaid gazette notification clearly depicts, that the reference was made by the State Government to adjudicate upon the controversy in hand to the Labour Court, Ludhiana.
However, over-looking the aforesaid factual position, the State Government published the award of the Labour Court, Patiala on 9121983 in the government gazette.
It is, therefore, the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, that the second award rendered by the Labour Court, Patiala after the dispute raised by the petitioner had completely and effectively decided by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana, Ludhiana, was clearly without jurisdiction and is liable to be aside.
12.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management is, that the respondent-workman is not entitled to any relief in law as he had obtained an order from the Labour Court, Patiala unfairly by with-holding relevant factual information of which he was personally aware.
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that it was imperative for the respondent-workman to inform the Labour Court, Patiala, that the issue in hand had already been adjudicated upon by the Labour Court, Ludhiana on 661983.
Had the respondent-workman brought this fact to the notice of the Labour Court, Patiala, it would not have gone ahead to dispose of the claim of the respondent-workman, as it had done, by rendering its award dated 18101983.
13.
I am satisfied that the controversy in hand deserves to be accepted on both the pleas advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
As already noticed herein above, reference to the Labour Court, Patiala as well as Labour Court, Ludhiana was made by the Government through the same endorsement number.
It seems that the reference was wrongly made to the two Courts (rather than to one).
The fact that the establishment of the petitioner-management was located within the territorial jurisdiction of the Labour Court, Ludhiana as well as the fact that the Punjab Government gazette dated 9121983 depicts that reference was made to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana, are sufficient to conclude that the determination at the hands of the Labour Court, Ludhiana was the rightful determination of the controversy.
Additionally, the issue having been finally settled by the award of the Labour Court, Ludhiana dated 861983 after recording evidence produced by the rival parties the award rendered by the Labour Court, Ludhiana, has to be accepted as the rightful decision on the controversy between the parties.
There could also be no doubt about the fact, that had the respondent-workman brought to the notice of the Labour Court, Patiala that the issue between the parties, based on the same reference order, had already been adjudicated by the Labour Court, Ludhiana, it would have stayed its hands from taking any further action on the matter without obtaining a clarification of the reference order from the appropriate government.
The respondent-workman had, obviously, deceived the Labour Court, Patiala by not disclosing to it, the factum of the determination of controversy at the hands of the Labour Court, Ludhiana, although he had personal knowledge and notice thereof.
In the circumstances in hand, it is natural to conclude that the order of the Labour Court, Patiala was unfairly obtained by the petitioner.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant writ petition is allowed.
The award of the Labour Court, Patiala dated 18101983 is hereby set aside.
I would like to express my gratitude to Mr. Dheeraj Chawla, Advocate who has whole-heartedly assisted this Court and has worked hard on the issues involved in the case.
In view of the above I am of the opinion, that he should be paid an appropriate fee for having assisted this Court.
Fee payable to the learned counsel is assessed at Rs. 22,000/- on the recommendation of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management.
The petitioner-management shall pay him the aforesaid fee as expeditiously as possible.
Petition allowed.