Surya Kant, J - The challenge herein lies to an award dated 2751987 (Annexure (P-1) passed by the Labour Court, Bhatinda, whereby the question, as to whether or not the termination of the service of the petitioner is justified and what relief he is entitled to, has been answered against him.
Though the appointment orders have not been placed on record by the petitioner, on a perusal of the impugned award it appears that the petitioner was employed as a labourer on daily wages vide order dated 22121983 (Exhibit M/2) for 89 days at a time and on expiry of the said term, he was re-appointed on 21.3.1984, 151984, 1.8.1984, 1111984 and finally on 3011985.
Each appointment was for 89 days only.
These orders were placed before the Labour Court and duly exhibited as mentioned in the impugned award.
It further appears that on expiry of the tenure of the last appointment, no fresh appointment was given to the petitioner and thus, he ceased to continue in the employment of the respondent-Management i.e. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Faridkot.
This led the petitioner to raise an industrial dispute which was referred for adjudication and has been answered against him by the impugned award on the premise that in view of sub-clause (bb) incorporated in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 w.e.f.
1881984 non-renewal of the contract of employment does not amount to "retrenchment".
The denial of fresh appointment to the petitioner has, thus, not been held to be `retrenchment', therefore, Section 25-F of the Act has also been held to be not attracted.
Aggrieved at the aforementioned award, the petitioner has approached this Court.
2.
Shri Vikas Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has made two fold submissions.
Firstly, he contends that sub-clause (bb) has no retrospective effect as it came to be introduced on 1881984 only and the petitioner having completed 240 days in employment in a period of one year preceding the date of retrenchment, had acquired the status of a regular employee and, therefore, the newly added provision was not attracted in this case.
He also contends that the said provision could not have taken away a right already vested in the petitioner.
Secondly, he contends that even if the newly added provision is assumed to be applicable in the case of the petitioner, yet the onus to prove that Section 2(ii)(bb) of the Act was attracted to the facts and circumstances of the present case, was upon the Management whereas it was erroneously shifted upon the workman by the Labour-Court.
Sh. Vikas Singh further contends that while appreciating the second submission, the Labour Court completely overlooked 5th Schedule of the Act, which defines "Unfair Labour Practices" on an illustrative basis especially when in terms of Clause 5(b) read with Clause 10 thereof, repeated appointments of the petitioner on tenure basis amount to `unfair labour practice'.
Reliance has been placed by him on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Bhikku Ram v. P.O.
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, 1998(1) RSJ 703 and on another Division Bench judgment in President, Zila Parishad v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, 2001(1) SCT 666 (P&H) : 2001(3) PLR 28.
3.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent-Management contends that after completion of 240 days in employment, the petitioner himself had accepted fresh employment offered to him vide order dated 1111984 (Exhibit M-6) and again on 3011985 (Exhibit M-7) and had forfeited his right to claim in continuous and for regular employment.
He further contends that no order retrenching the petitioner from employment was passed and the case being a mere non-renewal of contract of employment, the Labour Court has rightly pressed into service sub-clause (b) of Section (oo) of the Act.
4.
On a consideration of the import of the newly added sub-clause (b) of Section (oo) of the Act, a Division Bench of this Court in Bhikku Ram's case (supra) held as follows :-  "35.
From the above, it is clear that termination of service of a workman, who has worked under an employer for 240 days in a period of twelve months preceding the date of termination of service will ordinarily be declared as void if it is found that the employer has violated the provisions of Section 25-F(a) and (b).
If the employer resists the claim of the workman and invokes Section 2(oo)(bb), burden lied on the employer to show that though the employee has worked for 240 days in twelve months prior to termination of his service, such termination of service cannot be treated as retrenchment because it is in accordance with terms of a contract of employment or on account of non-renewal of the contract of employment.
It has also to be shown by the employer that the workman had been employed for a specified work and the job which was being performed by the employee is no more required.
Only a bona fide exercise of right by an employer to terminate the service in terms of the contract of employment or for non-renewal of the contract will be covered by Clause (bb).
If the Court finds that the exercise of rights by the employer is not bona fide or the employer has adopted the methodology of fixed term employment as a conduct (conduit ?)
or mechanism to frustrate the rights of the workman, the termination of the service will not be covered by the exception contained in Clause (bb).
Instead the action of the employer will have to be treated as an act of unfair labour practice, as specified in the Fifth Schedule of the Act.
The various judgments rendered by the different High Court and by the Supreme Court clearly bring out the principle that only a bona fide exercise of the powers by the employer in cases where the work is of specified nature or where the temporary employee is replaced by a regular employee that the action of the employer will be upheld.
In all other cases, the termination of service will be treated as retrenchment unless they are covered by other exception set out hereinabove."
5.
If a workman has completed 240 days in a period of 12 months preceding the date of his retrenchment from employment and if no retrenchment compensation has been paid to him under Section 25-F of the Act, ordinarily, the action of the Management will be void unless the employer leads evidence and proves otherwise that the termination of services are within the exception of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act and burden lies on the employer and not upon the employee-workman to prove the same.
That apart, if a workman is employed repeatedly, the inference of indulging into "Unfair Labour Practice" by the management as illustratively defined in Vth Schedule (clause 5(b) read with Clause 10) of the Act, can be drawn unless it is proved that the work against which the workman was employed, was occasional, seasonal, intermittent and not of regular nature.
6.
Applying the ratio of the Division Bench judgment referred to above and keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case in hand and the fact that petitioner was employed on more than five occasions by restricting his appointment to 89 days basis every time and it appears to be a case of `Unfair Labour Practice' more so when no defence evidence was led by the management that no work of regular nature against which the petitioner would be allowed to continue was available.
Normally, in an organisation such as the respondent, namely, the State Road Transport Corporation, it can be reasonably inferred that the requirement of manual labourer would be consistently in demand and there can hardly be any fluctuating circumstance to cause variation in the strength of such manual labourers.
Be that as it may, it was for the Management to lead evidence and establish that the services of the petitioner were not required and therefore, it was a case of non-renewal of his contractual employment.
In the absence of any such evidence and in the light of the Division Bench judgment referred to above, there can be no escape but to hold that the view point taken by the Labour Court runs contrary to the dictum of law as laid down by the Division Bench in Bhikku Ram's case and thus cannot sustain.
7.
The fact remains that the petitioner was employed on 22121983 and his employment came to an end somewhere in April 1985.
The matter has remained pending in this Court since the year 1987.
It is true that when termination of employment is found to be violative of mandatory provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the same is liable to be declared void and the consequential benefits would normally flow in favour of the workman.
However, it cannot be overlooked that the petitioner's claim is being accepted on a technical ground based upon the interpretation of a provision which at the relevant time was newly introduced and that too in order to help the Management.
The petitioner who worked for a very small duration cannot be, therefore, allowed the consequential monetary benefits for the period he remained out of employment.
The petitioner must have continued to work as a manual labourer somewhere else also, therefore, I am not inclined to grant him the benefit of backwages.
8.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed to the extent that the award dated 2751987 (Annexure P-1) is quashed.
Respondent No. 1-the Management is directed to reinstate the petitioner in service but, without any backwages.
In order to curtain (curtail ?)
future litigation, it is also directed that the claim of the petitioner for regularisation of his services will be considered by the Corporation on the premise as if he has continued in service since December 1983 and in terms of policy decision, if any, as applicable to the similarly situated employees of the Corporation.
If the petitioner is found to be entitled for regularisation of the services, his pay will also be fixed on the basis of his deemed continuous service but no arrears of pay even as a result of re-fixation shall be paid to him.
The needful shall be done within a period of our months from today.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.