MM Kumar, J - The instant application filed under Order XLVII Rule 1 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity, `the Code') prays for review of judgment dated 2352002 passed by a Division Bench of this Court.
The applicant-petitioners are students of Bachelor of Technology (for brevity, `B Tech.)
four years integrated course spread in eight semesters.
They were admitted in the session 1999-2000 by Adesh Institute of Engineering and Technology, Faridkot (for brevity, `the College').
The `College' is affiliated to Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar - the first respondent (for brevity, `the University').
They were debarred from taking admission of Vth semester because they had failed to clear Ist semester.
They filed CWP 17809 of 2001 which was dismissed on 2352002 by a Division Bench to which one of us was a member (MM Kumar, J).
The principal reason of dismissal of the petition was presumption of existence of a regulation of the University which debarred the students to seek promotion to Vth semester without clearing Ist semester.
2.
Before dealing with the legal controversy raised it would be necessary to make a reference to necessary facts.
The petitioners were admitted in VIII semesters integrated course of B Tech.
in the session 1999-2000 in the College.
Their studies were smooth till the passing of IVth semester.
However, all of them had reappears in one or the other papers of Ist, IInd and IIIrd semesters.
The details of subjects in which they were placed under reappears have been given in Annexure P-4 appended to the petition.
Some confusion had arisen at the time of their promotion to Vth semester.
On 31.7.2001, they were allowed to register provisionally to study for Vth semester, subject to their passing Ist semester course.
The applicants have filed a representation to the University.
The Principal of the College forwarded their representation dated 282001 (P-6) to the Vice Chancellor of the University.
The students had requested that there was no rule or regulation ever notified which debar them from taking admission in Vth semester just because they did not clear Ist semester.
It was further asserted that no such rule/regulation was in existence earlier.
No information with regard to the aforementioned rule/regulation was ever communicated and that they were under an impression that carry-on rule was applicable to them.
The aforementioned representation made by the appellants was recommended by the Principal of the college for sympathetic consideration of the University.
It was requested by the Principal that 24 credit or Ist to Vth semester or IInd to VIth Semester rule may not be applied to them as it was never notified to them.
They were under the impression that earlier rule providing for carry-on system as was applicable to 1998 batch would be applicable to them.
When no decision was taken, the applicant-petitioners approached this Court and filed CWP 15065 of 2001 which was disposed off on 2692001, by the Division Bench with a direction to the University to decide the representation filed by the applicants (P-6) as recommended by the Principal (P-8) within a period of 10 days.
The aforementioned order was sent by the applicant-petitioners to the University under registered post alongwith a copy of the writ petition through their counsel.
The University on its part dealt with the representation and rejected the same on 1112001, (P-12), by citing a rule/regulation and by observing as under :-  "The petitioners (students of AIET, Faridkot) are of 1999-2000 batch.
They were registered to the 5th Semester by the college provisionally.
But as per University examination rules of B.E./B Tech.
they could not pass all the papers of Ist Semester and are not eligible to register to 5th Semester.
The petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition in the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court praying that they may be allowed to continue in the 5th semester and Hon'ble Court disposed off the writ petition with orders that the appropriate specific orders may be passed by the University and the representation of the petitioners may be disposed off within 10 days from the date certified copy of the orders is received.
I have gone through the representation of the petitioners minutely.
As stated earlier the petitioners (the students of AIET, Faridkot) are of 1999-2000 batch and for that batch the relevant rule regarding promotion to next semester is applicable as under :  "A student will not be allowed to register for the 3rd semester and shall be required to repeat first year if he/she fails to earn a minimum of 24 credits out of the total credits offered in the approved scheme of course for the first year.
To register for the 5th semester a student must pass all the subjects offered in the Ist Semester and to register for the 6th semester he/she must pass all the subjects offered in the 2nd semester.
The student is allowed to reappear whenever an examination is held in subject(s)."
According to the Ist part of the above said rule, a student is required to earn a minimum of 24 credits out to total credits for promotion to 3rd semester.
None of the students (petitioners) could earn 24 credits in the Ist year and all were promoted to 3rd semester.
It means that the first part of the rule was not made applicable to them and is clear that they opted the second part of the above regulation.
All the 12 students (petitioners) could not earn 24 credits in the Ist year i.e. upto May-2000 examination.
Therefore, for them 2nd part of the above quoted rule becomes applicable.
In the light of 2nd part of the above said rule these 12 students only become eligible to register for Vth semester if they pass all the subjects offered in Ist semester.
But in the case of these 12 students (petitioners) there are still reappears in one of more paper/s of the subject of Ist semester.
Therefore, all these 12 students are not eligible to register for 5th semester.
The representation of the petitioners (students of AIET, Faridkot) have been considered in the light of examination rules and regulations applicable to them to register to next semester/s.
Since the following 12 students (petitioners) have failed to fulfill the requirements of the regulations applicable to them, therefore, they are not eligible to register for 5th semester."
After rejection of their representation on 1112001 (P-12) the aforementioned decision taken by the University was challenged by the applicants by filing CWP No. 17809 of 2001 which came up for consideration on 8.11.2001.
After the Division Bench had issued dasti notice to respondents on 23112001 an application being CM No. 34682 of 2001 was filed which after notice was allowed on 10122001 granting permission to the petitioner to take Vth semester examination provisionally and interim order was not to have any bearing upon the merit of the case.
Despite repeated adjournments granted to file reply the respondent University did not file reply which resulted in passing of another interlocutory order on 1822002, directing the University to declare the result of the applicants for Vth semester.
Even on 2232002, time was sought for filing reply.
Another CM No. 14072 of 2002 for issuance of interim directions was filed in which notice was issued to the counsel for the University for 2152002.
However, the case could be taken for consideration only on 2352002 when the counsel for the applicant-petitioners failed to appear.
The writ petition was dismissed by presuming the existence of rule or regulation providing that the applicants who have not cleared the Ist semester were not entitled to register for Vth semester and those who did not clear the IInd semester were not entitled to be registered for the VIth semester.
The order of the Division Bench dated 2352002 reads as under :-  "Petitioners are students of the 4th year B Tech.
Degree Course and are studying in Adesh Institute of Engineering and Technology, Faridkot.
They were admitted in the academic year 1999-2000.
They have not so far cleared the Ist semester of the course.
The rules governing the course w.e.f.
the academic year 1999-2000 were amended on 3052000 and it was decided that the students who do not clear the Ist semester will not be allowed to be registered for the 5th semester and those who do not clear the 2nd semester would not be allowed to be registered for the 6th semester.
Since the petitioners have not cleared the Ist semester of the course, the Punjab Technical University did not allow them to be registered for the 5th semester of the course.
It is this action of the University which is now challenged in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution."
We have heard the counsel for the respondent-University and perused the pleadings of the parties.
The fact that the petitioners had not cleared the Ist semester so far has not been controverted by them.
In this view of the matter, they are not eligible to study in the Vth semester of the course.
No fault can thus be found with the action of the respondent University in this regard.
Consequently, the writ petition fails and the same stands dismissed with no order as to costs."
(emphasis ours) This order has now been challenged in the instant review application filed by the applicants under Order XLVII Rule 1 read with Section 151 of the Code.
The case set up by the applicant-petitioners in the review application is that the Division Bench in its judgment dated 2352002 erroneously assumed existence of a regulation providing that promotion of a student of BTech.
course to Vth and VIth semesters would be permissible only when he had cleared Ist and IInd semester respectively.
In the writ petition, the averments have been made that the regulation concerning acquisition of 24/25 credits in the Ist and IInd semester respectively before promotion of a student to IIIrd semester was abandoned.
The aforementioned change for abandoning the credit system was supported by the fact that the applicant-petitioners, although had not cleared Ist and IInd semester, yet they were promoted to IIIrd and IVth semesters.
It was further been asserted in paragraph 4 of the writ petition that in fact the principle of `carry on' was prevalent.
The aforementioned assertion of the applicant-petitioners has been accepted to the extent that credit rule was done away with and the rule of Ist to Vth semester and IInd to VIth semester was introduced.
The replaced regulation has been referred to in the impugned order dated 2352002 passed by the Division Bench and has been quoted in the order impugned in the writ petition dated 1112001 (Annexure P-12).
There is, thus, no dispute that 24/45 credit rule was abandoned.
The aforementioned fact is proved by the admission of the University that the applicant-petitioners were granted the benefit of deletion of that rule as they were promoted to IIIrd and IVth semesters.
However, the dispute raised in the application for review is whether there was any regulation providing for promotion from Ist to Vth semester and IInd to VIth semester respectively.
Therefore, the following question of law would arise for consideration of this Court :-  "Whether on the date of admission in the Vth semester was there any enforceable rule/regulation in existence which could be invoked to debar the applicants to take admission in Vth semester on account of their reappear in the Ist semester ?"
3.
During the pendency of the review application, CM No. 1525 of 2003 was also filed on 2822003.
The petitioners were permitted to attend classes of VIIIth semester provisionally, subject to further orders of the Court.
Another CM No. 13160 of 2003 was filed which was allowed on 3052003 by directing the University to allow the applicants to take examination of VIIIth semester and reappear examination of the earlier semesters of BTech.
course on a purely provisional basis.
It was further clarified that the result of their examination was not to be declared without specific direction of this Court.
The applicants were not to acquire any right on the basis of the permission granted to them for provisional appearance in the examination.
On 8122003 a similar request made on behalf of four of the applicants for permission to appear in VIIth semester examination commencing from 9122003 was granted.
They are also provisionally permitted to appear in examination subject to stipulation made in the earlier order to appear only for two papers on 9122003 and 11122003.
Vide order dated 8122003, the matter was fixed for arguments on 11122003, when arguments could not be heard.
The matter was posted for 12122003, when the arguments could not be concluded, then permission was again granted to four of the applicants in continuation of the order dated 8122003 to appear in rest of the papers subject to all the earlier conditions.
4.
Another application being CM No. 15237 of 2003 was filed by the applicants to show that number of persons similarly situated to the applicants have been granted the benefit without insisting on the rigours of the rule/regulation of 24 credits or Ist semester to Vth semester or IInd semester to VIth semester as fully quoted in the impugned order dated 1112001 (P-12) (supra).
5.
We had heard the arguments at various sittings but it was not clarified when the regulation was amended and whether the law-making procedure of the University as postulated by the Punjab Technical University Act, 1996 (for brevity the `University Act') has been followed.
We have to seek personal appearance of the Registrar of the University to assist the Court.
On 17112004, Dr. MS Grewal, Registrar of the University appeared in the Court in person and assured the Court that he would hand over all the recommendations of various Sub-committees, Academic Council and the approvals thereto by the Board of Governors in respect of the BTech.
course from March 1999 till date to the learned counsel representing the University.
Subsequently, all those documents were placed on record as Annexures R-1/4.
6.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the applicant-petitioners has argued that when the applicant-petitioners took admission, the regulations providing for carry on rule were applicable which also governed the 1998 batch and that no one was sure about the amendments made in the regulations.
The applicants had thus attached the extracts which appear to have been passed by the Academic Council of the University in its 7th Meeting.
The relevant part of item No. 736 has been reproduced in para 4 which is to the effect that the Academic Council had approved discontinuation of 24/45 credit rule and on the recommendation of the Sub-committee had decided that no new conditions were to be imposed on the students belonging to 1998 batch.
It has further been submitted that the regulation concerning 24/45 credit was dispensed with by the University for all batches.
In support of the aforementioned submission the learned counsel has placed reliance on a letter dated 30112000 (P-3).
According to the aforementioned letter the students who have not been able to clear reappear examination in three chances were allowed a special chance with payment of some fee and those who have not cleared Ist semester were allowed to appear in the Vth semester examination.
Learned counsel has further submitted that there was wholesome confusion with regard to applicability of any regulation debarring the applicants from taking admission in Vth semester which resulted in filing of representation.
Learned counsel has argued that the representation made by the applicant-petitioners had been unlawfully rejected by invoking the rule of 24 credits or Ist to Vth and IInd to VIth semester as is evident from order dated 1112001 (P-12).
7.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel has further urged that in any case the amended regulation as on 3052002 on which reliance has been placed by the University in the impugned order dated 1112001 Annexure P-12 and which was subject-matter of challenge in the writ petition had in fact never been framed, approved and enacted in accordance with the provisions of Sections 14(8)(d), 15, 18 and 19 of the University Act.
The aforementioned provisions deal with the procedure for framing regulations and expressly require that the Board of Governors is the supreme authority of the University.
It has powers to frame and approve rules and regulations of the University.
Referring to the recommendation of the VIIIth Academic Council in its meeting held on 642001, appointed a sub-committee which held its meeting on 372001 and made recommendation for introduction of the regulation of Ist to Vth semester or IInd to VIth semester or 24/45 credits.
Learned counsel has argued that for the first time those recommendations were forwarded by the Sub-committee on 682001 vide annexure (RA-2) and the Director of Colleges without even recommendation of the Academic Council had illegally directed the implementation of the same pending the approval of Academic Council.
Learned counsel has maintained that such a direction for implementation of the recommendation of the Sub-committee was in direct violation of Section 18(3) of the Punjab Technical University Act, 1996, which expressly provide that new regulations or addition to the regulations or any amendment or repeal thereof would require the approval of the Board of Governors.
The Board of Governors has been further clothed with the power to approve, disallow or remit the same to the Academic Council for further consideration.
Learned counsel has maintained that the decision dated 642001 appointing the Sub-committee was approved in the Ninth Meeting of the Academic Council held on 2392002, by confirming the minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Academic Council.
It is appropriate to mention that the Sub-committee which made the recommendations on 372001 comprised of three Principals of engineering colleges including Sh. Ashwani Kumar, Principal of the college, respondent No. 2.
Learned counsel has pointed out that the amendments suggested by this Sub-committee were approved by the Academic Council for the first time in its meeting held on 13122002 as is evident from a perusal of Item No. 1012 of the proceedings of Tenth Meeting of the Academic Council (R-4/1).
8.
Learned counsel has then referred to the proceedings of Eleventh Meeting of the Academic Council held on 2242003, wherein, by Item No. 111 while confirming proceeding of Tenth Meeting of the Academic Council on 13122002, the aforementioned rules of 24 credits and Ist to Vth semester and IInd to VIth semester have been maintained.
Learned counsel has then drawn our attention to the proceedings of Thirteenth Meeting of the Board of Governors held on 1232004, wherein, reference has been made to the recommendations of the Sub-committee and that the amendment was approved by deciding to amend regulation 17(a).
He has also drawn our attention to the letter of the Director Colleges dated 682001 and the deliberation thereon by the Board of Governors.
According to the learned counsel, however, amendment was not made retrospectively and was applicable from 1232004.
9.
On the basis of the aforementioned submissions, learned counsel has argued that no regulation which may have force of law has been enacted by the University on 3172001 when the applicants were to be promoted to the Vth semester.
The recommendations were made by the Sub-committee of Principals dated 1572001 on the basis of delegated power given by the Academic Council on 642001, it cannot be concluded that an enforceable regulation came into force as the proposed amendment was only at a draft stage.
The Academic Council has approved it on 2242003 in its Eleventh Meeting and the Board of Governors could approve it only on 1252004.
On the basis of the aforementioned submission, learned counsel has argued that order dated 2352002 passed by the Division Bench purportedly relying on rules as amended on 3052000 in para 1 of the order is liable to be reviewed as it is an error apparent on the face of the record.
He has placed reliance of Order 47, Rule 1 and Section 114 of the Code and argued that this Court on the discovery of new and important evidence which after the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant-petitioners at that time, when the order was passed, could always review its order especially when students' career is at stake.
Learned counsel has also referred to the omnibus principle of ensuring advancement of justice especially in deciding the petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution.
In support of this submission learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in case of S Nagaraj v. State of Karnataka, 1994(1) SCT 99 (SC) : 1993(5) SLR 1.
10.
Mr. Atul Nehra, learned counsel for the non-applicant respondent No. 1 has argued that applicants are not entitled to grant of any relief as they have not approached this Court with clean hands.
According to learned counsel, the petitioners were fully aware about the existence of the amended regulations, because they were permitted to be registered for IIIrd and IVth semesters even though they had failed to earn 24 credits in their Ist year, which was required as per the earlier regulations applicable to them.
It has further claimed that once they are aware of item No. 736 of the Seventh Meeting of Academic Council, it cannot be claimed that they were oblivious of item No. 736 of the same Meeting, because the proceedings of Seventh Academic Council Meeting were circulated to all the concerned colleges on 2582000.
Learned counsel has further elaborated the question of concealment by referring to order Annexure P-3 dated 30112000 by arguing that the aforementioned letter had been withdrawn as it was applicable to some other courses.
In any case, it was later on clarified on 2732001 (R-1/1) that this letter was applicable to BBA/BCA students who were to appear in Vth semester in December, 2000.
Learned counsel has claimed that Academic Council approved the proposed amendment in Sixth Meeting held on 642001.
By referring to Section 10(5) & (8) that the Vice Chancellor is the conscious keeper (conscience keeper ?)
of the University and is entitled to exercise general control over its affairs, in accordance with the regulations learned counsel has maintained that when there is an emergency then immediate action was required to be taken, and that the Vice Chancellor is fully clothed with powers by sub-section (8) of Section 10 to pass any order.
Learned counsel has pointed out that merely because the recommendations made by the Sub-committee were ratified subsequently on 642001/ 2392002 by the Academic Council or the recommendations of the Academic Council were approved by the Board of Governors on 1232004 would not make any significant difference because such a ratification would have the effect of relating back as has been held by the Supreme Court in the case of Punjab University v. VN Tripathi and another, 2001(4) SCT 333 (SC) : JT 2001(7) SC 96.
He has placed reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Marathwada University v. Sesh Rao Balwant Rao Chauhan, JT 1989(2) SC 276.
Learned counsel has argued that review of an order is an extraordinary remedy and can only be permitted in case of error apparent on the face of record and not by going into the pleothra of evidence which require reappreciation.
According to the learned counsel in the present case for review of the order dated 2352002 a large number of papers by summoning the Registrar of the University are required to be gone into which in fact is not the real scope of the review.
In support of his submission learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Piskak Sharma, AIR 1979 SC 1047 and Smt. Meera Bhanja v. Smt. Nirmala Kumari Choudhary, 1995(2) R.R.R.
440 : AIR 1995 SC 455 and argued that once the finding has been recorded by this Court in its order dated 2352002 dismissing the writ petition i.e. rules did not permit promotion of the applicants to Vth Semester on account of the fact that they had remained unable to clear the Ist semester examination, no review is entertainable and the application is liable to be dismissed.
Learned counsel has maintained that the scope of review cannot be expanded because the impugned order can only be challenged by way of Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court.
11.
Having heard the learned counsel on various dates at a great length, we have reached the conclusion that the instant application deserves to be allowed and order dated 2352002 passed by the Division Bench is liable to be reviewed.
There is an error apparent on the face of record which has crept in while passing order dated 2352002 inasmuch as it was presumed and accepted that the rules/regulations governing the course and applicable to academic year 1999-2000 were amended on 3052000.
It is evident from various documents placed on record collectively as Annexure R-1/4 that there was no amendment effected in the rules on 3052000.
A persual of the minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the Academic Council would show that the meeting was held on 3052000 and vide item No. 7.3(b), the rules was sought to be changed by introducing Ist semester to Vth semester and 2nd semester to 6th semester for the students of 1999-2000 batch.
However, the views of the Sub-committee as to whether the amended rule was applicable to 1998 batch were solicited.
Item No. 73(b)/Item No. 3(b) read as under :-  "73(b)/Item No. 3(b) : - Change in 24 & 25 Credit Rules.
It was decided that 24 & 25 credit rule will be changed with immediate effect for 1999 batch and onwards.
Thus a student must clear Ist semester before he/she can be registered for 5th semester, and must clear 2nd semester before registering for 6th semester and so on.
However, for 1998 batch, the Sub- committee formed under agenda item No. 2 will discuss the issue and submit a recommendation as to whether the same decision be applied to 1998 batch also or not.
In this regard all the colleges were requested to send a status report on the expelled students from 1998 batch to the University."
The Sub-committee which made these recommendations was comprised of :-  "(a) Sh. NS Rattan, IAS, Vice Chancellor, PTU.
(b) Dr. Naresh Kumar Gupta, Advisor (Academic & Planning).
(c) Dr. Ashwani Kumar, Principal, AIE&T, Faridkot - respondent No. 2.
(d) Dr. GS Walia, Mata Gujri Institute of Management, Fatehgarh Sahib.
(e) Dr. DS Kumar, Principal, SUS CET Mohali, (f) Dr. Gurdeep Singh."
The aforementioned item clearly shows that the Academic Council had desired to enforce the rules for 1999-2000 batch immediately, whereas no approval of the Board of Governors in terms of Section 14(8) read with Section 18 of the University Act was taken.
However, a perusal of item No. 83 from the proceedings of the Eighth Meeting of the Board of Governors held on 14220002 shows that decision of the Seventh Meeting of the Academic Council held on 3052000 was approved by the Board on that date.
Item No. 83 approving the decisions taken by the Academic Council in its Seventh Meeting reads as under :-  "Item No. 83 : To consider & approve the proceedings of the 7th meeting of the Academic Council held on May 30, 2000.
The Board approved the decisions taken at 7th meeting of the Academic Council held on May 30, 2000.
The Board, however, desired that the decisions of the Academic Council involving the financial implications may be placed before the Finance Committee at its next meeting."
It is, thus, evident that the Board of Governors approved the amendment on 1422004.
13.
The law making process of the University is regulated by various provisions of the University Act.
A persual of Section 18 makes it evident that first set of regulations of the University were to be published by the State Government by notifying the same in the Official Gazette.
The Board of Governors has been empowered to make new or additional regulations or it may amend or repeal the regulations.
The Board of Governors has also been given the power to disallow or remit the regulations under Section 19 of the University Act.
The regulation may provide for all or any of the matters including the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such.
Sections 18 and 19(h) are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "18.
Making amendment, repeal and operations of Regulations.
- (1) The first Regulations of the University shall be made by the State Government and notified in the official Gazette.
(2) The Board of Governors may, from time to time make new or additional Regulations or may amend or repeal the Regulations : Provided that the Board of Governors shall not propose the draft of amendment of the regulations affecting the status, powers or constitution of any existing authority of the University until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion upon the proposal and any opinion so expressed shall be in writing and shall be considered by the Board of Governors.
(3) Every new Regulations or addition to the Regulations or any amendment or repeal of a Regulation shall require the approval of the Board of Governors who may approve, disallow or remit it for further consideration.
............. 19.
Regulations.
- (a) to (g) xx xx xx (h) the admission of students of the University and their enrolment as such."
14.
It is further pertinent to mention that under Section 14(8) of the University Act, it is proved (provided ?)
that the Board of Governors is the supreme authority of the University which enjoys the powers and duties to frame and approve the rules of the University.
Section 14(8)(d) of the University Act reads as under :-  "14.
Board of Governors - (1) to (7) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (8) (a) to (c) xx xx xx (d) to frame and approve rules and regulations of the University."
15.
A further perusal of the provisions of Section 15 would show that Academic Council has been constituted to be the academic body of the University and is ordained to act subject to the provisions of the University Act and Regulations.
It is entitled to advise the Board of Governors on all academic matters.
Section 15(1) of the Act reads as under :-  "15.
Academic Council.
- (1) The Academic Council shall be Academic Body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and Regulations, have control and general regulation and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination within the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Regulations.
It shall have the right to advise the Board of Governors on all academic matters."
It is, thus, evident that the amendment suggested on 3052000 by the Academic Council in its meeting was not complete in its effect and in the absence of any approval by the Board of Governors, it would be deemed to be a still born regulation which was at embryo stage.
Such an amendment cannot be considered to be enforceable nor it would have any force of law.
Therefore, no reliance on the aforementioned amendment could be placed.
16.
However, learned counsel for the University has insisted that credit system of 24/25 credit continues to exist.
On the contrary, the applicant- petitioners have claimed that the regulation providing for credit system was amended and the credit system was abandoned.
Regulation 16 as mentioned of the Regulations for B Tech.
and B Arch.
courses reads as under :-  "16.
(a) A student will not be allowed to register for the third semester and shall be required to repeat first year if (i) he/she fails to earn a minimum of 24 credits out of the total credits offered in the approved scheme of courses for the first year.
However, while repeating first year he/she will not be allowed to repeat courses in which the marks earned are more then 40 per cent in the earlier attempt.
(b) If a student after repeating first year under 16(a) fails to earn a minimum of 45 credits till the end of second year, he/she shall be required to leave the institute/college and his/her enrolment shall stand cancelled.
(c) A total of 6 years from the date of admission, shall be given to a candidate to pass all the courses and to fulfil all the requirements for the completion of degree of Bachelor of Technology and 7 years for the course of Bachelor of Arch.
Provided further that maximum period for qualifying for the award of degree will be seven years and eight years for engineering and architecture students respectively, for those who are required to repeat their first year under clause 16(a)."
However, the aforementioned regulation was amended by the Academic Council in its Seventh Meeting as per item No. 706 for the academic year 1998-99 and the same reads as under :-  "736/Item No. A-2.24 : Credits cases for Academic Year 1998-99.
The Academic Council approved the discontinuation of the 24/25 credit rules but on the recommendations of the Sub-committee in this regard decided that no new conditions will be imposed on 1998 batch students."
The aforementioned regulation as amended has not been applied to the candidates of 1998-99.
In other words, the system of 24/25 credit rules provided in the unamended regulation was done away with.
The aforementioned regulation as amended has not been subject-matter of challenge before us and the averments made by the applicant-petitioners in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the writ petition asserting that the carry forward system has been followed for 1998 batch and the subsequent batches except 1999-2000 batch.
The assertions made by the applicant-petitioners have been accepted by the University in its reply.
17.
It is further pertinent to make a reference to the affidavit filed by Ganganmeet Bains on 2582004 (CM Nos. 15236-37 of 2004).
A perusal of the affidavit would reveal that carry forward rule was not applied to Shri Manav Ahluwalia, a student from GTB Institute of Engineering and Technology, Malout, Ramandeep Singh, Inderjit Singh and Harmeet Singh Kochhar.
Similarly, four instances of the students of Shaheed Udham Singh College of Engg & Technology, Tangori (Mohali) have been quoted i.e. Manish Birdi, Ramandeep Singh, Amit Garcha and Puneet Bains.
The facts narrated in the aforementioned affidavit have not been controverted.
It is, thus, evident that 24 credit rule was dispensed with for the students of BTech.
course of 1998-99 batch.
The aforementioned rule continued to apply to the batch of 1999-2000 i.e. the applicant-petitioners.
18.
In view of the above, it is clear that Ist to Vth or IInd to VIth semester rule or 24/45 credit rule were not applicable.
Therefore, it is abundantly clear that the argument raised by learned counsel for the University is erroneous and cannot be accepted.
19.
Another argument raised by Mr. Atul Nehra, learned counsel for the University is based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Marathwada University (supra).
The view taken by the Supreme Court in the aforementioned judgment is that Vice Chancellor in an emergent situation could always take a decision and implement the same because the Vice Chancellor is a conscious keeper (conscience keeper ?)
of the University.
However, in the instant case, there is no emergency either pleaded or revealed necessitating the application of Ist to Vth and IInd to VIth semester rule to the batch of applicant-petitioners for the year 1999.
There is no decision of the Vice Chancellor taking the view that there was an emergency and the decision was required to be implemented even in the absence of approval by the Board of Governors as required by Section 14(8)(d) of the University Act.
The proceedings of various meetings of the Board of Governors also do not refer to any such decision of the Vice Chancellor, Therefore, to apply the amended regulation retrospectively would not be justifiable on that ground.
Thus, the argument is without any merit and we have no hesitation to reject the same.
For the reasons stated above, the review application and the writ petition are allowed.
All the interim orders are made absolute.
The applicant-petitioners shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits viz. issuancee of certificate/degree etc. wherever applicable.
The University is directed to declare the result of the applicant-petitioners.
Petition allowed.