Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - The appellant filed a suit for declaration that order dated 14.7.1994 dismissing him from service and the appellate order dtd.
26.5.1995, were void.
2.
Case of the appellant is that he joined as Constable in police force on 6111989.
On 26111993, he went on leave only for a day but on his failing to report for duty, he was marked absent on 28111993 and thereafter he did not report for duty till 611994.
A charge-sheet was given to him and after enquiry, order of dismissal dtd.
14.7.1994 was passed, which is as under :-  "The allegation against Constable Gurtej Singh, Batch No. 2005, Sangrur is that in the month of November, 1993, when he was doing the Capsule Course at RTC Lada Kothi, he went on leave for one day on 26111993.
When he did not return on the next day, he was treated as absent from duty vide report No. 23 dtd.
28.11.93.
He came back after a period of 38 days 20 hours on 611994.
Having remained absent without permission and intimation from duty, the departmental enquiry was order(ed) against him.
Inspector Shamsher Singh was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
A list of allegations and list of witnesses was prepared by the Enquiry Officer.
Due to the continuous absence of the Constable from the department, a notice to participate in the departmental enquiry was given to him at his residence.
Even after that, he did not associate himself in the departmental enquiry.
Due to this, an order for x parte proceedings against him was given.
After this, the Enquiry Officer recorded the statements/evidence of SI Karam Singh, Hawaldar Vijay Kumar No. 441/RTC & of Hawaldar Resham Kumar No. 1765 of Ferozepur.
After recording the statements proving the allegations against him, the Inquiry Officer prepared the charge- sheet and sent the same through Registered Post at his residential address.
He did not submit his reply in defence.
Since the allegations against him stood proved, the Enquiry Officer sent the report for further orders.
After deeply considering the departmental proceedings and report of the Enquiry Officer, a notice was sent to the delinquent at his residence with regard to his dismissal as also to treat his period of absence as without duty.
The same was received by his brother Gurjant Singh in his absence.
The delinquent submitted his reply to the notice which was considered deeply.
In his written reply, he said that when he was doing the course in the RTC, Lada Kothi, he fell ill and the took leave for one day.
Due to his serious illness, he could not join back his duty.
When he got well, he came to Lada Kothi on 6.1.94.
He was asked to report at the Police Lines.
When he came back to the police lines, he was not allowed to join.
He could not be excused.
I am not satisfied with his reply.
When he went on one day leave and if he fell sick, it was his duty to give intimation to the department and ask for more leave.
But he did not do anything in this regard.
Neither he was able to produce any evidence regarding his illness nor did he give any intimation to the Department for his absence.
It is difficult to believe him.
Therefore, I am not satisfied with his contention.
So far his plea that he was not allowed to join back, the same was not believable.
He never appeared before me and did not even ask for joining back.
He is saying this only in his defence and I am not satisfied with him.
Therefore, I am not satisfied with his reply and accordingly, I reject it.
I have seriously considered the documents produced in the departmental Inquiry, the report of the Inquiry Officer and reply given by him.
Besides this, an opportunity of personal hearing was given to him to appear before me.
But he did not appear.
It becomes clear that he knowingly absented himself and the charge levelled against him was true.
On the basis of the charge levelled against him, Constable Gurtej Singh No. 2005/Sangrur is hereby dismissed from service with effect from today, i.e. 14.7.1994 (AN) from this department.
His total period of absent (absence) of 39 days is to be treated as without duty.
Order be complied with and the copy of the order be delivered to the concerned person free of costs.
Sd/-  Senior Superintendent of Police  Sangrur."
Case of the plaintiff is that the said order is void being against natural justice.
3.
The suit was contested on the plea that the plaintiff was absent for 38 days 24 hours and 30 minutes and in view of his wilful absence, order of dismissal was justified as this amounted to gravest act of misconduct proving his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
4.
The trial Court decreed the suit, relying upon the decision of this Court in the State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174, holding that absence without leave does not amount to gravest act of misconduct under Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
5.
On appeal, the decree of the trial Court was reversed.
It was observed :-  "The reply submitted by the plaintiff to the show-cause notice does not disclose as to what was the illness suffered by the plaintiff and for how long he had remained under treatment.
In the reply, it has been only mentioned that the plaintiff had been unable to attend his duty as he was not feeling well.
Even while appearing in the witness box the plaintiff has not disclosed as to what was the particular illness he had suffered.
No medical record has been placed on record by the plaintiff to support his plea that he had been absent on account of his ill-health and the said absence was not intentional or mala fide.
The plaintiff in his cross-examination admitted that he had absented from duty for a period of 38 days, 20 hours and 30 minutes and had not sent any intimation to the authority in writing regarding the said absence."
The lower appellate Court referred to the decision of the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Sukhwinder Singh, (1999) SCC (L&S) 1234.
Hence this appeal.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that a substantial question of law arises as to whether single act of absence would be covered by Rule 162 of the Rules.
The said rule is as under :-  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the `gravest' acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct providing incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service....." 7.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that absence for 38 days could neither be held to be "gravest act of misconduct" nor it could be held to be "continuous misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for Police service."
He relied upon decision of the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh, 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2188, to submit that order of dismissal from service may entail forfeiture of all pensionary benefits, which fact must be taken into account in interpretation of Rule 1626 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
Observations in para 7 of the said judgment relate to second part of the rule.
Learned counsel submitted that absence from duty by itself was not gravest act of misconduct and it could only be misconduct if it was habitual absence.
He relied on observations in para 7 to the effect "take for instance the delinquent officer if habitually absent from duty when required.
Despite giving an opportunity to reform himself he continues to remain absent from duty off and on.
He proved himself to be incorrigible and thereby unfit to continue in service".
The decision of the Apex Court in Sukhwinder Singh (supra) was distinguishable being a case of repeated absence.
He also submitted that in Haryana Government notification dtd.
2131985, an explanation had been added to Rule 162 of the Rules as applicable to Haryana to the following effect :-  "The `gravest' acts inter alia include indulging in spying or smuggling activities, disrupting the means of transport or of communication, damaging public property, causing indiscipline among fellow policemen, promoting feeling of `enmity' and hatred between different classes of citizens; going on strike or mass casual leave or resorting to mass abstentions, spreading disaffection against the Government and causing riots and the like ?"
In para 6 of judgment in Ram Singh (supra), it was observed :-  "Under General Clauses Act singular includes plural, act includes acts.
The contention that there must be plurality of acts of misconduct to award dismissal is fastidious.
The word "acts" would include singular "act" as well.
It is not the repetition of the acts complained of but its quality, insidious effect and gravity of situation that ensues from the offending `act'.
The colour of the gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or attending circumstances.
Take for instance the delinquent that put in 29 years of continuous length of service and had unblemished record; in 30th year he commits defalcation of public money or fabricates false records to conceal misappropriation.
He only committed once.
Does it mean that he should not be inflicted with the punishment of dismissal but be allowed to continue in service for that year to enable him to get his full pension.
The answer is obviously no.
Therefore, a single act of corruption is sufficient to award an order of dismissal under the rule as gravest act of misconduct."
8.
Learned counsel further submitted that a person is said to be incorrigible and unfit to continue in service only if an opportunity to reform was given to him.
Learned counsel for the appellant also referred to the decisions of the Apex Court in State of UP and others v. Ashok Kumar Singh and another, 1996(2) SCT 139 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 736, to submit that order of removal from service was upheld in that case as the employee was absent on "several" occasions.
Referring to judgment in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1997(11) SCC 523, it was submitted that order of dismissal was set aside by the Apex Court as the misconduct was not "gravest".
He further referred to the The State of Punjab and others v. Bakhshish Singh, 1997(3) SCT 401 (SC) : 1998(5) SLR 625.
Further reference was made to Maan Singh v. Union of India and others, 2003(2) SCT 84 (SC) : 2003(2) SLR 607, wherein earlier judgment in Ram Singh (supra) was upheld.
He also referred to decisions in State of Haryana v. Lakhan Lal, 1991(2) SCT 718 (P&H) : 1991(4) SLR 82, Mahipat Ex. Constable v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 337 (P&H) : 1994(4) SLR 311, Ex. Constable Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(3) SCT 151 (P&H) : 1996(5) SLR 9, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(1) SCT 109 (SC) : 1997(1) RSJ 768, Ex. HC Mohinder Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) RSJ 679 and State of Punjab and others v. Nirmal Singh, 2002(4) SCT 1038 (P&H) : 2003(2) SLR 102, wherein orders of dismissal were set aside on the ground that misconduct was not "gravest act of misconduct".
He also referred to a decision of this Court in State of Punjab and others v. Surjit Singh, 2002(1) SCT 404 (P&H) : 2003(3) SLR 148, wherein order of dismissal was upheld but that was a case of repeated absence from duty.
9.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the appellant and perused the record.
10.
No doubt, as laid down in Rule 162 of the Rules, order of dismissal could be justified only if it was for "gravest act of misconduct" or "for cumulative effect of continuous misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service".
This requirement is a usual requirement for punishment of dismissal but still the question is whether the words "gravest acts of misconduct" or "cumulative effect", debar an order of dismissal for proved misconduct either, when series of misconducts are not mentioned or when the words of the rule are not reproduced in the order of dismissal, as appears to be the submission on behalf of the appellant, which is also supported by earlier decisions of this Court.
On a close examination of law on the subject, the contention raised on behalf of the appellant cannot be upheld.
Even where such words are not mentioned in the order of dismissal, order of dismissal may not be void on that account unless it is found that the misconduct was trivial in nature or was not "gravest" or of such a nature which can be termed as continuous misconduct proving incorrigibility.
To ascertain whether misconduct is gravest or whether cumulative effect of continuous misconduct is such as proving incorrigility and complete unfit for Police service, nature of misconduct, circumstance in which such misconduct is committed, nature of duties of the employees are some of the factors to be taken into account.
What may not be a "gravest" act of misconduct in some other service may be a gravest act of misconduct in police service."
11.
In Ashok Kumar Singh (supra), Para 8, it was observed by the Apex Court :-  "The High Court failed to bear in mind that the first respondent was a police constable and was serving in a disciplined force demanding strict adherence to the rules and procedure more than any other department."
12.
In State of Punjab and others v. Bakhshish Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2696, which was also a case of a constable of Punjab Police, the Apex Court reversed the judgment of this Court reinstating the constable by holding that absence from duty was not a gravest act of misconduct.
It was observed :-  "It is settled legal position that it is for the disciplinary authority to pass appropriate punishment; the civil Court cannot substitute its own view to that of the disciplinary as well as appellate authority on the nature of the punishment to be imposed upon the delinquent officer."
13.
In State of Punjab and others v. Sukhwinder Singh, 1999 SCC (L&S) 1234, Para 6, it was observed :-  "That the order of dismissal did not use the `mantra' of `gravest act of misconduct' is not determinative.
The substance of that conclusion is to be found in that order.
When a policeman is repeatedly absent from duty, it cannot but be reasonably concluded that there is incorrigibility in his continued misconduct."
The amendment is Haryana Rules is also illustrative and not exhaustive.
14.
It is difficult to accept the contention that unexplained absence from duty can never amount to gravest act of misconduct, as sought to be inferred from the decision of the Apex Court in Ram Singh (supra).
In that case, having regard to the fact that the employee had rendered 17 years of service, order of dismissal was converted into that of compulsory retirement.
15.
In view of decisions of the Apex Court in Ashok Kumar Singh, Bakhshish Singh and Sukhwinder Singh (supra), order of dismissal for misconduct of absence from duty for 38 days for which no explanation was furnished, cannot be interfered with on the ground that the said misconduct was not gravest act of misconduct.
The decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant without reference to the said decisions of the Apex Court, cannot be given effect to in preference to the said decisions.
16.
For the above reasons, the view taken by the lower appellate Court that no interference was called for by the civil Court with the order of dismissal, when misconduct of absence for 38 days is fully established in a departmental enquiry, cannot be held to be erroneous.
No substantial question of law arises.
The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.