VM Jain, J - This order shall dispose of RSA Nos. 2446 and 2447 of 1993, 3018 of 1994 and 531 of 1995, as common questions of law and facts are involved in these appeals.
2.
Two suits were filed on 16111985.
One suit was filed by ASI Mohinder Singh, Head Constable Bhagwant Singh, Head Constable Mohan Singh and Constable Darshan Singh.
The other suit was filed by Constable Ram Kumar, Constable Balkar Singh and Constable Harbhajan Singh.
In both the suits the aforenamed plaintiffs challenged the order dated 15111985 passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala, dispensing with the departmental enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and dispensing with the services of the plaintiffs.
In these suits, it was alleged that the plaintiffs joined the Police Department as follows :-  1.
ASI Mohinder Singh (1965).
2.
HC Bhagwant Singh (1956) 3.
HC Mohan Singh (1976) 4.
Constable Darshan Singh (1971) 5.
Constable Ram Kumar (1977) 6.
Constable Balkar Singh (1976) 7.
Constable Harbhajan Singh (1958) 3.
In both the suits it was alleged by the plaintiffs that they were deputed to escort a hardcore extremist namely Balwinder Singh from Nabha Jail to Faridkot Jail on 10111985.
It was alleged that inspite of best efforts of the plaintiffs, the hardcore extremist namely Balwinder Singh managed to give a slip to the plaintiffs and ran away from their custody at 730 pm on 10111985.
It was alleged that a case under Section 223 IPC was registered against the plaintiffs in PS Kotwali, Faridkot and he plaintiffs were suspended and subsequently released on bail.
It was alleged that the plaintiffs reported back on duty at the Police Lines, Patiala on 13111985 and remained at the Police Lines till 15111985.
It was alleged that on 15111985 at the back of the plaintiffs the SSP Patiala (defendant No. 2) passed the impugned order against the plaintiffs under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and dispensed with the services of the plaintiffs.
It was alleged that said order dated 15111985 passed by the SSP Patiala, dispensing with the regular enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and dispensing with the services of the plaintiffs, was illegal and void on the various grounds detailed in the said suits.
It was accordingly prayed that the order dated 15111985 passed by the SSP Patiala, dispensing with the departmental enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and subsequently dispensing with the services of the plaintiffs be declared as illegal and void and the plaintiffs be declared to be still in service with all consequential benefits.
Both the suits were contested by the defendants by filing separate written statements, controverting the allegations contained in the plaint and taking up various preliminary objections.
It was alleged that the plaintiffs joined Police Department as under :-  1.
ASI Mohinder Singh (1965) 2.
HC Bhagwant Singh (1956) 3.
HC Mohan Singh (1976) 4.
Constable Darshan Singh (1977 and not 1971, as alleged) 5.
Constable Ram Kumar (1971 and not 1977, as alleged) 6.
Constable Balkar Singh (1976) 7.
Constable Harbhajan Singh (1958) 4.
It was alleged that the plaintiffs were deputed to escort under trial prisoners from Nabha Jail to District Jails Sangrur, Faridkot and Ferozepur, including hardcore extremist Ex-Constable Balwinder Singh, who was an accused in about two dozen cases of heinous crimes in various districts.
It was alleged that hardcore extremist Ex-Constable Balwinder Singh during the escort duty of the plaintiffs escaped from their custody at Faridkot on 10111985 on account of gross negligence and cross remissness of the duty of the plaintiffs.
It was admitted that the SSP Patiala, passed the order dated 15111985, dispensing with the enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and dispensing with the services of the plaintiffs due to their negligence and gross remissness of their duty.
It was alleged that the order dated 15111985 was perfectly legal and valid.
It was accordingly prayed that the suits be dismissed.
5.
The plaintiffs filed replications in both the suits.
Various issues were framed in both the suits including issue No. 1 as to whether the order of dismissal dated 15111985 was illegal, arbitrary and unconstitutional, null and void as alleged in the plaint and issue No. 2 as to whether the plaintiffs were entitled to the declaration prayed for.
Both sides led evidence.
6.
After hearing both sides and perusing record, the learned trial Court, vide separate judgments and decrees dated 1081989, partly decreed the suit ASI Mohinder Singh etc. v. State of Punjab and declared the order dated 15111985, against ASI Mohinder Singh to be illegal and void, whereas the said suit qua the remaining plaintiffs namely HC Bhagwant Singh, HC Mohan Singh and Constable Darshan Singh was dismissed and similarly the other suit filed by Constable Ram Kumar, Constable Balkar Singh and Constable Harbhajan Singh was also dismissed.
Aggrieved against the same, in the civil suit filed by ASI Mohinder Singh etc., two appeals were filed : one by State of Punjab and SSP Patiala, challenging the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court vide which suit of ASI Mohinder Singh was decreed and the other appeal was filed by HC Bhagwant Singh, vide which the suit filed by him and others namely HC Mohan Singh and Constable Darshan Singh was dismissed.
In the other suit filed by Constable Ram Kumar etc., two appeals were filed; one by Constable Ram Kumar and the other by Constable Balkar Singh and Constable Harbhajan Singh against the dismissal of their suit.
Sh. ML Malhotra, the then Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Patiala, vide judgment and decree dated 2081994, accepted the appeal filed by the State of Punjab and SSP Patiala and upheld the order dated 15111985 even qua ASI Mohinder Singh to be legal and valid, while the appeal filed by HC Bhagwant Singh was dismissed.
The other two appeals filed by Constable Ram Kumar and Constable Balkar Singh and Constable Harbhajan Singh were dismissed by Sh. SK Chopra, Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Patiala, vide judgment and decree dated 1641983.
Aggrieved against the judgments and decrees passed by the Addl.
Distt.
Judges, Patiala, as aforesaid, the present appeals were filed in this Court.
RSA No. 2446/1993 has been filed by Constable Ram Kumar while RSA No. 2447/1993 has been filed by Constable Balkar Singh and Constable Harbhajan Singh.
RSA No. 3018/1994 has been filed by HC Bhagwant Singh while RSA No. 531/1995 has been filed by ASI Mohinder Singh.
All these appeals were admitted to a regular hearing.
7.
As referred to above, two suits were filed by seven police officials.
Against the dismissal of their suits by the trial Court, two of the police officials namely HC Mohan Singh and Constable Darshan Singh had not filed any appeal before the Distt.
Judge or in this Court.
Thus, now we are concerned only with five of the police officials namely ASI Mohinder Singh and HC Bhagwant Singh, in one suit and Constable Ram Kumar, Constable Balkar Singh and Constable Harbhajan Singh in the other suit.
8.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel appearing for the appellants sought time to seek instructions as to whether the appellants were prepared to forego backwages etc. in case they were taken back in service.
Accordingly, the cases were adjourned and in the meanwhile, the learned State Counsel was given time to seek instructions about the stand of the State Government in this regard.
Thereafter, learned counsel for the appellants after seeking instructions form the appellants submitted that the appellants were prepared to forego backwages etc. in case they were taken back in service.
However, the learned State counsel sought time to seek instructions.
Thereafter during the course of arguments, learned State counsel produced before me a copy of the letter dated 952003 received from the Director General of Police, Punjab.
In the said letter dated 952003, the Director General of Police, Punjab had informed the learned State counsel that the office had examined the case and that if the appellants forego their claims, their case would be considered for pension at the time of their dismissal from service i.e. on 15111985 and they would be granted pensionary benefits from fresh dates.
It was also made clear that as per provisions of PPR 162, regard shall be had to the length of service of the petitioners with regard to their pension and if the petitioners were eligible to pension on the date of their dismissal, they would be granted pension from the fresh date otherwise their case may be decided on merits.
9.
In the light of the aforesaid letter dated 952003, learned State counsel submitted before me that in the case of those plaintiffs who were eligible or pension on the date of dismissal from service i.e. on 15111985, the order of dismissal dated 15111985 shall be deemed to have been set aside and instead, punishment of retirement from service shall be deemed to have been passed.
In the light of the stand taken by the department and the learned State Counsel, referred to above, learned counsel for the appellants submitted before me that only the case of those employees, whose cases are covered by the aforesaid letter received from Director General of Police, Punjab, may be disposed of in the terms of that letter, while the cases of others may be decided by this Court, on merits.
10.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record carefully.
11.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted before me that the order dated 15111985 vide which the holding of a departmental enquiry was dispensed with under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution and subsequently these plaintiffs-appellants were dismissed from service, was contrary to law, inasmuch as no case was made out for dispensing with the regular departmental enquiry on the facts and circumstances of the present case, especially when criminal case was also registered against the plaintiffs-appellants and the same ultimately ended in their acquittal by the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge.
It was further submitted that the length of service of the plaintiffs was not kept in view while passing the impugned order dated 15111985, vide which the plaintiffs-appellants were dismissed from service.
Reliance was placed on Chief Security Officer v. Singasan Rabi Das, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 594; Swaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(3) Service Cases Today 113 (P&H); Sangram Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(1) Service Cases Today 231 (P&H); Darshan Jit Singh Dhindsa v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) Service Cases Today 338 (P&H); Ex- Constable Balwinder Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 2003(2) Service Cases Today 137 (P&H); Om Parkash and another v. Government of India and others, 2004(3) Services Cases Today 390 (P&H); State of Punjab v. Darshan Singh, 1995(4) Service Cases Today 488 (P&H); Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(1) SCT 125 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 385; Ex. Sub-Inspector Puran Chand v. State of Punjab, 1996(1) Service Cases Today 625 (P&H); Lalji Dass v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(1) Service Cases Today 821 (P&H); Sahib Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(1) Service Cases Today 701 (P&H); Arjan Singh v. State of Punjab, 1996(1) Service Cases Today 597 (P&H); Gurcharan Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(1) Service Cases Today 600; The Punjab State v. Jagir Singh, 1993(4) Service Cases Today 534 (P&H); and State of Punjab and others v. Dharam Singh, 1997(4) SCT 410 (SC) : 1996(6) Services Law Reporter 361 (SC).
12.
On the other hand, the learned State counsel submitted before me that the order dated 15111985, dispensing with the holding of a regular departmental enquiry was rightly passed by the competent authority and the order of dismissal was also rightly passed.
It was submitted that with regard to pension (keeping in view their length of service) at the time when the order dated 15111985 was passed, the relief is being given by the department as per letter dated 952003 and with regard to the other plaintiffs who were not eligible for pension etc., the impugned order dated 15111985 has rightly been passed dismissing them from service.
Reliance has been placed on Satyavir Singh and other v. Union of India and others, AIR 1986 SC 555; Ikramuddin Ahmed Borah v. Superintendent of Police, Darrang and others, AIR 1988 SC 2245; Kuldip Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(4) SCT 595 (SC) : (1996)10 SCC 659; Union Territory, Chandigarh and others v. Mohinder Singh, 1997(2) SCT 39 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1201; Sahadeo Singh and others v. Union of India and others, 2003(1) SCT 935 (SC) : AIR 2003 SC 1568; and Ex-Inspector Police Gulab Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(3) Service Cases Today 644 (D.B.).
13.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, in my opinion, there is no merit in these appeals and the same are liable to be dismissed.
14.
In AIR 1986 SC 555 (supra), it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as under :-  "The crucial and material evidence against the appellants would be that of their co-workers for these co-workers were directly concerned in and were eye witnesses to the various incidents.
Where the disciplinary authority feels that crucial and material evidence will not be available in an enquiry because the witnesses who could give such evidence are intimidated and would not come forward and the only evidence which would be available namely, in this case, of policemen, police officers and senior officers would only be peripheral and cannot relate to all the charges and that, therefore, leading only such evidence may be assailed in a Court of law as being a mere farce of an enquiry and a deliberate attempt to keep back material witnesses, the disciplinary authority would be justified in coming to the conclusion that an inquiry is not reasonably practicable."
In AIR 1988 SC 2245 (supra), it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as under :-  "One of the illustrations justifying clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311 being invoked, as indicated above, is the non- availability of the witnesses on account of fear of the officer concerned.
In the instant case as is apparent from the impugned order of dismissal, this was the main ground for invoking the said clause (b).
On the material on record, it is not possible for us to take the view that there was an abuse of the power by the disciplinary authority in invoking clause (b).
The Superintendent of Police, who passed the order was the best authority on the spot to assess the situation in the circumstances prevailing at the relevant time and we do not find any good ground to interfere with the view taken by the Superintendent of Police in this behalf.
As pointed out in the case of Tulsi Ram Patel (AIR 1985 SC 1416), in such matters the Court will not sit in judgment over the relevancy of the reasons given by the disciplinary authority for involving clause (b) like a Court of first appeal and that even in those cases where two views are possible, the Court will decline to interfere".
In 1996(10) Supreme Court Cases 659 (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing with the situation in Punjab in terrorism days held as under :-  "The appellant alongwith some other caused the death of Superintendent of Police and a few other police officials.
It must be remembered that we are dealing with a situation obtaining in Punjab during the years 1990-91.
Moreover, the appellate authority has also agreed with the disciplinary authority that there were good grounds for coming to the conclusion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold a disciplinary enquiry against the appellant and that the appellant was guilty of crime confessed by him.
There is no allegation of mala fides levelled against the appellate authority.
The disciplinary and the appellate authorities are the men on the spot and we have no reason to believe that their decision has not been arrived at fairly".
15.
In AIR 1997 SC 1201 (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court was again dealing with the terrorism days in Punjab.
In the reported case it was found by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the order of dismissal recited that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry against SI Mohinder Singh for the reason that the witnesses cannot come forward freely to depose against him in a regular departmental enquiry.
The hon'ble Supreme Court found that on the given facts keeping in view that all this was happening in the year 1991 in the State of Punjab, the Senior Superintendent of Police cannot be said to be not justified in holding that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry against the respondent.
16.
In AIR 2003 SC 1568 (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court upheld the decision of the competent authority in dispensing with the departmental enquiry keeping in view that the delinquent were working as Rakshaks in Railway Protection Force and they were charged for their involvement in the theft of rice bags from goods train in collusion with certain miscreants and other officials.
Keeping in view the none was willing to give a statement in writing or giving evidence against them apprehending danger to their lives and under such circumstances it was held that it could be said that the disciplinary authority had rightly come to the conclusion that it would be impracticable for the Railways to hold fair enquiry.
17.
In 1993(3) Service Cases Today (644 D.B.)
(supra), it was held by a Division Bench of this Court that non-compliance of the provisions of Rules 16.38 and 162 of the Punjab Police Rules shall not invalidate the order of dismissal by invoking the provisions of clause (a), (b) or (c) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
18.
In the present case, on 10111985 when the plaintiffs were put on duty to escort various under trial prisoners including Ex-Constable Balwinder Singh, who was accused in about two dozen cases of heinous crimes of different districts and was a hardcore extremist, while being transported from Nabha Jail, said Ex-Constable Balwinder Singh escaped from the custody of the plaintiffs at Faridkot.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, after considering the entire matter while dispensing with the departmental enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India found as under :-  "And whereas from the material available, I am satisfied that the aforesaid police personnel were grossly remiss in the discharge of their duties which enabled said Balwinder Singh to escape from their custody; And whereas the aforesaid dereliction of duty on their part constitutes an act of gravest misconduct rendering them completely unfit for service in the police department; And whereas I am satisfied that it is not reasonably practical for reasons recorded separately, as provided in proviso (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, to hold an enquiry;".
After passing the aforesaid order, dispensing with the enquiry, the SSP Patiala ordered the dismissal of these plaintiffs-appellants.
Earlier, on the file, the detailed report submitted by the DSP Police Lines, Patiala in this regard was accepted by the SSP Patiala and it was found that it was not reasonably practicable to hold a regular departmental enquiry against these police officials.
It was found that the circumstances under which the hardcore extremist namely Balwinder Singh, who was wanted in about two dozen cases of heinous crimes escaped, was known only to the police officials, on account of whose gross negligence and serious dereliction of duty he managed to escape.
It was further found that under such circumstances they were not likely to depose against one and other during enquiry and, therefore, finding no other alternative and for enforcing strict discipline, in exercise of powers vested in him under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India, the holding of a regular departmental enquiry was dispensed with and the dismissal order was passed.
19.
In the present case, it is the admitted case of the parties that even though initially all the police officials were held guilty of the charge under Section 223 IPC by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, yet in appeal filed by them the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge, Faridkot vide judgment dated 2341992, accepted their appeals and acquitted these police officials of the charge under Section 223 IPC.
It is also not disputed before me that these police officials were acquitted by the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge because none of the witnesses examined by the prosecution had stated that they had seen Balwinder Singh escaping from police custody and since there was no evidence that Balwinder Singh escaped from lawful custody of the police officials concerned, these police officials were acquitted by the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge.
Copy of the judgment dated 2341992 passed by the Addl.
Sessions Judge is also available on the trial Court record.
Thus, it would be clear that the police officials were acquitted on account of lack of evidence.
Thus, the apprehension of the SSP Patiala, in this regard, was found to be true.
20.
In view of the above, in my opinion, no fault could be found with the order dated 15111985 passed by the SSP Patiala vide which holding of a regular departmental enquiry was dispensed with under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
Furthermore, taking into consideration that the police officials who had not completed enough service entitling them to pension, in my opinion, it could not be said that while passing order of dismissal their length of service was not kept in view by the punishing authority.
However, with regard to those, who had put in sufficient service required to give them pension, the Director General of Police, Punjab, has already stated in the letter dated 952003 that their cases would be considered for pension and they would be granted pensionary benefits from fresh date.
21.
The various authorities relied upon by the learned counsel for the plaintiffs-appellants, in my opinion, would have no application to the facts of the present case, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and by a Division Bench of this Court in the cases referred to above.
22.
In 1992(1) SCT 594 (supra), the holding of enquiry was dispensed with by the competent authority and it was found by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the reasons given by the competent authority were insufficient for dispensing with the enquiry and under those circumstances the order passed by the High Court setting aside the order of the competent authority, was upheld by the Supreme Court.
In the reported case the enquiry was disposed (dispensed ? )
with giving the reason that inquiry witnesses would suffer personal humiliation and insults and their family members may become targets of acts of violence and those reasons were found insufficient by the Supreme Court.
However, as referred to above, facts of the present case are entirely different and the law laid down in the said authority would have no application to the facts of the present case.
In 1996(3) SCT 113 (supra), the order dispensing with the enquiry was set aside by a Division Bench of this Court on the ground that the impugned order did not show any application of mind by the competent authority and the records produced did not contain any material showing that the competent authority was satisfied that it was not reasonably practicable to hold enquiry.
It was found that it was not a case in which the respondents had come forward with a plea that holding of enquiry against the petitioners was improbable and it was not a case in which respondents had come out with a case that the persons from whom the petitioners had allegedly extorted money would not come forward to depose against them.
It was also found that the respondents had not placed any material on the record to show that the petitioners had threatened any person.
It was under those circumstances that it was found that the dismissal order could not be sustained and was quashed.
However, the law laid down in this authority would have no application to the present case, in view of the facts of the present case and in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above mentioned authorities.
Similarly, the authority 1996(1) SCT 231 (supra) would have no application to the present case.
In the reported case it was found by this Court that mere two lower officers passed notes against the petitioner who happened to be a Police Constable (driver) that he had got links with militants and was supplying them information and helping transport of arms and ammunition to them.
It was found that the order dispensing with the enquiry was passed only on the basis of these two notes passed by lower rank officers and the competent authority had not made any effort to verify the correctness of these notes.
It was also found that there was no material available either with the lower officers or with the competent authority to support the conclusion and satisfaction that the enquiry was not reasonably practicable.
It was under those circumstances that the order of discharge was found to be illegal and was quashed.
However, as referred to above, the law laid down in this authority would have no application to the facts of the present case.
Similar is the position with regard to the authority 1993(1) SCT 338 (supra).
In the reported case the petitioner was charged for having links with extremists.
It was found that it was too vague in view of his previous record prior to his dismissal whereby commendation certificates were issued for courageous acts performed by the petitioner in curbing the terrorist activities.
It was found that there was no evidence to show that holding of an enquiry is or was not practicable.
It was found that the inquiry against the petitioner was dispensed with on excuses.
It was under those circumstances that the order of dismissal passed against the petitioner was set aside.
However, in my opinion, the law laid down in this authority as well will have no application to the facts of the present case.
23.
In 2003(2) SCT 137 (supra) it was found that the petitioner alongwith other persons was involved in a criminal case under Sections 379/409, 120-B IPC read with Sections 3 and 4 of TADA.
It was found that when evidence could be led in the criminal case there was no reason as to why evidence could not be led in the departmental enquiry.
It was also found that the departmental enquiry was initiated against some of the other persons and no reason had been given as to why evidence could not be led in the case of the petitioner.
It was under those circumstances that it was found that the competent authority had failed to make out a case for dispensing with the enquiry.
However, the law laid down in this authority would have no application to the facts of the present case.
In the present case, even though the evidence was led by the prosecution in the criminal case, but as referred to above, none of the material witnesses examined by the prosecution had supported the case of the prosecution and it was for this reason that all the appellants were acquitted in appeal by the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge.
Similarly, in my opinion, the law laid down in the case 2004(3) SCT 390 (supra), would have no application to the facts of the present case, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases referred to above.
In the reported case the petitioners were employed in the Railway Protection Force and the allegations against them were that thefts were being committed with the active connivance of the petitioners and their associates who were recruited for the protection of railway property.
Both the petitioners were dismissed from service without holding departmental enquiry on the ground that it was not reasonably practicable to hold the enquiry.
On the facts of the reported case, it was found that there was no sufficient material on the record to dispense with the holding of a departmental enquiry.
However, the law laid down by this Court in this authority would have no application to the facts of the present case, in which the holding of a regular departmental enquiry was dispensed with against the appellants, who were involved in the escaping of a hardcore extremist namely Balwinder Singh in Punjab during the days when the terrorism was at its peak in November 1985.
Similarly, the authority 1995(4) SCT 488 (supra), relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellants would have no application to the facts of the present case.
In the reported case, it was found that the punishing authority had failed to support the order of dismissal after dispensing with enquiry inasmuch as the punishing authority had failed to record or produce before the Court the reasons so recorded before proceeding to pass the order in exercise of powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and as such the order could not be sustained.
However, in the present case, the competent authority had given detailed reasons as to why holding of a regular departmental enquiry was not practicable and the reasons as to why the same was dispensed with.
Similarly, the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in AIR 1991 SC 385 (supra) would have no application to the facts of the present case in view of the various authorities of the Supreme Court, referred to above.
24.
Similarly, the authorities 1996(1) SCT 625 (supra), 1996(1) SCT 701 (supra), 1996(1) SCT 597 (supra) and 1996(1) SCT 600 (supra), relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellants, would have no application to the facts of the present case in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the various cases, referred to above.
Similar is the position with regard to the authority 1996(1) SCT 821 (supra) and 1993(4) SCT 534 (supra).
25.
With regard to 1996(4) SLR 361 (supra), the allegations against the delinquent police official were that he remained absent from duty and the absence was wilful.
However, on the facts of the said case the punishment of compulsory retirement from service was awarded instead of removing from service.
In my opinion, this authority would be of on help to the appellants except those who had put in sufficient service entitling them to pension and the other appellants cannot take any benefit of the same especially when the allegations against them are very serious.
In view of the detailed discussion above, in my opinion, there is no merit in these appeals and the same are hereby dismissed.
However, it is made clear that those appellants, who had put in sufficient service which is required to give them pension, their cases would be considered for pension and they would be granted pensionary benefits, as mentioned by the Director General of Police, Punjab, in his letter dated 952003, already referred to above.
No costs.
Appeals dismissed.