SS Saron, J - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks quashing of the impugned order dated 1262002 (Annexure-P.3) whereby the Executive Engineer, D&P Public Health Division, Sonepat (respondent No. 3) in response to legal notice of the petitioner has intimated that the petitioner is not entitled for the service benefits, i.e., family pension, gratuity, ex-gratia grant and appointment on compassionate ground.
Besides, she is not entitled for taking the benefits under Rule 312 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules (as applicable in Haryana) Volume-II.
It is prayed that the respondents be directed to grant family pension, gratuity, ex-gratia grant with all other consequential benefits after regularising the services of the husband of the petitioner and the arrears be paid with interest @ 18% per annum.
2.
The husband of the petitioner, namely, late Ravinder Singh was appointed as Mali-cum-Chowkidar in Public Health Department on work charge/daily wage basis w.e.f.
March 1994.
While in service of the Public Health Department, he died on 2081999 leaving behind his widow petitioner, besides three minor daughters and one minor son.
The deceased husband of the petitioner had rendered more than five years service at the time of his death and, therefore, it is stated that he was entitled for regularisation of his service according to the government instructions.
The petitioner made an application dated 2222001 (Annexure-P.1) requesting for appointment in the Department of Public Health.
The petitioner contacted the office of the respondents time and again for release of pensionary benefits like family pension, gratuity, ex- gratia grant and compassionate appointment but nothing was done.
Thereafter, the petitioner through her counsel served a legal notice dated 252002 (Annexure-P.2) for the grant of pensionary benefits, i.e., family pension, gratuity, ex-gratia grant and appointment on compassionate grounds.
The said legal notice has been rejected vide impugned order dated 1262002 (Annexure- P.3) which, as already noticed, is assailed in this writ petition.
3.
On notice, reply has been filed by the Executive Engineer, Public Health Division No. 2, Sonepat (respondent No. 3) on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 on 20.2.2003 and thereafter filed amended written statement dated 7.12.2003 which was permitted to be taken on record by this Court vide order dated 11122003.
In terms of the amended written statement, it is stated that pensionary benefits cannot be given to the petitioner in case of the death of her husband while working in the respondent department as daily wager as there is no such rule/instructions of the State Government to grant pensionary benefits to the deceased family of the daily rated employees.
It was also stated that the provisions of Civil Services, Rules, Volume-II (CSR, Volume-II - for short) are only applicable to State Government employees under permanent/regular cadre and not for daily rated employees.
Besides, in terms of Rules 312 and 316(b) under foot-note (4) of CSR, Volume-II, the claim of the petitioner is not maintainable.
It is further stated that the husband of the petitioner was engaged as daily rated employee with the respondent department as an unskilled labourer and paid as per rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner and there are no dues pending with the respondents.
Further there are no such rules under which pensionary benefits are available to the daily rated employees.
It is accepted that husband of the petitioner had rendered service with the respondents as daily wager for five years.
It is submitted that the respondents have full sympathy with the petitioner but are unable to grant the family pension, gratuity, ex-gratia grant to the petitioner in the absence of rules and, therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
Shri RS Sangwan, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of family pension, gratuity, ex-gratia grant and all other consequential benefits and that the services of the husband of the petitioner are liable to be regularised in accordance with the government instructions.
5.
In response, Shri Bijender Dhankar, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana submits that though the petitioner was continuously working for the last five years, but as a daily wager and as such he is not entitled to family pension.
Besides, as per Rules 312 and 316 of the CSR, Volume-II, the petitioner is not entitled for any benefit.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
It is appropriate to note that Ravinder Singh, deceased husband of the petitioner was appointed as Mali-cum-Chowkidar in the Public Health Department on work-charge/daily wage basis w.e.f.
March 1994 and he expired on 2081999.
The deceased Ravinder Singh had rendered more than five years of service at the time of his death.
The question, therefore, that requires to be considered is whether the petitioner is entitled for family pension, gratuity, ex-gratia grant and other benefits on account of the demise of her husband.
It is appropriate to note that the claim of the petitioner is primarily for family pension and that the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 as contained in Appendix-I under Chapter-XV of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (as applicable in Haryana).
Volumed II, Part-I ("1964 Scheme' for short) is applicable in the State.
Paras 1, 3, 4 and 11 of the 1964 Scheme read as under:-  "1.
This scheme called the "Family Pension Scheme 1964" has been formulated to afford further relief to the family of the deceased Government employees and provides for the following benefits :- *Pay of the Govt.
Employee Monthly pension of widow/widower or children (i) Not exceeding Rs. 1500 30% of pay subject to a minimum of Rs. 300.
(ii) Exceeding Rs. 1500 but not exceeding Rs. 3000 20% of pay subject to a minimum of Rs. 450.
(iii) Exceeding Rs. 3000 15% of pay subject to a minimum of Rs. 600 and a maximum of Rs. 1250.
*Substituted vide No. 1/2/CSR Vol.II/91-SAO(FD), 3111992 w.e.f.
1.1.1986 Note.
- The minimum pension will be Rs. 300 and maximum Rs. 1250.
"Pay" for this purpose means the pay as defined in Rules 294 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, which the person was drawing on the date of his death while in service or immediately before his retirement.
If on the date of his death while in service or immediately before his retirement, a person has been absent from duty on leave (including extraordinary leave) or suspension.
"Pay" means the pay which he drew immediately before proceeding on such leave or suspension.
It includes "Dearness Pay".
3.
This scheme comes into force with effect from 1st July, 1964 and is applicable to all regular employees on pensionable establishment - temporary or permanent - who were in service on the 1st July, 1964, or are recruited thereafter.
"4.
This scheme is administered as below :- (i) The family pension is admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement on or after the 1st July, 1964 if at the time of death, the retired officer was in receipt of a compensation, invalid, retiring or superannuation pension.
The Family Pension will not be admissible in case of death after retirement if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
In case of death while in service a Government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without break..... (emphasis added) Note 1.
- The term one year continuous service used in para-4(i) above is inclusive of permanent/temporary service in a pensionable establishment but does not include periods of extraordinary leaves, boy (sic.)
service and suspension period unless that is regularised by the competent authority or before completion of one year continuous service provided the deceased Government employee concerned immediately prior to his recruitment to the service or post was examined by the appropriate Medical Authority and declared fit by that authority for Government service.
Note 2.
- xx xx xx xx xx (ii) "Family" for purposes of this scheme includes the following relatives of the officer :- (a) wife, in the case of a male officer; (b) husband, in the case of a female officer; (c) minor sons; and (d) unmarried minor daughters.
Note 1.
- (c) and (d) include children adopted legally before retirement.
Note 2.
- Marriage after retirement is not recognised for purposes of this scheme.
Note 3.
- A judicially separated wife/husband does not lose her/his legal status of wife/husband of the Government employee and is thus eligible for the benefit of the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
(iii) The pension is admissible :- (a) in the case of widow/widower upto the date of death or remarriage, whichever, is earlier; and (b) in the case of son/unmarried daughter until he/she attains the age of 25 years : Provided that an unmarried daughter will become ineligible for pension from the date she gets married : Provided further that the son/unmarried daughter shall become ineligible for pension if he or she starts earning livelihood.
Note.
- (i) Where an Officer is survived by more than one widow, the pension will be paid to them in equal shares.
On the death of a widow, her share of the pension will become payable to her eligible minor child.
If at the time of her death, a widow leaves no eligible minor child the payment of her share of the pension will cease.
(ii) Where an Officer is survived by a widow but has left behind an eligible minor child from another wife, the eligible minor child will be paid the share of pension which the mother would have received, if the had been alive at the time of the death of the officer.
(iv) Except as provided in the Note below sub-para (iii) of this para, pension awarded under this scheme will not be payable to more than one member of an officer's family at the same time.
It will first be admissible to the widow/widower and thereafter to the eligible minor children.
(v) In the event of remarriage or death of the widow/widower the pension will be granted to the minor children through their natural guardian, if any, otherwise through their de facto guardian on production of indemnity bond, etc., on the analogy of the orders contained in FD circular letter No. 6837-(5) FR-1-61/8358, dated the 29th July, 1961.
In disputed cases, however, payments will be made through a legal guardian (i.e. guardian appointed by court of law).
The ad hoc increase granted under the Punjab Government circular letter No. 8206-6FR-I64/7668, dated 13th August, 1964, will not be admissible on the family pension granted under this scheme."
11.
This Scheme will not be applicable to :- (a) Persons who retired before the 1st July, 1964 but may be re- employed on that date or thereafter; (b) Persons paid from contingencies; (c) Work-charged staff; (d) Casual labour; (e) Contract Officers; and (f) Persons who were in service in the composite State of Punjab prior to 1st November, 1966 and came over to Haryana State on or after 1st November, 1966 or those who have been recruited by the Haryana Government on or after 1st November, 1966, without a minimum service of five years in the Haryana State."
7.
The effect of the said scheme and the disentitlement to the applicability in terms of para 11(c) of the 1964 Scheme was considered by this Bench in the case of Om Pati Devi v. State of Haryana and another, (CWP No. 2249 of 2003), decided on 19122003.
In Om Pati Devi's case (supra), the deceased husband of the petitioner therein was also working as Mali-cum-Chowkidar on work-charge basis for the period from 1671083 till 781988 when he died all of a sudden.
In this manner, the decreased husband of the petitioner therein had rendered five years of service.
The provisions of the 1964 Scheme as also the case law on the point was considered and after considering the same, it was held as follows :-  "Keeping in view the fact that the husband of the petitioner was in continuous service for about five years and was receiving monthly pay.
Besides, the requirement of para 4(i) of 1964 Scheme, which provides for administration of the Scheme in case of death while in service.
The nature of service rendered has no rational basis which can be said to satisfy the twin test of classification which distinguishes persons that grouped together from those that are left out from the group and the differentia has no rational nexus or casual connection to the object sought to be achieved.
Therefore, the provisions of pare 11(c) of the 1964 Scheme are to be read down by applying principles of severance as it is wholly irrelevant and arbitrary as there is no acceptable or persuasive reason for this division between regular employees or work-charged employees for the purposes of grant of benefits of the 1964 Scheme.
Besides, the fact that a widow of the similarly situated decreased employee is in receipt of family pension, there is no reason to deny the benefit of family pension as enjoined by the 1964 Scheme to the petitioner.
The reasoning given, however, is for the purpose of the 1964 Scheme only and would not otherwise be construed as altering the status of a work-charge employee as it is normally understood in serviced law."
8.
A reference was also made to an earlier judgment of this Court, in Kanta Devi v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(2) SCT 32 (P&H) : 2000(1) RSJ 505, wherein this Court in the case of Government employee who and served for a period of about two years on ad hoc/purely temporary basis was denied the benefit of pension.
This Court while referring to the provisions of para 4(i) of the 1964 Scheme observed that even if a government employee has one year service to his credit irrespective of the fact whether he was permanent or temporary, his widow would be entitled for family pension.
Besides, the question of regularisation of the service was also considered in the context of the instructions of the respondent State Government as considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2130.
In any case, the fact that the deceased husband of the petitioner in the case in hand has more than one year of service would entitle his family to the benefit of pension in terms of para 4(i) of the 1964 Scheme.
In Kanta Devi's case (supra) it was held that if a government employee has one year service irrespective of the fact whether he was permanent or temporary his widow would be entitled for family pension.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondent-State has, however, placed strong reliance on the provisions of Rules 312 and 316(b) of CSR, Volume-II.
Rule 312 and 316(b) of CSR, Volume-II read as under -  "Chapter III - Service qualifying for pension Section II - Conditions of qualification A - General 312 The service of a Government servant does not qualify for pension unless it conforms to the following three conditions :- First.
The service must be under Government.
Second.
The employment must be substantive and permanent.
Three.
The service must be paid by Government."
316(a) xx xx xx xx xx (b) Past service rendered in a part B State (excluding Saurashtra but including an Indian State which subsequently became a Part B State) shall be treated as equivalent to Government service for the purpose of pension and shall count for pension on permanent absorption in the Punjab Government service in the same manner as such service rendered in a former Part 'A' State counts.
Note 1.
- The following are examples of Government servants excluded from pension by this rule :- (1) Employees of a municipality.
(2) Employees of grant-in-aid schools and institutions.
(3) Subordinates appointed by Treasurers on their own responsibility.
(4) Service on an establishment paid from a contract establishment allowance, with the detailed distribution of which the Government does not interfere, whether such contract allowance is a fixed amount or consists of fees.
(5) Service on an establishment paid from the Household allowance of the Governor."
10.
It is, however, appropriate to note that the said rules provided for conditions for qualifications for the grant of pension to a government employee under the State Government.
However, the 1964 Scheme is a complete independent scheme by itself and its provisions are applicable for the grant of benefit under the same and as already noticed above the same is provided for under Chapter-XV of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, as applicable in Haryana, Volume-II, Part-I.
Therefore, the provisions of Rules 312 and 316(b) of the CSR, Volume-II, as referred to by the learned counsel for the State, are inapplicable.
In the case in hand the provisions of the 1964 Scheme would be applicable.
The learned counsel for the State then contended that in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. Rabia Bikaner, 1997(3) SCT 598 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2843, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of family pension.
The question that was considered therein was whether a widow of a casual labourer in Railway Establishment who died after putting in six months service and obtaining the status of a temporary workman but before his appointment to a temporary post after screening is entitled to family pension under the Family Pension Scheme.
A reference was made to para 211 of the Railway Establishment Manual wherein causal labourers with temporary status were entitled to certain entitlements and privileges granted to temporary railway servants but this did not entitle them to family pension.
It was held that every casual labour employee in Railway Administration for six months was entitled to temporary status then they were empanelled and thereafter were required to be screened by the competent authority.
They were appointed in order of merit as and when vacancy for temporary post in regular establishment arose.
On their appointment they were also required to put in minimum service of one year on temporary post.
If any of those employees who had put in the required minimum service of one year, that too after the appointment on a temporary post, died while in service, his widow would be eligible for pension.
In the said case though some of the deceased employees had been screened yet appointments were not given to them since temporary posts were not available or in some cases they were not even eligible for screening because the posts became available after their death.
Under these circumstances, it was held, that the respondents-widows therein were not entitled for family pensionary benefits.
Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ram Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 390, wherein the provisions of para 2511 of the Railway Establishment Manual were considered in terms of which no pensionary benefits are admissible to temporary railway servants and, therefore, retiral advantage is not available to casual labour acquiring temporary status.
Therefore, the ratio of the judgment therein is in the context of para 2511 of the Railway Establishment Manual and is not applicable to the case in hand wherein in terms of para 3 of the 1964 Scheme the family pension Scheme is applicable to all regular employees on pensionable establishment - temporary or permanent - who were in service on 171964 or are recruited thereafter.
It is admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement on or after 171964 and in case of death while in service a government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without break.
In terms of Note-1 below para 4(i) it is provided that the term one year continuous service used in para 4(i) is inclusive of permanent/temporary service in a pensionable establishment.
The establishment of the respondent Public Health Division indeed is a pensionable establishment and the petitioner has rendered five years continuous service in the said establishment.
It is also appropriate to note that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of work-charge employee of the state of Haryana in case titled State of Haryana and others v. Ravinder Kumar and others, (Civil Appeal Nos. 5740-5741 of 1997) passed the following order on 31102000 :-  "Delay condoned in SLPs.
These batch of cases were delinked while hearing another batch of appeals from the same State, which were disposed of by us by judgment dated 19th September, 2000.
It is contended by the learned counsel appearing for the State that in these cases we are concerned with employees who had been engaged initially on work charge basis and later on they were regularized and brought into the cadre of the service.
It is also not disputed by the learned counsel appearing for the State that this period which the employee has rendered as work charge basis for the purpose of the increment in the cadre as well as the qualifying service for the pension.
We, therefore, see no justification in not counting their period for the purpose of giving additional increment on completion of 8 and 18 years of service as well as 10 and 20 years of service for getting higher scale as per the Government Circular, which obviously are intended to avoid stagnation in a particular grade.
In that view of the matter, we see no justification for our interference with the impugned order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
These appeals and SLPs, accordingly, stand dismissed."
In the light of the above, it is evident that work charge service was given due consideration on regularisation.
In the case in hand the work charge employee having died, there is no justification to decline the benefits of family pension under the 1964 Scheme to his widow.
11.
Insofar as the claim of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show as to how the petitioner is entitled for appointment on compassionate grounds.
Consequently, the said claim is without any merit.
12.
In the circumstances and for the reasons stated in the case of Om Pati Devi v. State of Haryana and another (supra), it is held that the petitioner is entitled to family pension in accordance with the 1964 Scheme and the order dated 1262002 (Annexure-P.3) is set aside and quashed.
The respondents are directed to release the family pension to the petitioner in accordance with 1964 Scheme.
The petitioner shall, however, not be entitled to any interest on the arrears due.
Besides, the claim of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds is dismissed.
In the circumstances there shall be no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.