SS Saron, J - PSIDC Karmchari Union (registered) (petitioner No. 1) is an association of the employees of the Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd (respondent No. 4) (PSIDC - for short).
Petitioner No. 2 is a Superintendent (Grade-II) in the PSIDC and is also General Secretary of the Union.
2.
The grievance of the petitioners in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is against the withdrawal of reimbursement of financial benefits like reduction in reimbursement in respect of outdoor medical treatment as well as the reduction of house rent allowance from 25% to 15%.
Besides, seeking directions to release the same after quashing the letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) issued by the Chief Secretary of Government of Punjab as also the extract of the minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of PSIDC held on 2452002 (Annexure P-17).
3.
The PSIDC (respondent No. 4) was established by the Government of Punjab in 1966 to act as an Institutional entrepreneur for establishment of large and medium scale industries in the State.
It started functioning as a financial Institution in 1976 for extending loans to various industrial ventures.
At the time, when PSIDC was set up there was very low industrial activity in the State, particularly in the medium and large scale sector.
Therefore, the PSIDC, it is stated, has been very successful for the purpose of which it was established as it had promoted a large number of industrial projects in the large and medium scale and thereby has been able to create a large entrepreneurial base in the State.
The PSIDC has a work-force of only 140 personnel, out of which 111 employees are in the non-mangerial field and are members of the Union.
The remaining 29 are in the managerial cadre in addition to the Managing Director and Additional Managing Director of the PSIDC.
The service conditions of the employees of PSIDC are regulated by the provisions of the Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd Services Rules (Rules - for short) which have been in force w.e.f.
171976.
Rule 75 which defines "allowance" to include dearness allowance, house rent allowance, travelling allowance, conveyance, city compensatory, sumptuary and overtime allowance or any other allowance sanctioned by the Board from time to time.
Rule 714 envisages that the employees of the Corporation shall receive such allowance as may be sanctioned by the Board from time to time.
The agenda that was circulated records that matter regarding enhancement in the House Rent Allowance was referred to the Finance Department and that the case had been discussed in detail with the concerned official of the Finance Department and reasonableness of the proposal was explained.
The Board of Directors of the PSIDC in its meeting held on 761976 took a decision vide item No. 27 (Annexure P-2(a)) to pay house rent to its employees @ 25% w.e.f.
161976 instead at the rate of 12-1/2% as was then payable.
Thereafter, the Board of Directors of the PSIDC in its 135th meeting held on 12.9.1983 approved reimbursement of conveyance charges incurred by its employees on the basis of basic pay drawn by them.
The employees of PSIDC accordingly got financial reimbursement w.e.f.
191983.
Subsequently, vide decision dated 18.9.1996, the rate of conveyance reimbursement was revised.
This financial reimbursement, it is stated, was allowed by the Board in exercise of its powers under Rule 74 read with Rule 7.15 of the Rules.
The PSIDC had on some later occasions reiterated its decision to continue to grant house rent allowance to its employees @ 25% of the basic pay of the employees.
However, the Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab, respondent No. 3 issued a Demi official letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) addressed to the Principal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Industries & Commerce, Chandigarh.
In the said letter, a reference has been made to the Meeting of the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Fiscal Management, held on 2442002, in which various decisions were taken to effect economy in pay and allowances.
It was observed that some of the PSUs were paying pay scales and allowances to their employees at rates higher than the Government employees and were also extending perquisites to the employees which were not available to their counterparts in Government service.
A decision was taken by the Sub-Committee that pay, allowances and perquisites of employees of Public Sector Undertakings, Local Bodies, Corporations and other Public and quasi-Public institutions shall not be higher than their counterparts in the Government service.
It was, therefore, requested to immediately order alignment of pay scales and allowances and perquisites of the employees of the institutions with that of the Government employees of the equivalent category with immediate effect.
The responsibility for non-implementation of the above decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee was to be that of the Administrative Secretary and the Managing Director of the PSU concerned.
Compliance report in that behalf, was required to be sent by 2152002, with a copy to the Principal Secretary, Government of Punjab Department of Finance.
It was also indicated that the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Fiscal Management is an Empowered Sub-Committee of the Council of Ministers and, therefore, its decision were the decisions of the Council of Ministers for all intents and purposes.
The said letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) was taken up for consideration in the meeting of the Board of Directors of PSIDC held on 2452002.
Item No. 14 of the agenda of the meeting of the Board of Directors related to the strictest observance of economy and austerity measures by all the Public Sector Undertakings (including Cooperative Apex Institutions) and payment of House Rent Allowance/Conveyance Allowance at Government rates.
On consideration of the memorandum placed before the Board and letter received from the Chief Secretary, which was placed before the Board, it was decided that the Corporation should follow Government pattern with regard to payment of HRA to its employees w.e.f.
162002.
Accordingly, the house rent allowance was reduced from 25% of the basic pay to 15% as was being given to Government employees.
Besides, conveyance reimbursement was discontinued w.e.f.
162002 as the State Government employees do not get any such facility.
It was also decided by the Board that w.e.f.
162002 the Corporation should follow State Government Rules of payment of Rs. 250/- per month for outdoor treatment and indoor treatment expenses as per norms fixed by AIIMS and PGI.
However, the employees could avail of indoor treatment from any other recognised hospitals.
Accordingly, the present petition has been filed assailing the aforesaid Demi Official letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) of the Chief Secretary and the above extract of the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors of PSIDC held on 2452002 (Annexure P-17) whereby the Punjab Government pattern in respect of payment of HRA, conveyance allowance and medical reimbursement was decided to be followed.
4.
On notice, reply has been filed by the Additional Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Industries and Commerce, Chandigarh, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and also by Executive Director-cum-Secretary PSIDC (respondent No. 4).
5.
The respondent-State in its written statement submitted that the Cabinet Sub-Committee of the Government considering the precarious fiscal health of the State had taken certain decisions, which were conveyed vide extracts of the minutes of the meeting dated 2452002 (Annexure P-17) in order to bring parity in the pay, allowances and perquisites being enjoyed by the employees working in the various Public Sector Undertakings, Local Bodies, Corporations and other Public and Quasi Public Undertakings shall not be higher than their counterparts in the Government service.
The Public Sector undertaking to whom instructions had been issued in the light of the decision of the Cabinet Sub- Committee are fully owned by the State Government with 100% equity participation with PSIDC (respondent No. 4).
In addition, the State Government also gives guarantee for the bonds raised by the PSIDC.
Besides, the decision of the Government was placed before the Board of Directors of the PSIDC, which were duly ratified, approved and adopted by the PSIDC after due consideration.
Therefore, there is no illegality in the decision of the Government or the decision of the Board of Directors of the PSIDC to resort to the uniform pattern of perks especially in the nature of withdrawal of reimbursement of conveyance expenses, reduction of reimbursement in respect of outdoor medical treatment as well as the reduction of house rent allowance.
The petitioners, it is stated, have no statutory right to claim such allowances.
It is further submitted that Article 135 of the Articles of Association of the PSIDC Ltd provides that the Government may from time to time issue such directives as they may consider necessary in the matters of broad policy and the PSIDC is to give immediate effect to the directives so issued.
6.
The PSIDC (respondent No. 4) in its separate reply has stated that Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 applies for the petitioners and, therefore, the appropriate remedy for them is under the said Act and the disputes as raised cannot be adjudicated by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The other material aspects as regards of the setting up of the Corporation and its aims and objects of bringing industrialization in Punjab and bring about economic growth in the region have been admitted.
It is stated that there was no thumb rule established by which one could say that a benefit once granted was to continue in perpetuity.
Besides, the Board of Directors of the PSIDC had resolved to enhance the house rent allowance and it was enhanced from 125% to 25% w.e.f.
161976.
Thereafter, the Board of Directors of the PSIDC in their meeting held on 2452002 considered the State Government directives with regard to the strict compliance of economy measures by all Public Sectors undertakings and payment of house rent allowance, conveyance allowance as per Government rates.
The Board made a comparative study of the pay scales and the facilities available to the Government department and having regard to the financial position and commercial exigencies decided the matter.
It is submitted that TA/DA facilities being given to the staff were retained as was given to the Corporation employees previously as the continuance of such facilities to the employees was in the interest of the PSIDC and its employees.
It is stated that the financial position of the Corporation as on 3132002 reveal accumulated loss of Rs. 118 crores and it is due to adverse financial resources of the Corporation that the Board desired that the continuance of such facilities will not be able to do any good to the employees in the long run.
Besides, in order to cut down the expenses, the PSIDC introduced voluntary retirement scheme and so far 38 employees had opted for it and quit the Corporation.
An additional affidavit dated 2572002 of Shri R Narayanan, Executive Director-cum-Secretary, PSIDC, was also filed.
In terms of which Annexure R-1/A and R-1/B were placed on record to show the precarious financial position of PSIDC and the need to exercise economy in the expenditure to bring down the administrative expenses to reasonable cause.
In the circumstances, it is prayed that the petition be dismissed.
7.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Senior Advocate appearing with Ms. Madhu Dayal, Advocate, for the petitioners has contended that the impugned decision taken by the PSIDC to lower the allowances and perquisites being enjoyed by the employees and the officers of the PSIDC is based on the directive dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) of the State Government, which it was not competent to issue and in any case was not binding on the PSIDC as it is an autonomous body having its own independent identity.
It is further contended that the house rent allowance, conveyance allowance, medical reimbursement which was granted to the employees of the PSIDC are statutory allowances in terms of Rule 75 and 714 of the Rules.
Besides, Chapter VI of the Rules deals with full reimbursement of the expenses incurred on the purchase of medicines on the prescription of Corporation Doctors or Doctors in the Government/Municipal Hospitals.
It is in consequence of this power that the Board of Directors of PSIDC had in its meeting held on 761976 granted house rent allowance to the extent of 25% w.e.f.
161976 instead of 12-1/2% then payable.
It is further contended that majority of the employees joined service in PSIDC primarily due to house rent allowance and other allowances then paid by it.
A reference has been made to the meeting of the Board of Directors on 30.6.1982 wherein while taking note of the directive dated 431982 issued by the State Government in respect of pay and allowances payable to its employees.
It is submitted that the employees of PSIDC were not provided any residential accommodation and neither did they enjoy the benefit of pension, security of service, better avenues or promotion etc. as were available to the employees of the State Government.
Besides, it is on the basis of the 135th meeting held on 12.9.1983 of the Board of Directors of the PSIDC that grant of conveyance reimbursement was approved w.e.f.
191983 and the rate of conveyance reimbursement was revised vide decision dated 18.9.1996.
In the circumstances, the Board of Directors did not apply its mind and failed to take into account the relevant material which was necessary to be taken into account in the decision making process.
The PSIDC, it is submitted, is a deemed Corporation and its articles of association are liable to be read as a whole along with other articles.
Therefore, the action of the PSIDC (respondent No. 4) acting on the directive dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) of the Chief Secretary is clearly illegal and that a perusal of the impugned decision dated 2452002 (Annexure P-17) in the meeting of the Board or Directors is also a decision without due consideration to the facts and circumstances.
8.
In response, Shri CM Munjal, learned Additional Advocate General, appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and Shri N.S.
Boparai, learned counsel appearing for PSIDC (respondent No. 4) have contended that the house rent allowance and conveyance allowance are in the nature of concession and the petitioners have no statutory right to claim the same.
Besides, in terms of Article 135 of the memorandum of articles of association of PSIDC, the Government issued directives like the directions dated 1052002 (Annexure P- 11) which the Corporation is bound to give immediate effect.
Besides, the matter has been considered in the meeting of the Board of Directors and it having been passed and austerity measures adopted, no prejudice has been caused to the petitioners.
Therefore, the petition is liable to be dismissed.
9.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
10.
The question regarding maintainability of the writ petition though taken as a ground in the written statement by the PSIDC has, however, not been seriously raised during the course of arguments.
Even otherwise, it is not a case were industrial rights simplicitor are being enforced, but is one where the decisions dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) and 2452002 (Annexure P-17) have been assailed by the petitioners.
The said decisions being administrative in nature are open to judicial review of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, in any case, the objection as taken by the respondent-PSIDC is not or much significance.
11.
On the basis of the contentions raised, the question that requires to be considered is whether the allowances which were being paid to the employees of the PSIDC could be withdrawn on the directive of the State Government.
As already noticed above, the State Government has issued directives vide Demi Official Letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-10) from the Chief Secretary, intimating the decisions of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Fiscal Management, wherein it had been decided to effect economy in pay and allowances.
It was observed that some PSUs were paying pay scales and allowances to their employees at rates higher than the government employees and were also extending perquisites to the employees, which were not available to their counterparts in government service.
It is further mentioned that a decision had been taken by the Sub-Committee that pay, allowances and perquisites of employees of Public Sector Undertakings, Local Bodies, Corporations and other Public and quasi Public Institutions shall not be higher than their counterparts in the government service.
It was requested to immediately order alignment of pay scales, allowances and perquisites of the employees of the institutions with that of the government employees of the equivalent category with immediate effect and while doing so, it was mentioned, that the pay of the employees may be protected in the lower scale and higher allowance and perquisites not admissible to government employees but being enjoyed by the PSU employee may be withdrawn prospectively.
Lastly, it was mentioned that it may kindly be noted that the responsibility for non-implementation of the decisions of the Cabinet Sub-Committee would be that of the Administrative Secretary and the Managing Director of the PSU concerned.
A compliance report in this regard was to be sent to the Chief Secretary by 2152002, with a copy to the Principal Secretary, Finance.
12.
It is in consequence of the afore-stated directives of the State Government that the Board of Directors of the PSIDC (respondent No. 4), took the impugned decision and resolved vide resolution dated 2452002 (Annexure P-17), to the following effect :-  "Item No. 14 : Strict observance of economy & austerity measures by all the Public Sector undertakings (including cooperative apex institutions) - Payment of HRA/Conveyance Allowance at Government rates.
On consideration of the Memorandum placed before it and also a letter received from the Chief Secretary, which was placed before it, the Board decided as under :- PAY SCALES : As far as pay scales are concerned, the pay scales of the officers and non- managerial staff are as per Government norms and as such there are no deviations and hence need no change.
HRA : The Board noted that the Corporation was paying HRA @ 25% of the basic pay to its employees, whereas the State Government employees were getting 15% of their basic pay.
The Board decided that the Corporation should follow Government pattern with regard to payment of HRA to its employees with effect from 1st June, 2002.
CONVEYANCE REIMBURSEMENT : Conveyance reimbursement implemented by the Corporation should be discontinued with effect from 1st June, 2002 as the State Government (Sic.
- employees) do not get any such facility.
CCA : As per Government pattern and hence requires no change.
MEDICAL REIMBURSEMENT : The Board decided that with effect from 1st June, 2002, the Corporation should follow State GOVERNMENT RULES OF PAYMENT OF Rs. 250/- per month for outdoor treatment and indoor treatment expenses as per norms fixed by AIIMS and PGI.
However, employees could avail of indoor treatment from any other recognized hospital (to be short-listed by the Management) and the reimbursement of the charges not to exceed the charges stipulated by PGI or AIIMS.
TA/DA : The Daily Allowance may continue to be paid as decided by the Board as per the classification of the cities by it and the local conveyance expenses be paid on actual basis as per entitlement.
TA/DA norms as per the rules followed by PSIDC may be continued and approval of the Finance Department may be obtained.
The Board further desired that the decision of the Board be conveyed to the Government forthwith."
A perusal of the above decision shows that the house rent allowance had been reduced in respect of the employees of the Corporation from 25% to 15% w.e.f.
162002.
Besides, conveyance reimbursement was discontinued w.e.f.
162002 as the State Government was not giving such facility to it employees.
The Board of Directors of PSIDC also decided that w.e.f.
162002 the PSIDC should follow State Government Rules of payment of Rs. 250/- for outdoor treatment and indoor treatment expenses as per norms fixed by All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi and Post Graduate Institute (PGI), Chandigarh.
However, employees could avail of indoor treatment from any other recognised hospitals to be short-listed by the Management and the reimbursement of the charges was not to exceed the charges stipulated by PGI or AIIMS.
13.
The learned counsel for the State and the PSIDC have sought to justify the decision on the strength of the provisions of Article 135 of the Memorandum of Articles of Association.
Besides, keeping in view the financial health of Corporation, it is contended that the Board could reduce the house rent allowance and medical allowance keeping in view the health of the Corporation.
A reference has been made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Balco Employees Union (Registered) v. Union of India, 2002(2) SCT 12 (SC) : AIR 2002 SC 350.
Besides, it is contended that these allowances were in the nature of concession.
However, learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has taken the stand that Article 135 of the Articles of Association cannot be read in isolation and is to be read along with others.
It will be appropriate to notice Article 135 and other Articles referred to by the learned senior counsel for the petitioners :-  "80(i) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Board shall be entitled to exercise all such powers, and to do all such acts and things, as the Company is authorised to exercise and do in furtherance of its objects, specified in the Memorandum of Association, for which the Company is established, except such powers as are required by the Act or the Memorandum or Articles of Association of the Company to be exercised or done by the Company in General Meeting.
In exercising such powers or doing any such acts or things, the Board shall be subject to the provisions contained in that behalf in the Memorandum or Articles of the Company or in any regulations not inconsistent herewith and duly made thereunder, including regulations made by the Company in General meeting.
(ii) No regulations made by the Company in General Meeting shall invalidate any prior act of the Board which would have been valid if that regulation had not been made.
81.
Without prejudice to the general powers conferred by Article 100 and the other powers conferred by these Articles but subject to the provisions of Section 292 of the Act, the Directors shall have the following powers namely :- 81(v) to appoint at their discretion, remove or suspend such managers, secretaries, officers, clerks, agents and servants for permanent, temporary or special services, as they may from time to time, think fit, and to determine their powers and duties and fix their salaries or emoluments and to require security of such amount as they think fit in such instances.
135.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the Articles, the Government may from time to time, issue such directives as they may consider necessary in matters of broad policy and in like manner may vary and annul any such directive.
The Company shall give immediate effect to directives so issued."
14.
The Articles 80 and 81(v) are under the heading, Powers of the Board of Directors and Article 135 is under the head, `Audit'.
15.
A perusal of Article 135 of the Memorandum and Articles of Association shows that the Government may from time to time issue such directions as they may consider necessary in matters of broad policy.
It is, therefore, to be seen whether the reduction of house rent allowance and medical reimbursement and discontinuation of conveyance reimbursement financial requirement are questions of broad policy.
Insofar as the consideration process of the Board of Directors of the PSIDC is concerned in terms of its impugned extracts of the minute dated 2452002 (Annexure P-17), it is appropriate to note that the same do not depict any material that was taken into consideration in the decision making process other than the State directive dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11).
The learned counsel for the PSIDC has tried to justify the action of the Board of Directors by placing strong reliance on the additional affidavit dated 2572002 of Shri R Narayanan, Executive Director-cum- Secretary, Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation, Chandigarh, wherein it is deposed that it has become necessary to place on record relevant documents/noting to indicate that the Corporation was in financial distress and it was decided to reduce expenditure by and effecting economy.
The copies of the noting in regard to the financial health and measures proposed are annexed with the said affidavit as Annexure R-1/A and R-1/B.
Besides, it is mentioned in the last decade or so there was a decline in the earning of the Corporation and it was suffering serious reverses on the economic front since the last four years.
The copy of the annual accounts reflecting profit/loss is annexed as Annexure R-2.
It is, however, pertinent to note that the said affidavit is silent as regards consideration of these documents in the meeting of the Board of Directors of PSIDC while taking the impugned decision dated 2452002 (Annexure P-17).
It is stated in the said additional affidavit that besides, the letter issued by the Chief Secretary on 1052002 (Annexure P- 11), the Corporation was also in the process or taking remedial measures to cut down costs and this clearly goes to indicate that apart from the letter issued by the Chief Secretary, the Corporation had independently also decided to cut down costs.
Therefore, it is apparent that insofar as the impugned decision dated 2452002 (Annexure P-17) is concerned, it is only the memorandum placed before the Board from the Chief Secretary that was taken into consideration.
This is evident from the following recording in the said decision words :-  "On consideration of the Memorandum placed before it and also a letter received from the Chief Secretary, which was placed before it, the Board decided as under :-" 16.
The memorandum that had been placed before the Board for consideration with regard to strictest observance of economy and austerity measures by all Public Sector Undertakings is the memorandum dated 2052002 (Annexure P-16) in which a reference has been made to the Government instructions on economy austerity measures which was earlier issued vide letter dated 982000 and which were placed before the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 512001 and the decision taken by the Board of Directors was that the earlier missive dated 982000 of the State Government was decided to be not followed and that rather a representation be made to the Government.
The decision is as follows :-  "On consideration of the memorandum placed before it and the submission of the Addl.
Managing Director, the board decided that the Corporation should represent to the State Govt. to allow the Corporation to follow its own rules regarding HRA, Conveyance Reimbursement, TA/DA, CCA, Medical reimbursement etc. as have been approved by the Board of the Corporation and have since been implemented in the Corporatioin as far back as 20-25 years.
The Board observed that the reduction or the discontinuance of these facilities would adversely affect the morale of its employees and in some cases these could even lead to a spate litigation, which the Corporation should avoid.
The Board further decided that a detailed note be put up to the Finance Department through the Administrative Department i.e. Secretary Industries and Commerce in this regard.
The Board further decided that the Corporation should also seek the Government's approval to delink PSIDC from other Corporations with regard to the Corporation to have the follow Government rules on these facilities, since PSIDC was not taking any budgetary support from the State Govt. for more than 12 years now."
In the light of the above decision a letter was addressed to Principal Secretary Finance, Government of Punjab, on 2622001.
In response to which PSIDC was conveyed that the reasons given by the Corporation were not valid.
The matter was again put up before the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 16.5.2001 and the decision is as follows :-  "On consideration of the Memorandum placed before it, on the above subject and after deliberations, the Board decided that the Corporation should carry out an exercise with regard to the practice being followed by other Corporations with regard to the rules regarding HRA, conveyance reimbursement, TA/DA, CCA reimbursement etc. and bring up an exhausive Memo to the Board for discussion preferably when the Principal Secretary Finance who is on the Board of the Corporation is also present."
In view of the afore-stated decision of the Board, letters were written to other financial and cooperative institutions and position regarding those who had adopted or those who were in the process were indicated.
The position, therefore, is that the Board of Directors had on earlier occasions not agreed to the directives/instructions issued by the State Government in this regard.
However, in terms of Article 135 of the memorandum or article or association, it is to be seen whether the Demi Official letter dated 1022002 (Annexure P-11) of the Chief Secretary is one in relation to matter of `broad policy' which PSIDC is to give immediate effect.
In the case of Rakesh Ranjan Verma v. State of Bihar, 1992(3) SCT 144 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 1348, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the provisions of Section 78-A of the Electricity (Supply) Act 1948, which conferred powers on the State Government to issue directions to the Electricity Board.
It is provided by Section 78-A of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 that in the discharge of its functions, the Electricity Board shall be guided by such directions on question of policy as may be given to it by the State Government.
The provisions of Article 135 of the memorandum or articles of association also provide for the State Government to "issue such directive as they may consider necessary in the matters of broad policy."
In Rakesh Ranjan Verma's case (supra), it was observed as follows :-  "The above provision clearly lays down that the Board shall be guided by such directions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the State Government.
In the circumstances of the case before us the directions given under letters dated 1871988 and 5.5.1989 cannot be considered as directions on any questions of policy.
So far as the appointment of staff is concerned.
Section 15 empowers the Board to appoint such officers and employees as may be required to enable the Board to carry out its functions under the Act."
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx ".....
Thus, we agree with the view taken by the High Court in this regard that the direction given by the State Government to appoint the appellants as Junior Engineers by the Board does not involve any matter of policy and it would be an encroachment on the powers of the Board given under Section 15 of the Act."
17.
In Chittoor Zilla Vyavasayadarula Sangham v. APSE Board, AIR 2001 Supreme Court 107, also while considering the provisions of Section 78-A of the Electricity (Supply) Act, it was held as follows :-  "It is necessary first to examine the periphery of the statutory fields within which, the Board and the State Government has to function.
Admittedly both are statutory functionaries under the Central Act.
They have to perform their obligations within the limits they have been entrusted with.
Section 78-A empowers the State Government to issue directions to the Board on question of policy, on the other hand the Board has to perform its statutory obligations under the said Act and with reference to the fixation of tariff it has to act in terms of what is contained in Sections 49 and 50(59).
But this field of policy direction is not unlimited.
There cannot be any policy direction which pushes the Board to perform its obligations beyond the limits of the said two sections.
Any policy direction, which in its due performance keep the Board within its permissible statutory limitations would be binding on the Board.
So, both State and the Board have to maintain its cordiality and co-ordination in terms of the statutory sanctions.
If any policy direction pushes the Board in its compliance beyond statutory limitations, it cannot be a direction within the meaning of Section 78-A It is significant that opening words of Section 78-A are, "in the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided by such directions."
So, the direction of the State is for the guidance to the Board, in the discharge of its functions.
Thus this direction has also limitation to give direction which will subserve in performing its statutory obligation....".
The above observations show that the provision of the Act; "in the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided by such directions," was considered and it was held that the directions of the State is for guidance to the Board in the discharge of its functions.
The provisions of Section 78-A of the Electricity (Supply) Act, which as already noticed, are some what similar to provisions of Article 135 of the Memorandum and Articles of Association in the case in hand.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Housing Board Engineers Association v. State of Gujarat, 1994(1) SCT 528 (SC) : JT 1993(6) SC 469 considered the provisions of Section 82 of the Gujrat Housing Board Act 1961, which empowered the State Government to give to the Housing Board such directions as were in its opinion necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of the said Act and it was submitted that the Housing Board was obliged to comply with such directions.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the short answer to this submission was that it was not open to the State Government to give directions to the Housing Board under Section 82 which were contrary to the provisions of the Regulations made under the provisions of the said Act with its previous sanction.
"Therefore, in the light of the above observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is appropriate to note that the State Government is entitled to give instructions on questions of broad policy and as to what is broad policy would be depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The provisions of Articles 80 and 81(v) of the Memorandum and Articles of Association show that the Board of Directors of the PSIDC is entitled to exercise all such powers and to do all such acts and same as the company is authorised to exercise and do in furtherance of its objects specified in the memorandum of association for which the company is established.
Besides, the Directors have the power to appoint at their discretion, remove or suspend such managers, secretarires, officers, clerks, agents and servants for permanent, temporary or special services, as they may from time to time, think fit, and to determine their powers and duties and fix their salaries or emoluments and to require security of such amount as they think fit in such instances.
Therefore, the power to fix salary and emoluments vests with the Directors of the Board by virtue of Article 81(v) of the Memorandum and Articles of Association.
Moreover, Rules 75 and 714 and Chapter VI of the Rules have been framed which provide for service conditions of the employees of the Corporation.
The same read as under :- "Rule 75 "allowance" include dearness allowance, house rent allowance, travelling allowance, conveyance, city compensatory, sumptuary and overtime allowance or any other allowance sanctioned by the Board from time to time.
714" Employees of the corporation shall receive such allowances as may be sanctioned by the Board from time to time."
Chapter - VI MEDICAL RULES "All employees of the Corporation shall be entitled to full reimbursement of the expenses incurred on the purchase of medicines on the prescription of Corporation Doctors or Doctors in the Govt/Municipal Hospitals, expenses on hospitalization and consultation fee paid to Doctors in Govt/Municipal Hospitals.
This is, however, subject to the condition that all bills and the essentiality certificates are signed by the Doctors referred to above.
N.B.
The Corporation Doctors in these rules shall mean any Doctor(s) other than Doctors in Govt./Municipal Hospital specially appointed by the Corporation for the purpose."
Therefore, a cumulative reading of the provisions of the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the service rules governing the service conditions of the employees of the PSIDC would show that the house rent allowance and travelling allowance and conveyance allowance are allowances which may be sanctioned by the Board from time to time.
Therefore, the powers vest with the Board to fix these allowances from time to time.
However, the directives given by the State Government regarding broad policy are to be kept in view by virtue of Article 135 of the Articles and Memorandum of Association.
The fact that these allowances are permissible by the Board from time to time would go to show that these are in the nature of concession.
However, the question is not whether the petitioners are entitled to claim house rent allowance, medical allowance and conveyance reimbursement as a matter of right but whether there has been due consideration in the decision making process of these matters in terms of the impugned decision dated 2452002 (Annexure P- 17).
Judicial review of an administrative order is concerned with the decision making process and it is to be seen whether decision taken by the Board of Directors of PSIDC on 2452002 (Annexure P-17) satisfies the test of "reasonableness" which has three elements i.e. the Board of Directors of the Corporation must have taken into account all relevant factors which were necessary for the decision making process and at the same time left out from consideration all irrelevant factors and the decision is neither perverse nor irrational.
"Perverse" would mean an improper or contradictory decision not supported by any evidence and "irrational" would be one which no sensible person properly advised on the facts would reasonably arrive at.
Keeping in view the above principles a reading of the impugned decision dated 2422002 (Annexure P-17) shows that it is based solely on the Demi Official letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11).
19.
In the circumstances, in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rakesh Ranjan Verma (supra), Chittoor Zilla Vyavasayadarula Sangham (supra) and Gujarat Housing Board Engineers Association (supra), it is open to the State Government to give directions to the PSIDC but the directions of the State Government is on matters of broad policies.
As to what is question of policy or whether the missive given is a question of broad policy or not is to be determined in the facts and circumstances of each directive or missive given.
There can be various circulars and guidelines issued by the State Government on questions of policy.
It is to be seen in the context of each as to whether the same is of mandatory character or directory in nature depending on whether the directive is one of broad policy or for general guidelines.
In any case the directive issued would require consideration by the Board of Directors of the Corporation to determine its character and in the consideration process or decision making process the Board is required to take all necessary material into account which is relevant for the decision making process.
At the same time exclude irrelevant material from the consideration process.
Besides, the decision is neither to be perverse nor irrational.
20.
In the case in hand, the grant of house rent allowance, medical allowance, conveyance reimbursement cannot be said to be questions of broad policy.
In the consideration process, it may appropriately be noticed that the memorandum for the Board (Annexure P-16) on the subject of strictest observance of economy and austerity measures by all the Public Sector Undertakings and payment of HRA/conveyance allowance at Government rates was put up.
The said memo had referred to the earlier Government instructions on economy and austerity measures issued vide letter dated 982000 which were placed before the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 512001.
The Board, after consideration of the memo, had observed that reduction or the discontinuance of these facilities would adversely affect the moral of its employees and in some cases these could even lead to a spate of litigation, which the Corporation should avoid.
It was decided that a detailed note be put up to the Finance Department and the Corporation should seek the Government's approval to delink PSIDC from other Corporations with regard to the Corporation to follow Government Rules on these facilities since PSIDC was not taking any budgetary support from the State Government for the last more than 12 years.
It is also mentioned that in view of the said decision letter dated 2622001 was addressed to Principal Secretary Finance, Government of Punjab, Department of Finance and in response to the same it was conveyed that there was no scope for exception from the instructions already issued by the State Government and that the reasons given by the Corporation were not valid.
The matter was again taken up by the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 16.5.2001 and it was decided that the Corporation should carry out an exercise with regard to the practice being followed by other Corporations with regard to HRA, conveyance reimbursement, TA/DA, CCA reimbursement etc. and bring up an exhaustive Memo to the Board for discussion preferably when the Principal Secretary Finance, who is on the Board of the Corporation, is also present.
In view of the said decision of the Board, letters were written to other Corporations to intimate the position being followed by them in this regard.
Some of the Corporations had informed that the decision had been deferred and some had informed that the matter is still under consideration.
PUNSUP had intimated that the benefits of HRA, conveyance allowance and TA/DA drawn by their employees prior to 1332001 had been restored.
It is further mentioned that in the mean time the PSIDC had received the letter dated 1122002 from the Government of Punjab, Department of Finance, Directorate of Institutional Finance and Banking and Public Enterprises, in which it was indicated that the policy of the Punjab Government applies to PSIDC and also to members of the Board of the Directors.
It was desired that the said letter be placed in the Board of Directors meeting.
It was also desired by the Managing Director that the excess payment of the allowances be stopped immediately to avoid any financial implications.
It is thereafter that the impugned letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) was received from the Chief Secretary requesting for immediate alignment of pay scales, allowances and perquisites to the employees of the Institutions with that of the Government employees of the equivalent category with immediate effect.
A note of warning was recorded that responsibility for non-implementation of the decision of the Cabinet Sub- Committee would be that of the Administrative Secretary and the Managing Director of the PSU concerned.
A compliance report, in this regard, was to be sent to the Chief Secretary by 2152002 with copy to the Principal Secretary, Finance, Punjab.
The Board while taking its impugned decision on 2452002 (Annexure P-17) placed reliance on the said memo only and passed the order reducing the HRA and medical reimbursement and discontinued with conveyance reimbursement.
Therefore, there has evidently been no due consideration to the documents and materials on record.
The Rules 75, 714 and other relevant rules framed by the Corporation itself are not shown to have been taken into account in the decision making process.
Therefore, there has been an improper consideration of the entire matter, which is in contravention of the test of reasonableness and consequently vitiated.
The directives given by the State Government were to be examined and considered as to whether they relate to question of broad policy for the conduct of affairs of the Corporation or were simply in the nature of general guidelines.
The letter of the Chief Secretary dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) itself does not indicate as to whether it is a question of broad policy which the Corporation ought to follow.
The said letter, in fact, is for the purposes of bringing about parity of pay, allowances and perquisites of employees of PSUs with that of Government employees.
The question whether this was a broad policy decision which the Corporation was required to follow was to be examined by the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
The said letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) rather carries out a threat of fixing responsibility for non-implementation of its decision which left hardly any scope for due consideration.
Therefore, the said letter is vitiated.
21.
Insofar as the reliance placed on the judgment of Balco Employees Union (Regd.
)'s case (supra) is concerned, the same relates to the challenge by the employees of Balco to disinvestment of majority shares by Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd which is a public sector undertaking.
It was contended by the workmen therein that they had been adversely affected by the decision of the Government to disinvest 51% of the share in the Balco in favour of a private party.
It was also contended that by reason of disinvestment the workmen had lost their rights and protection under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and, therefore, they had a right to be heard before and during the process of disinvestment.
It was held that process of disinvestment is a policy decision involving complex economic decisions factors and the Courts have consistently refrained from interfering with economic decisions as it has been recognized that economic expediencies, is demonstrated to be so violative of constitutional or legal limits on power to so abhorrent to reason that the Courts would decline to interfere.
Besides, the employees of Balco, it was held, cannot demand a right of hearing merely because Balco is recorded as `State.'
The present is a case of reduction of allowances like, house rent allowance and medical allowance besides discontinuance of conveyance reimbursement.
In the case in hand, the employees are not asking for any right of hearing but their grievance is as regards the discontinuance of the allowance, the decision in respect of which has been taken only on the basis of the letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) of the Chief Secretary.
The ratio of the judgment in Balco Employees Union (Regd.
)'s case (supra) is, therefore, inapplicable to the case in hand.
22.
For the foregoing reasons the impugned decision of the respondents, the letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) and the extract of the minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of PSIDC held on 2452002 (Annexure P-17) to the extent that house rent allowance and medical allowance have been reduced and conveyance reimbursement discontinued are liable to be quashed.
23.
The petition is accordingly allowed and the impugned letter dated 1052002 (Annexure P-11) issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab as also the extract of the minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of PSIDC held on 2452002 (Annexure P-17) to the extent the house rent allowance and medical allowance has been reduced and conveyance reimbursement discontinued are quashed.
The Board of Directors of the PSIDC (respondent No. 4) shall re-consider the matter by taking into account all the facts and circumstances the economic constraints if any, and also whether there was justification for reduction in the house rent allowance and medical allowance and discontinuance of conveyance reimbursement after taking into account all relevant materials which are liable to be taken into consideration in the consideration process.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.