JS Narang, J - The petitioner qualified and passed the course of diploma in teaching from Rani Durgavati Vishawavidyalaya, Jabalpur (hereinafter referred to as "the Institute") on May 30, 1985 by securing first division.
A copy of the certificate has been appended as Annexure P-4.
She also qualified and passed Principles of Practice of Education, Education Psychology, School Organization, Hindi, Social Studies by securing first division in Part I examination and second division in Part II examination.
Under the University Act, all the degrees/diplomas issued by the said Institute are recognized all over the country.
In the State of Punjab, the Department of Education, issued a circular letter dated May 9, 1960 vide which it had recognized various courses offered by other States by applying the rule of equivalence.
The requisite courses were accepted as equivalent to the Junior Basic Teacher Training Certificate issued by the Punjab Education Department with the stipulation that the said certificate awarded by other States fulfils the following conditions :-  (a) It has been awarded after two years training.
(b) In the event of it being awarded by any Institution, it is recognized by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the Institution is situated.
Pursuant to this letter, the diploma in teaching issued by the Institute to the petitioner was also recognized by the State of Punjab.
2.
The Department of Education advertised posts of JBT teachers in the year 1995.
In response thereto, the petitioner applied for the post and on the basis of the qualifications, she was holding, was called for interview on June 28, 1995.
She was selected as JBT Teacher and the District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur was instructed to issue letter of appointment in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2100 with initial pay of Rs. 1200 plus other allowances admissible from time to time.
The letter of appointment was issued vide letter dated September 11, 1995 and the petitioner joined as JBT Teacher in Government Primary School, Dulmiwal Block, Dasuya-II on September 21, 1995.
She was confirmed with effect from September 21, 1997 vide communication dated May 10, 2000.
3.
In 2002, the Block Primary Education Officer, Dasuya-II, Hoshiarpur directed the petitioner to get her certificates verified from the District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur.
Compliance was made accordingly.
Surprisingly, notice dated June 5, 2003 was received by the petitioner intimating that she had passed Diploma in Education of Madhya Pradesh and that the said Diploma was not recognized by the State of Punjab, therefore, why her services be not terminated within 15 days from the receipt of the notice.
The petitioner submitted detailed reply to the notice disclosing that the Diploma passed by her was duly recognized and the same has been issued by the Institute recognized by the University Grants Commission.
It has also been pleaded that the State of Punjab de-recognized the said Diploma with effect from August 29, 1990 and before this date, the said Diploma was duly recognized.
Thus, she was not at fault and that she had been validly selected.
She was given personal hearing on August 25, 2003 and thereafter order of termination was passed on January 15, 2004, copy Annexure P-18 and she was relieved on 27/28012004 vide order, copy Annexure P-19.
4.
The petitioner felt dis-satisfied with the action of the respondents and has filed the present petition making the order of termination, copy Annexure P-18, the subject matter of challenge.
5.
Reference and reliance has been placed on a Full Bench Judgment of this Court rendered in re : Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) SCT 770 (P&H) : 1993(1) RSJ 327 and the decision of the Supreme Court rendered in re : Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027.
6.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated February 3, 2004.
7.
The official respondents have contested the petition by filing a detailed written statement.
The stand taken is that according to the advertisement, only those candidates possessing the qualifications of 10+2 and two years ETT course from the State of Punjab could apply for the post of Primary Teacher and besides this, the candidates having the qualification of JBT from the State of Haryana and UT Chandigarh before May 29, 1984 and having passed six months condensed course could also apply for the post, whereas, the petitioner has passed two years Diploma in Education from Jabalpur.
The Government of Punjab, vide its letter dated August 29, 1990 has decided that two years JBT Course of Jabalpur is not recognized.
A copy of this letter has been appended as Annexure R-1 and the same reads as under :-  "PUNJAB GOVERNMENT EDUCATION DEPARTMENT EDUCATION BRANCH-5.
To The Director, Public Instruction (S), Punjab, Chandigarh.
Memo No. 36/14/89-Edu.-5/1729 Dated Chandigarh 219-8-90.
Subject : Regarding recognition of Two years JBT Diploma course of Jabalpur University in the Punjab State.
Ref : Refer to your Memo No. 160(s)-8/13/81 Dt. 17790 on the above subject.
On considering your report the Govt. has decided that Two Years JBT Course from Jabalpur University should not be recognized to the Punjab State.
Sd/- Supdt."
8.
It has also been averred that in such similar Civil Writ Petition No. 6946 of 2002 filed by the respondent No. 5, the matter regarding giving appointment to Harjinder Kaur, who had passed JBT Course from Jabalpur is being looked into.
Since the petitioner was not eligible for appointment as JBT Teacher, her services have been correctly terminated.
So far as other facts stated in the petition are concerned, they have been by and large admitted.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner had passed the Diploma Course from the Institute in the year 1985 when the said certificate was duly recognized by the Government of Punjab, as is evident from the circular letter dated May 9, 1960 issued to all the Heads of the Department, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-6.
The said Diploma Certificate was de-recognized by the Government of Punjab on August 29, 1990.
This action on the part of the State would be prospective and not retrospective.
Obviously, it would mean that any one obtaining such a Diploma after 1990 would not be deemed to be qualified by the Government of Punjab but this would not mean that any person holding such qualification prior thereto would also stand dis-qualified.
10.
It has been further argued that the petitioner had applied for appointment to the post of JBT Teacher pursuant to advertisement issued in the year 1995 and that her credentials had been duly scrutinized.
She had been issued a letter of appointment in the year 1995 and she continued to work against the post and was also confirmed with effect from September 21, 1995 vide communication dated May 10, 2000.
The State has taken erroneous decision in terminating the services of the petitioner on the premises that the petitioner did not fulfil the qualifications for appointment as JBT Teacher as the Diploma which she was holding was not recognized by the Government of Punjab.
This aspect had come up for consideration before this Court and a Full Bench of this Court has categorically observed that when the petitioner had completed the course and applied for job on the basis of certificates, which were recognized by the State of Punjab and subsequently the same were re- recognized by the Government, such de-recognition would be effective prospectively and not retrospectively.
In the case of the petitioner, similar is the situation as she had passed the Diploma Certificate from the Institute way back in the year 1985, when the same was duly recognized by the State of Punjab, however, subsequent de-recognition of this certificate in the year 1990 would not nullify the qualification of the petitioner.
11.
Reliance has also been placed upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 14419 of 1997 decided on January 14, 1998 wherein reliance has been placed upon the dicta of this Court rendered in Neelam Kumari's case (supra).
Further, reference has also been made to a judgment of the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal and others' case (supra).
12.
On the other hand, Mr. SS Behl, learned Additional Advocate General has argued that the services of the petitioner have been correctly terminated as the advertisement had been issued in the year 1995 when the certificate held by her was no longer recognized by the Government of Punjab.
Thus, the qualification held by the petitioner could not be accepted and she could be held to be qualified to be appointed as JBT Teacher.
It is also the settled law that if any error has been committed by the employer, which is based upon admitted facts, the positive act in favour of the petitioner can always be rescinded and reversed.
In the present case, giving appointment to the petitioner and ordering termination of her services would not give her right to continue on the post when the basic qualification was not recognized by the Government.
13.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
We have also perused the respective pleadings and also the documents appended as Annexures respectively.
14.
We are of the considered opinion that the respondents have not acted in a fair and a rational manner.
Admittedly, the petitioner had passed Diploma Course from the Institute in the year 1985 and that the said course was recognized (de-recognised ?)
pursuant to the instructions issued in the year 1990.
It is obvious that it was recognized upto August 29, 1990.
On the date of interview, the petitioner was holding this certificate which she had acquired in the year 1985.
In view of the principles enunciated by a Full Bench of this Court in Neelam Kumari's case (supra) by placing reliance upon the dicta of the Supreme Court rendered in Suresh Pal's case (supra) and further having been followed by a Division Bench of this Court, we are of the view that the impugned order of termination.
Annexure P-18, is not sustainable.
It shall be apposite to notice the relevant observations of the Full Bench of this Court (Neelam Kumari's case) :-  "Although in the present case it was not disputed that the Haryana Government had issued the Diploma Certificate in Final Arts and Crafts Teacher Certificate in Final Arts and Crafts Teacher Training Examination, to be more sure, we called upon both the parties to produce the Diploma Certificate produced by the petitioner before the State seeking appointment.
The petitioner has produced photo copy of such certificate and she also produced a photo copy of the Examination Roll of all the candidates from the Department of Industrial Training, Haryana.
It is now quite clear that the certificate was issued by the Comptroller of Examinations, Department of Industrial Training, Haryana, in favour of the petitioner Smt. Neelam Kumari, daughter of Parshotam Singh, having passed final Arts and Crafts Teachers Examination, 1981 and Annexure P/1 produced in the case another certificate issued from Arya High and Training School, Gohana, that this Course taken by the petitioner was of two years session 1979-81.
The name of this institution is also mentioned in the certificate issued by the Comptroller of Examination, Department of Industrial Training, Haryana.
In view of the instructions Annexure P-16, this Certificate of training taken in Haryana stood recognised by the State of Punjab.
When the petitioner completed this course and applied for job, such certificates were recognised by the State of Punjab and if subsequently the State of Punjab decided to de-recognise such certificates, the same would be prospectively and will not apply retrospectively.
In this context reference may be made to the decision of Supreme Court in Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027.
In para 3 of the judgment, it was observed as under :- "Since at the time when the petitioners joined the course, it was recognised by the Government of Haryana and it was on the basis of this recognition that the petitioners joined the course, it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that at the time of their joining the course it was recognized, yet they cannot be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course, it was derecognized by the State Government."
The aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court was also cited in Harpal Singh's case, but was not relied upon on the ground that the State of Punjab had never recognised certificates of JBT obtained from the State of Haryana.
In view of the instructions of the State of Punjab contained in Annexure P/16, the view expressed in Harpal Singh's case cannot be accepted as correct.
Net result would be that the said training course diploma obtained by the petitioner from the Haryana State which was recognised by the State of Punjab in view of the instructions contained in Annexure P/16, would continue to be recognised as such and the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Arts and Crafts teacher on compassionate grounds under State Government instructions dated April 18, 1973 could not be denied."
15.
It will also be apposite to notice the relevant observations of the Supreme Court in Shish Pal's case (supra).
"3.
We are of the view that since at the time when the petitioners joined the course, it was recognised by the Government of Haryana and it was on the basis of this recognition that the petitioners joined the course, it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that though at the time of their joining the course it was recognized, yet they cannot be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course it was derecognized by the State Govt. on 9th January, 1985.
We would, therefore, allow the appeal and direct the State Government to recognize the certificates obtained by the petitioners and others similarly situate as a result of completing the certificate course in Shri Hanuman Vayayam Prasark Mandal Amravati for the purpose of appointment as Physical Training Instructor in Govt. Schools in Haryana.
Of course, if any person has joined the certificate course after 9th January, 1985 he would not be entitled to the benefit of this order and any certificate obtained by him from the said Institute would be of no avail.
There will be no order as to costs of the appeal."
Resultantly, the petition is allowed and the order of termination dated January 15, 2004, copy Annexure P18, is quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the appointment, continuity in service and also the fiscal benefits without any break.
The relief be granted to the petitioner by the concerned quarters within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.