Amar Dutt, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1701, 1707, 1724, 3030 to 3041-CAT of 2004.
2.
Union Territory, Chandigarh and others are aggrieved by the order dated 28.7.2003 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh (in short "the Tribunal"), by which 15 OAs filed by the private respondents, were disposed of with directions that are unpalatable to them.
3.
The lis brings into focus the consequences of the failure of the petitioners to give effect to the observations of the Apex Court in the case reported as Union of India & ors. v. Dharma Pal & ors. etc., 1996(2) SCT 719 (SC) : JT 1996(4) SC 371.
Paradoxically the directions, which were necessitated on account of failure of the employer in this case, the Union Territory, Chandigarh and the Central Government, to act as an ideal employer by employing persons against sanctioned posts and resorting to self-serving adhocism, which is used by private entrepreneurs to exploit the abundance of illiterate and unorganised manpower that is available in this country.
The State having not complied with, even after about six years, the order of the Apex Court had necessitated the employees of the Engineering Department to move the Tribunal for further directions in the matter.
The adverse order passed by the Tribunal is sought to be challenged in 15 writ petitions.
4.
In Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3033 and 3037 of 2004, the respondents claim pension and pensionary benefits, which have been denied to them on the ground that they have not completed 10 years of service on regular basis.
The respondents claim that the relief sought for could not be denied as each one of them has put in 18 to 20 years of service as daily wagers and 5 to 6 years of service on regular basis.
5.
In Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3030, 3031, 3036 and 3038 and 2004, the respondents claim pension and pensionary benefits as well as regularisation from the date on which their juniors were regularised.
They assert that from the date on which, they took up employment as daily wagers till they retired from service, they had put in 16 to 33 years of service and the benefit sought for is also being wrongly denied on account of having not put in 10 years of regular service.
6.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 3032 of 2004, the respondents seek regularisation on account of the fact that till date they had already put in 8-1/2 years of service.
7.
The case of the respondents concededly is covered by the directions issued by the Apex Court in Dharma Pal's case (supra).
The Tribunal has, after examining the directions issued by the Apex court, adverted to the various judicial precedents before coming to the conclusion that "in the result, all the fifteen OAS are allowed.
It is directed that the respondent-department shall consider the question of creation of requisite number of posts to regularise the services of all the applicants.
Regularisation of their service shall not be deferred or denied merely on the ground that there are no regular vacancies/posts.
The applicants in the OAs No. 1070, 1072, 1073 and 1074-CH of 2002 and 14 and 40-CH of 2003 shall further be entitled to the pensionary and retiral benefits which shall be released to each one of them within a period six months from the date a certified copy of the order is produced before the competent authority."
8.
The Union Territory, Chandigarh has filed 15 petitions to challenge the view taken by the Tribunal on the following grounds :  (a) that as a "Co-ordinate Bench of the Tribunal had refused the relief sought for to other applicants in OA No. 1296-CH of 2001, the impugned order could not be sustained as it was not permissible for a Bench exercising co-ordinate jurisdiction to take a contrary view; (b) that in effect, the impugned order grants relief to at least 122 persons, who were parties in Dharma Pal's case (supra) over and above the relief granted to them by the Apex Court; (c) No blanket directions to regularise the employees could have been issued by the Tribunal as they would be against the view taken by the Apex Court in Dharma Pal's case (supra); Gujarat Agricultural University v. Rathod Labhu Bechar, 2000(2) SCT 394 (SC) and State of Himachal Pradesh, through the Secretary, Agriculture to the Government of Himachal Pradesh v. Nodha Ram and others, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 1445.
9.
In reply, an effort was sought to be made on behalf of the respondents to justify the order on the ground that the directions of the Tribunal cannot be faulted with as the Government cannot be allowed to continue hire workers on daily wages years after year and behave like an ordinary employer, who was seeking to exploit the poor workmen.
It was also submitted that failure to sanction a regular post would not justify the denial of pension.
To strengthen the argument, reliance was sought to be placed on Kewal Singh v. State of Punjab, 2002(4) SCT 650 (P&H); Mohan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1991(3) SCT 147 (P&H) and AP Srivastava (Dead by LRs.)
v. Union of India and others, 1995(4) SCT 781 (SC) : (1995)6 SCC 227.
It was also submitted that a perusal of the directions contained in Dharma Pal's case (supra) makes it clear that the option incorporated therein to terminate the services of the excess staff had not been utilised and, therefore, it does not lie in the mouth of the petitioners to assert that it could keep continue employing the respondents on daily wages despite the fact that the need of employing them was not temporary and had continued for decades and extended in time to more than 20 years.
The Tribunal, in this case, was right when it came to the conclusion after relying upon the observations made in Gujarat Agricultural University's case (supra) that "there was neither any financial crunch, which would necessitate the retrenchment of the respondents nor was continuity of the post dependent upon the completion of any project, which would justify their abolition and, therefore, as the petitioners had not seriously made any effort to implement the scheme which was incorporated in Dharma Pal's case (supra), therefore, OAs seeking enforcement of those unimplemented directions had rightly been allowed and the petitions had to be dismissed."
10.
We have carefully considered the rival contentions and perused the record.
11.
Before us, it is not disputed that the malady of employing workers on daily wage, ad hoc and work charged basis instead of regular basis has been plaguing the respondents for a long time, even though some of the respondents have been in service since 1986.
12.
On an earlier occasion some of the colleagues of the present respondents had sought issuance of directions to the petitioners for regularisation of the casual and daily workers employed in the Constructions Circle of the Chandigarh Administration.
On the intervention of the Apex Court in Dharma Pal's case (supra), a scheme for regularisation has been framed, details whereof were as under :-  "For work charged employees :  (i) All the works establishment [excluding office of Ministerial Clerical and drawing cadres below the level of Junior Engineer], engaged in the construction/execution of maintenance work, shall be called `Work Force'.
The work force includes buildings, roads, public health activities comprising augmentation of water supply, canals, drainage, electrical and electricity etc.
The work division shall be a unit for casual or daily wage work force and a `circle' for work-charged establishment.
Separate cadre and seniority list for each category shall be maintained in the Division and Circle as the case may be.
(ii) Workers engaged on jobs, which are likely to be of a short duration, i.e., less than 240 days in a year, will be terminated on completion of work.
No seniority list of such workers will be required to be maintained.
(iii) Workers who have completed five years service as on 31st August, 1995 will be considered for regularisation against the available regular posts subject to the fulfilment of requirements as laid down in the Recruitment Rules for the post in question, if they were recruited before 611992, the date on which a ban was imposed on the recruitment of daily/casual workers.
(iv) Since a complete ban on recruitment of work charged casual/daily wage employees was imposed by Chandigarh Administration, those recruited in contravention of this policy decision after this date, i.e. 611992 will be considered for their regularisation only on the assessment of justification/requirements on the basis of norms approved for the continued nature of work and attaching the specific approval of Home Department, Chandigarh Administration.
For Casual/Daily Wages : (v) Workers working as Casual labourers in works which have more or less fixed period of completion will be eligible for payment of benefits as admissible to them under rules.
However, they will not be considered for regularisation automatically.
Their requirement has to be reassessed after commissioning the work.
Thus, the workers will be liable to be retrenched on completion of works except categories in limited numbers who are required for the operation and maintenance of the completed works.
In their cases specific approval of the Home Department should be taken.
(vi) Daily wage employees who have completed 10 years or more service as on 3181995 shall be considered for regularisation w.e.f.
3181995 on the availability of posts.
Such employees shall be entitled for minimum of the scale w.e.f the date of their regularisation.
On regularisation, these employees shall be liable for transfer any where within the Engineering Department UT Chandigarh.
(vii) In respect of all such daily wages employees, who have not yet completed 10 years service, a special review should be carried out at the level of Head of Department regarding their requirement.
(viii) In the case of those employees whose services are no longer required and have been taken after 611992 and specific approval of Home Department, Chandigarh Administration does not exist, they may be relieved of their duties at the earliest possible."
13.
After adverting to the scheme, the Apex Court in Dharma Pal's case (supra), had issued the following directions :  "In view of the scheme now framed, the appellants are directed to regularise all those who have completed the prescribed period of days, viz. 240 days against the existing vacancies applying the rules of reservation in the order of seniority in the respective categories mentioned in the scheme.
Such regularised employees would be entitled to all the regular payment at the scale of pay prescribed to the Central Government employees.
Those who would not be regularised are directed to be regularised in the order of seniority as and when vacancies arise.
Work would be continued to be taken from them as long as the work exists.
Even those who were engaged as daily wage/casual labour, who could not complete 240 days but were required to be retrenched, the procedure prescribed for retrenchment under the Industrial Disputes Act should be followed.
A list of them in the order of seniority should be maintained.
Last-come first-go principle should be followed in that behalf.
As and when vacancies arise or need for the work arises, they should be called for work immediately without asking them to get their names sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
The daily wages workers/casual workers who are not regularised and taken work from them are entitled to minimum of scale of pay prescribed for that post.
In addition to that, they are also entitled to 60% of the D.A.
at Punjab pattern which is being followed in all other cases.
The payment to all the candidates whose service are regularised/continuing on daily wage/casual labour shall be calculated from one year prior to the date of filing of the application in the Central Administration Tribunal, Chandigarh.
The appellants are directed to pay the same within a period of four months from today."
14.
It is not disputed before us that the respondents have put in more than 7 years of service in various capacity after 2931996, the date on which, the Apex Court pronounced the directions in Dharma Pal's case (supra).
Since then, on the record, there is no material, which would indicate that any exercise regarding the justification for the continuance of the ad hoc/daily wages status of the respondents was ever assessed.
Since the day on which the order has been passed over about 7 years have elapsed, the petitioners have, till date, not carried out any exercise in relation to the retrenchment of these respondents, from which the only inference, which can be drawn, is that the work, which is being done by them, is not temporary in nature, which would come to an end either after the expiry of some period of time or on completion of any work.
The petitioners are clearly trying to circumvent the process of law and indulge in unfair labour practice, which is not expected of the ideal employer in a welfare State, which is sought to be established by the Founding Fathers of the Constitution.
The findings of the Tribunal to this effect cannot be faulted with and the consequential directions have got to be upheld as despite an opportunity having been given for cadre review, the petitioners have not cared to do so and all circumstances point in one direction that they are trying to misuse the ad hoc status of their employees in order to demand respect of the subordinate instead of commanding the same on account of their acting as a good employer.
15.
The reliance that is sought to be placed for denying the relief to the respondents on Dharma Pal's case; Gujarat Agricultural University's case and State of Himachal Pradesh's case (supra) is clearly misconceived.
The problems that had been created by the Chandigarh Administration i.e. propensity to engage daily wagers, casual labours and ad hoc employees was the subject matter of adjudication by the Apex Court in Dharma Pal's case (supra).
With a view to resolve the same, the Apex Court had directed the Union of India to frame a scheme, relevant paragraphs of which have been reproduced above.
Admittedly, it is not disputed that the exercise, which the petitioners were required to conduct for regularising services of workers employed by them in the Engineering Department, Chandigarh was not carried out to its logical conclusion and the liberty granted to the Administration to retrench the excess staff after following the principles of Industrial Disputes Act and following the principle of Last come first go was never carried out.
Most of the respondents, as already indicated were in the employment of the petitioners on 2931996, the date on which the judgment was rendered in Dharma Pal's case (supra).
The practice to employ daily wagers and casual labours is still being followed in the Engineering Department.
Having lost out on the opportunity given in Dharma Pal's case (supra) of getting rid of excess staff, which had been employed by the petitioners, it would not lie in the mouth of the petitioners to assert that the prayer of the respondents is devoid of merit.
It is high time that the functionaries of a socialist State, in whatever shape it is, put an end to shed their capitalist ideology of exploiting the persons employed by them and start behaving like an ideal employer, who does not keep the sword of democles hanging on the heads of the persons working with them only with a view to bring them to heal in order to extract respect.
It should try to command respect instead of eliciting the same out of a fear of insecurity.
Any effort on the part of the petitioners to delay the regularisation has to be frowned upon as neither before the Tribunal nor before us have petitioners brought on record any material which would justify the delayed retrenchment of the respondents.
As a matter of fact, there is not even a whisper in the pleadings about the State having any intention to seek permission of the Court for justifying their failure to take advantage of the opportunity given to it by the Apex Court to shed any excess staff that was being employed by it.
There being no material on the basis of which any further rationalisation of the staff strength can be justified, the petitions have got to fail and are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.