JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner was allegedly appointed as Peon-cum- Chowkidar on daily wage basis by the Range Forest Officer (Working Plan), Company Bagh, Ambala City.
His services were terminated on 3041993.
Dissatisfied with the order of his termination, the petitioner issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
On the failure of conciliation proceedings, the appropriate Government referred the dispute raised by the petitioner-workman for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala (hereinafter referred to as the `Labour Court').
The Labour Court struck the following issues for determination :-  "1.
As per reference ?
OPW 2.
Whether the Forest Deptt.
is not an industry ?
OPM 3.
Relief."
On issue No. 1, the Labour Court recorded a conclusion in favour of the petitioner by holding that the petitioner's services had been terminated in violation of the provisions of the Act.
However, while adjudicating upon issue No. 2, the Labour Court concluded that the Management by whom the petitioner- workman was engaged was not an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act.
2.
The short controversy before this Court through the instant writ petition revolves around the determination of the Labour Court on issue No. 2 i.e. whether or not the respondent Management is an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act.
A perusal of the issues struck by the Labour Court hereinabove, reveals that the onus of proof for establishing, whether or not the Forest Department was an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act, was placed on the shoulders of the Management.
The Management did not lead any evidence in that behalf.
It is, therefore, that the Labour Court while disposing of Issue No. 2 held that the Management did not constitute an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act.
It has now been settled by the Apex Court in State of Gujarat and others v. Pratamsingh Narsinh Parmar, 2001(2) SCT 1081 (SC) : JT 2001(3) SC 326, that the onus of proof to establish that whether an establishment is an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act, rests on the shoulders of the employee, who invokes the provisions of the Act.
Relevant observations of the Apex Court are being extracted hereunder :-  "If a dispute arises as to whether a particular establishment or part of it wherein an appointment has been made is an industry or not, it would be for the person concerned, who claims the same to be an industry, to give positive facts for coming to the conclusion that it constitutes "an industry".
Ordinarily, a Department of the Government cannot be held to be an industry and rather it is a part of the sovereign function.
To find out whether the respondent in the writ petition had made any assertion that with regard to the duty which he was discharging and with regard to the activities of the organization where he had been recruited, we find that there has not been an iota of assertion to that effect though, no doubt, it has been contended that the order of dismissal is vitiated for non-compliance of Section 25-F of the Act.
The State in its counter affidavit, on the other hand, refuted the assertion of the respondent in the writ petition and took the positive stand that the Forest Department cannot be held to be an industry so that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act cannot have any application.
In the absence of any assertion by the petitioner in the writ petition indicating the nature of duty discharged by the petitioner as well as the job of the establishment where he had been recruited, the High Court wholly erred in law in applying the principles enunciated in the judgment of this Court in Jagannath Maruti Kondhare (supra) to hold that the Forest Department could be held to be "an industry"."
It is, therefore, apparent that the confusion in the matter arose as a consequence of wrongful placement of onus of proof in respect of issue No. 2 on the Management.
For the aforesaid limited reason, the Award of the Labour Court on issue No. 2 deserves to be set aside.
The same is accordingly set aside.
The parties are directed to appear before the Labour Court either in person or through their authorised representatives on 1392004.
3.
The Labour Court will redetermine issue No. 2 by placing the onus of proof thereof on the petitioner-workman.
Both the parties shall be afforded two effective opportunities to lead evidence on the aforesaid issue.
Disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Order dasti on payment of usual charges.
Order accordingly.