Swantanter Kumar, J - Adarsh Mehta, who was working as Clerk-cum-Typist with the Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports under the Sports Authority of India, (hereinafter referred to as "Authority"), has filed a suit for declaration against the said authority that the services rendered by him from 28121981 to 31.03.1984 be counted towards his seniority, promotion and fixation of seniority on the basis of uninterrupted service for the said period.
The suit was filed by him on the ground that he initially joined the Authority in December, 1981 as Clerk-cum-Typist and was attached with Store Keeper, Imported Equipments (Assistant).
Vide letter dated February 26, 1986 the Executive Director of the concerned authority appreciated his work and he was confirmed as Store-keeper in the institute.
He was appointed to the post of Clerk-cum-Typist on regular basis with effect from 1.4.1984 and was confirmed in that post.
According to him, he was given due increments for the ad hoc service rendered by him, regular pay scale and all other benefits to which regular employees were entitled to and as such the said period should be counted for all benefits as aforenoticed.
2.
The suit was contested by the Authority.
The suit of the plaintiff was decreed vide judgment and decree dated 14111994, passed by Sub-Judge 2nd Class, Patiala.
Against that judgment and decree the Sports Authority of India filed an appeal before the District Judge, Patiala, which was transferred to Central Administrative Tribunal on coming into force the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and was registered as TA No. 18/PB/1995.
The Chandigarh Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal, vide its judgment dated 2312001 dismissed the appeal preferred by the authority and affirmed the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court.
The authority did not appear before the CAT to argue this appeal/petition which as already noticed above was dismissed.
Before approaching this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the authority also filed a review application on 20.2.2001 justifying its absence as well as stating the reasons why the judgment of the CAT dated 23012001 should be reviewed.
This review application was also dismissed by the Bench of the Tribunal vide its order dated 7032001.
3.
Aggrieved from these two orders, the authority has preferred this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
4.
Learned counsel appearing for the authority impugned the judgments of the trial Court and the Central Administrative Tribunal dated 14111994 and 23012001, respectively, mainly on the following grounds :-  (a) that Adarsh Mehta (respondent herein) did not possess the requisite qualification at the time of his appointment and as such is not entitled to the benefit of service rendered by him during the period 28.12.1991 to 31.03.1984 when he was appointed after qualifying the typing test; (b) the appointment of the said respondent is against the Rules with a particular reference to Rule 25 and as such in the light of the judgments of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Haryana Vaterinary and AHTS Asson and another, 2000(4) SCT 664 (SC) : 2000(4) R.S.J.
167, PK Singh v. Bool Chand Chablani and others, 1999(1) SCT 128 (SC) : 1998(4) R.S.J.
125 and Davinder Bhatia and others v. Union of India and others, 1998(3) SCT 103 (SC) : 1998(3) R.S.J.
234, the respondent cannot claim any benefit of the said service.
Lastly, the judgment of the Tribunal and the court is contrary to evidence on record.
5.
Before we proceed to discuss the merit or otherwise of these contentions we may notice herein that before the trial Court parties led oral and documentary evidence in detail.
The learned trial Court answered the issues in favour of the respondent herein and decreed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 14111994.
There is no doubt that the petitioner was appointed as a temporary employee vide letter dated 26121981 (Annexure P-7) to the writ petition.
As per the terms and conditions stated in this letter, the appointment was for six months and the respondent was to be governed by the Rules and Regulations as framed by the Board of Governors from time to time.
No stipulation was incorporated in this letter which required the petitioner to pass the typing test.
The service of the petitioner was continued and extended from time to time till letter of regular appointment was issued in his favour on 341994.
Vide this letter the respondent was made a member of the regular service.
According to the respondent he was granted complete benefits for the period in question by way of increments, regular pay scale and other benefits which the employees of the institute were being paid.
This case of the respondent is fully substantiated by evidence on record.
When the evidence was being recorded by the learned trial Court, Shri KL Arora, Assistant Director had appeared as DW-1 and in his cross-examination he stated as under :-  "It is correct that the plaintiff had been paid pay and allowances and also increments for the period from 28121981 to 31.3.1984".
Not only this the respondent had also placed on record Ex.D-1 which has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure R-1/6 wherein the services of one Mrs. Indira Bali, LDC after accepting her request for regularisation, was given seniority from the date of creation of the post i.e. 1321987 instead of 911988, as earlier granted by the department.
The respondent also raises the plea of discrimination.
In the case of the respondent, the post was sanctioned and created vide letter dated 26121981 vide office order No. 2191.
If the same analogy is applied to the case of the respondent we failed to see any reason why he should be denied the benefit granted to him by the trial Court as well as by the Tribunal.
6.
The respondent was appointed to the post on 26121981 and was confirmed in that post without any break in service.
In fact vide order dated 28.9.1990/4.4.1990, the Executive Director of the Institute accorded sanction to grant initial grade increments to the respondent right from the year 1982 till 1989 as per rules.
In the pleadings filed before us (i.e. replication and the writ petition) the petitioner-institute has admitted that the respondent was not able to clear the typing test till 1983 but he cleared the same on 31.3.1984 and that is why he was issued letter of regular appointment on 341984.
In other words even as per the case of the petitioner institute itself the respondent has qualified even the typing test.
In the initial letter of appointment no such term was incorporated and as such no liability could be fastened on the respondent to clear such a test.
A temporary employee shall be governed by the terms of the contract as contained in the letter of appointment, in furtherance to which he has joined the service.
The petitioner institute cannot be permitted to act contrary to the terms of appointment and that too to the prejudice to the respondent.
As and when the institute required the respondent to clear the typing rest, he cleared the same though after grant of extension and satisfied the condition imposed upon him.
This per se would not have the effect of rendering the initial appointment of the respondent bad or contrary to the rules.
It is the conduct of the institute itself which has granted specific extention to the service of the respondent without stipulating any of such condition.
The conduct of the petitioner institute subsequent to the initial appointment, by granting extension and confirming the service of the respondent, granting annual increments and regular pay scale without imposing the condition of typing test, which the respondent qualified, would operate as estoppel against the authority from questioning their own earlier case which are no where opposed to the terms of the contract or the law and on the basis of which the respondent had acted and continued in employment.
7.
The Bench of the Administrative Tribunal while relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association and another v. State of Maharashtra and others, JT 1990(2) SC 264, and relying upon another judgment of the High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2780 of 1980 - Malook Singh v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) SCT 133 (P&H), decided on 6121991 and also relying on the judgments of the Supreme Court in MK Shanmugam etc. v. Union of India etc., 2000(2) Services Cases Today 954 (SC) and Rudra Kumar Sain v. Union of India, 2000(3) SCT 1096 (SC) dismissed the petition of the institute by holding that the appointment was neither stop gap arrangement nor fortuitous and as such the service of the respondent should be counted towards seniority.
8.
In the present case as already notice above, the post was created and sanctioned while the respondent was appointed.
As such the appointment of the respondent was against a regular post duly sanctioned and was not a mere stop-gap arrangement.
Even in the case of Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association and others v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1607, where the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that once initial appointment is made as per procedure and the appointee continues on the post un- interruptedly till regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted.
Reliance placed by the petitioner upon the judgments of the Supreme Court would not be applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the Haryana Veterinary case supra, the court was concerned with the statutory rules in relation to grant of higher pay scale.
The expression used in those rules was regular service.
No such argument has been raised before us in the present writ petition.
In other two cases, the appointment itself was without proper sanction and contrary to the rules; that again is not the position in the case in hand.
There is sufficient material on the record to show that the respondent was appointed to the post as per procedure and after due creation of the post in terms of the office order.
In any case the petitioners by their own conduct and positive acts by passing different orders, treating the respondent as part of their service cadre.
9.
The orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal and the learned trial Court have been assailed before us in a writ petition.
The scope of judicial review of such judgments in a writ jurisdiction is a limited one.
Unless and until the judgments challenged in this writ petition suffered from patent infirmity or are contrary to the enunciated law, this Court would decline to interfere and upsetting the judgments which are concurrently in favour of the respondent herein.
10.
In paragraph 11 of the written statement filed before us, the respondent has specifically stated in regard to regularisation of services of Ms. Indira Bali from the date of creation of the post, which was accepted by the petitioner institute.
This has not been specifically disputed by the institute in the replication filed by the petitioner.
Even during the course of arguments no record was produced before us that the practice of the institute was to the contrary.
11.
For the reasons aforestated, we find no reason to interfere in the judgments of the learned trial Court as well as the Central Administrative Tribunal vide which the Original as well as the review petition filed by the institute was dismissed.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.