SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the service of Market Committee, Sirhind, respondent No. 4 as a Steno-Typist on daily wages in the year 1986.
Thereafter he was appointed as Steno-Typist w.e.f.
13.5.1987 in the pay scale of Clerk.
It is the case of the petitioner that throughout the service, he has been given the pay scale and allowances of the post of Clerk and not Steno-Typist.
On the other hand, respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were appointed as Clerks on daily wages in the year 1986.
Their services were initially regularised as Clerk w.e.f.
3101990 on the basis of the award of the Labour Court.
These respondents challenged the aforesaid award in this Court by way of filing a writ petition which was dismissed.
The judgment of the High Court was challenged by respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court directed that the respondents should again approach the Secretary, Punjab Mandi Board for redressal of their grievances.
Thereafter, Secretary, Punjab Mandi Board has regularised the services of these respondents w.e.f.
1371987.
In 1987, a common seniority list of the Clerks and Steno-Typists was issued and the name of the petitioner was included therein.
Punjab Market committee (Class III) Services Rules, 1989 came into effect on 2711989 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
These rules have been promulgated by the State Government under Section 43 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961.
The same were published in the Punjab Government Gazette dated 2711989 vide Notification No. G.S.R.
9/P.A.
23/61/S.
43/89.
Instructions were issued by the Punjab Mandi Board-respondent No. 3, on 8.12.1992 (Annexure P-2) merging the posts of Kandaman, Record Keeper, Store Keeper, Caretaker, Restorer, Moharrir, Kanda Muharrir, Rest House Attendant, Kanda Munshi etc. appointed after 371980 in the Cadre of Clerks.
It was, however, mentioned that in the Cadre of Clerks for giving them scale of Rs. 1200-2100 and 1500-2640, all these would be shown below all the Clerks in the seniority list.
Thereafter the recruitment was only to be made on the post of Clerks.
Although the petitioner was a Steno-Typist, he was shown senior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in the common seniority list of Clerks.
The case of the petitioner for adjustment on the post of Clerk was sent to the Punjab Mandi Board on the basis of a resolution having been passed to that effect on 29.6.1998 by the Market Committee, Sirhind where the petitioner is working.
The petitioner has pleaded in the writ petition that the delay in passing the formal orders regarding petitioner's adjustment/merger as Clerk was due to the casual attitude of the department.
In the tentative Seniority List of Clerks/Steno-Typists issued on 892000, the petitioner was again shown senior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
The petitioner was even designated as Junior Assistant by order dated 20112000.
However, on the same date, the post of Steno-Typists was abolished.
The petitioner was adjusted on the post of Clerk.
In the meantime, persons junior to him, including respondent Nos. 5 and 6 have been promoted on the posts of Auction Recorder.
The petitioner, therefore, submitted an appeal before the Secretary, Punjab Mandi Board claiming promotion against the post of Auction Recorder.
The appeal filed by him was accepted by passing an order dated 29.6.2001 (Annexure P-7).
The Market Committee, Sirhind was directed to consider the petitioner for promotion by giving him benefit of service from the date of his joining.
In compliance with the order of Punjab Mandi Board, the petitioner was promoted as Auction Recorder from the date the persons junior to him were promoted w.e.f.
16112000, by order dated 7.9.2001 passed by the Chairman, Market Committee, Sirhind (Annexure P-9).
In the seniority list dated 2492001 of the Auction Recorders, the petitioner is shown at Sr. No. 11 and respondent Nos. 5 and 6 have been shown at Sr. Nos. 13 and 14.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid order dated 29.6.2001 (Annexure P-7), respondent Nos. 5 and 6 filed an appeal before the Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Punjab under Section 42 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961.
The petitioner was impleaded as party.
The petitioner filed a written statement.
Parties were represented by their counsel.
By order dated 13.10.2003 (Annexure P-12), the order dated 29.6.2001 (Annexure P-7) promoting the petitioner on the post of Auction Recorder was set aside.
On the basis of the aforesaid order, show-cause notice (Annexure P-13) was issued to the petitioner as to why he be not reverted back to the post of Clerk (Junior Assistant).
The petitioner submitted his reply (Annexure P-14).
Now the respondents have passed the impugned order dated 772004 (Annexure P-15) reverting the petitioner to the post of Clerk.
2.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length.
It is submitted by the learned counsel that all along the petitioner had been performing the duties of a Clerk, although he had been appointed on the post of Steno-Typist.
Non-absorption of the post of Steno-Typists in the cadre of Clerks was due to the inaction of the respondents.
The petitioner cannot be made to suffer for no fault of his own.
3.
We are of the considered opinion that the writ petition is based on a misconception that the post of Steno-Typists stood merged in the cadre of Clerks by virtue of instructions dated 8.12.1992 (Annexure P-12).
A perusal of the aforesaid instructions shows that the post of Steno-Typist is conspicuously absent from the list of Posts which have been merged in the cadre of Clerks.
The post of Steno-Typists not having been merged with the post of Clerks, the petitioner clearly could not have been included in the seniority of Clerks.
The petitioner also could not have been considered for promotion on the post of Auction Recorder as the post of Steno-Typist was not a feeder post for the post of Auction Recorder.
The service conditions of the employees of the Market Committee are governed by the statutory rules which came into force on 2711989.
Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules provides for the method of recruitment and the qualifications.
Appendix "B" of the aforesaid Rules provides for the method of recruitment on the post of Auction Recorder which is as under :-  "Sr. No.
Designation of Post Mode of appointment Qualifications for recruitment by--- Direct Appointment Promotion Transfer 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 4.
Auction Recorder (i) Twenty five per cent by direct appointment; and Should have passed Matriculation Examination from the Education Board with at least fifty per cent marks and should have obtained a graduate of a recognised University with at least fifty per cent marks.
From amongst the Clerks, Care-Takers, Kanda-men who have an experience of working on either of the post of a minimum period of three years."
(ii) Seventy five per cent by promotion.
4.
A perusal of the aforesaid Rules clearly shows that the post of Steno- Typist does not fall amongst the posts from which the promotion is to be made on the post of Auction Recorder.
The post of Steno-Typists was never merged in the Cadre of Clerks.
Learned counsel has, however, vehemently argued that in reality, the petitioner had always been treated as a Clerk.
He was also treated senior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
Therefore, the petitioner was entitled to be promoted on the post of Auction Recorder.
We find no merit in the aforesaid submission of the learned counsel.
When the conditions of service of a particular cadre are governed by statutory rules, all orders have to be passed in strict compliance of the Rules.
This view of ours will find support from a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Gurdip Singh v. RN Attri and others, 2000(3) SCT 268 (P&H) : 2000(3) RSJ 97.
In paragraph 7 of the aforesaid judgment, it has been held as under ;-  "7.
We have thoughtfully considered the submissions of the learned counsel.
There cannot be any doubt that the State has the exclusive prerogative to frame rules or issue executive instructions for regulating recruitment to the civil posts and other posts falling within its purview and also to lay down the conditions of service of the persons appointed in connection with the affairs of the State but it is also well-settled that after having framed the rules or having issued executive instructions on the subject, the State, its functionaries and agencies are bound to act in accordance with such rules and/or instructions and any deviation from the same would ordinarily attract the charge of arbitrariness and violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In matters relating to public employment, such deviation would result in violation of Article 16 as well."
5.
It is also settled proposition of law that statutory rules cannot be amended by executive instructions.
It is permissible for the State to issue executive instructions to supplement the provisions of the statutory rules.
However, the executive instructions cannot run contrary to the provisions of the statutory rules or whittle down their effect.
Executive instructions cannot supplant the provisions of the statutory rules.
The aforesaid principles have been laid down by the Supreme Court in a number of cases.
We may notice only the following :-  6.
In the case of Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan and another, 1967 SLR (SC) 906, the Supreme Court, considering the scope of executive instructions vis-a-vis the statutory rules, observed as follows :-  "6.
We proceed to consider the next contention of Mr. NC Chatterjee that in the absence of any statutory rules governing promotions to selection grade posts, the Government cannot issue administrative instructions and such administrative instructions cannot impose any restrictions not found in the Rules already framed.
We are unable to accept this argument as correct.
It is true that there is no specific provision in the Rules laying down the principle of promotion of junior or senior grade officers to selection grade posts.
But that does not mean that till statutory rules are framed in this behalf the Government cannot issue administrative instructions regarding the principle to be followed in promotions of the officers concerned to selection grade posts.
It is true that Government cannot amend or supersede statutory rule by administrative instructions, but if the rules are silent on any particular point Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed."
In the case of Paluru Ramkrishnaiah and others v. Union of India and another, 1989(2) SLR (SC) 202, the Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "11.
It is thus apparent that an executive instruction could make a provision only with regard to a matter which was not covered by the Rules and that such executive instruction could not override any provision of the Rule.
Notwithstanding the issue of instruction dated 6th November, 1962 therefore, the procedure for making promotions as laid down in Rule 8 of the rules had to be followed.
Since rule 8 in the instant case prescribed a procedure for making promotion the said procedure could not be abrogated by the executive instruction dated 6th November, 1962.
..." In the case of Senior Supdt.
of Post Offices and others v. Izhar Hussain, 1989(4) SLR (SC) 229, the Supreme Court held as follows :-  "6.
..... A statutory rule cannot be modified or amended by executive instructions.
A valid rule having some lacuna or gap can be supplemented by the Executive instructions, but a statutory rule which is constitutionally invalid cannot be validated with the support of executive instructions.
The instructions can only supplement and not supplant the rule."
In the case of Gulbir Singh Shastri v. State of Punjab and others, 1999(1) SCT 248 (P&H) : 1998(4) RSJ 583 again the same principle has been reiterated by the Supreme Court in the following words :-  "9.
...
The Rules have been framed under the provisions of the Security of Service Act, 1979.
These are statutory.
The statutory rules cannot be amended by an executive order.
Thus, the instructions issued by the department cannot override the provisions of the statutory rules...." 7.
As noticed earlier, the petitioner was working on the post of Auction Recorder which had not been merged in the Cadre of Clerks.
Even the posts which have been merged by instructions dated 8.12.1992 (Annexure P-2) were directed to be shown below all the Clerks in the seniority list.
An option was also given to the employees not to be included in the Cadre of Clerks.
So even if it is to be assumed, for the sake of arguments, that the post of the petitioner was merged with the Cadre of Clerks, the petitioner would have to rank junior to all the Clerks.
Therefore, even on this premise, necessarily he would be junior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
In the order dated 13.10.2003 (Annexure P-12) passed by the Additional Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Agriculture, it has been clearly held that the post held by the petitioner was not in the feeder cadre for getting promotion to the post of Auction Recorder nor was he eligible to be promoted.
In our opinion, the Additional Secretary has rightly held that the statutory rules cannot be amended by executive instructions.
Therefore, the petitioner could take no advantage of the instructions issued by the State of Punjab on 26.12.1961 permitting the official respondents to maintain a joint seniority list of the Cadre of Clerks and Steno-Typists for further promotion.
Relying on the aforesaid order of the Additional Secretary, the petitioner was issued a show-cause notice on 1562004 (Annexure P-13).
The petitioner submitted the reply (Annexure P-14) to the same.
Before the respondents could even take a decision on the same, the petitioner moved this Court by filing CWP No. 9429 of 2004.
The aforesaid petition was disposed of by this court on 272004 with a direction to the respondents to take a conscious and cautious decision upon the reply submitted by the petitioner.
It was also directed that if the decision is adverse to the petitioner, the same be not effective for 15 days, after the same has been served upon the petitioner.
8.
Having considered the entire matter, we are of the considered opinion that no injustice has been done to the petitioner.
We find no merit in the present writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.