SS Nijjar, J - The petitioners are aggrieved by the speaking order passed by the respondents on 1452004 by the Chief Engineer of the Bhakra Beas Management Board (for short `the BBMB').
The petitioners had filed CWP No. 568 of 2004 seeking a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to implement the office order dated 1441980, in which it has been notified that all Saturdays of every month instead of second and last Saturdays only of each month shall be observed as holidays in the BBMB Offices.
The petitioners had also prayed for a direction to the respondents not to implement notification dated 2751983, in which it has been decided that all employees whether regular or work charged working in the field offices would work for six days a week.
The petitioners had also claimed a direction for the grant of extra wages for the work done after office hours or on holidays.
The writ petition was disposed of on 1512004 with a direction to the respondents to take a decision on the representations, which had been submitted by the petitioners within a period of four months from the date of service of certified copy of the order, by passing a speaking and well reasoned order.
The speaking order, which is challenged in the present writ petition has been passed in compliance of the earlier order passed by this Court.
The petitioners had places strong reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 8434 of 1997, Municipal Employees Union (Registered) Sirhind and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2000(9) SCC 432, decided on 1532002.
The Chief Engineer notices the moot question, which was considered by the Supreme Court of India.
The question framed by the Supreme Court was as follows :-  "Whether the employees belonging to Class-III and Class IV service of the respondent-Municipal Committee who have common employer and who have common seniority list and also common pay scales, when required to work either at the Octroi check post or in the offices of the Municipal Committee, as the case may be, depending upon the exigencies of service in committees, can have an equal right to enjoy Saturdays as Holidays and whether the right available to their entire cadre as such to enjoy such weekly holidays be denied only to a limited category of Octroi Staff, who, due to exigencies of service may, at a given point of time, be required to work not only in the offices but by rotation in the Octroi check-posts or barriers ?"
The Supreme Court held as under :-  "So far as this question is concerned, unless there is any express provision in the Municipal Committees to deny the benefit of non-working Saturdays only to those staff members who have, because of the exigencies of service, to discharge their duties at Octroi check-posts or barriers rather than in the offices.
But that would require a further question as to whether, at the relevant time at which the concerned employees like the appellants have actually worked on Saturdays, their colleagues in the offices had enjoyed such holidays and further whether the bye-laws of the concerned Municipal Committees required the employees, by way of their service conditions, to discharge their duties for six days in a week and, therefore, it was open to the Municipal authorities, looking to the exigencies and pressure of work, to give some additional concession to only those office staff members who would have been permitted not to come for work on the Saturdays.
Therefore, all that we can lay down in the present proceedings is to the effect that if the appellants, at the relevant time at which they claim to have earned the right to enjoy holidays falling on Saturdays were made to work while their colleagues similarly situated like them, working in the offices of the Municipal Committees, were given the benefit of such holidays and when their were no bye-laws requiring the employees to work for six days in a week, then they would be entitled to be given monetary compensation for the working Saturdays by grant of extra wages for each of the working Saturday on which they are shown to have discharged their duties."
After considering the entire matter, the Supreme Court granted the following relief :-  "Under these circumstances, the relief which is granted to all these appellant-employees by modification in the High Court's order will be as under :- 1.
The appellants, by filing appropriate applications under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 may, on proper computation, be entitled to get extra wages for each of the Saturdays on which they might have worked while their colleagues in the offices of the Municipal Committees had enjoyed benefit of Saturdays provided the 52 Saturdays in a given calendar year were enjoyed by the employees of the State Government.
2.
Even the State Government employees had enjoyed the said benefit during the relevant calendar year but if the Municipal Committees had promulgated, at the relevant time, any bye-law under which the working conditions of the staff members were uniformly prescribed to be six days in a week, then, the question of granting any monetary benefit to the appellants would not survive.
On the other hand if there was no such bye-law at the relevant time, then, the appellants, would be entitled to claim wages for the Saturdays on which they have actually worked when their colleagues in the offices had not worked and had enjoyed benefit of closed Saturdays."
2.
The Chief Engineer further notices that some other categories of employees of BBMB had filed CWP No. 2060 of 2003, Nathu Ram and 66 others v. Bhakra Beas Management Board and others claiming the same benefit.
The writ petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court on 2422003 and the petition was dismissed.
The Chief Engineer has examined the case of the petitioners in the light of the observations made by the Division Bench in the case of Nathu Ram (supra).
It has been observed that although the present petitioners rendered duties for six working days in every week but there is no parity in controversy with the petitioners in whose case the judgment was rendered by the Supreme Court.
The petitioners are attached with Field Officers in the Field Offices, who are working for six days in a week and are being allowed the field holidays as sanctioned on year to year basis.
We are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid order of the Chief Engineer cannot be said to be arbitrary, unreasonable or based on extraneous considerations.
The petitioners are required to work six days in a week as they are attached to field establishments.
As compensation, they have been granted either additional casual leaves besides normal casual leaves and field holidays.
They have also been granted fixed TA for 12 full daily allowances in a month.
Therefore, the Chief Engineer has rightly observed that the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Municipal Employees Union, Sirhind (supra) would not be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
3.
Mr. V Ramswaroop, learned counsel submits that the Chief Engineer has merely based the decision on the earlier decision of the Division Bench in Nathu Ram's case (supra).
The case of the petitioners has not been examined on merits.
We are unable to accept the submission of the learned counsel.
A perusal of the order passed shows that the Chief Engineer considered the entire ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court.
The Chief Engineer also took into account the judgment of the Division Bench in Nathu Ram's case (supra).
The Chief Engineer has also observed that CWP No. 18965 of 2002, Pavittar singh and others v. BBMB and CWP No. 18964 of 2002, Gurcharan Singh and others v. BBMB and others have already been dismissed by this Court by recording similar findings.
We are of the considered opinion that no injustice has been done to the petitioners.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.