MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for quashing order dated 2422003 passed by respondent 2, namely, Accountant General, Punjab, Chandigarh stopping the pro-rata pension of the petitioner, which was earlier sanctioned to him.
The order has been conveyed to the petitioner by the Senior Accounts Office on 432003.
2.
The petitioner joined the office of Accountant General, Punjab on 2091952 and was promoted as SAS Accountant on 571963.
On 1861964 he applied for the post of Accounts/Officer in Oil and Natural Gas Commission (for brevity, `ONGC') through proper channel where he was selected on 151965.
He was asked to report for duty upto 2261965.
The petitioner made a request to respondent 2 for maintaining his lien in the office of Accountant General which was rejected on 2851965 (Annexure P-2).
Consequently, he submitted his resignation on 961965 and was relieved from duties to join the post of Accounts Officer in the ONGC.
He rose to the rank of Additional Director in the ONGC and retired as such on 31.3.1990.
3.
After his retirement he submitted all the documents and all the duly filled in proformas for grant of pro-rata pension in respect of the service rendered in the office of Accountant General, Punjab.
However, the pension was not released resulting into filing of a representation on 1311992.
The case of the petitioner was rejected on 451992 (Annexure P-13).
Thereafter, the appeal filed by the petitioner was rejected on 131993.
The orders dated 451992 (Annexure P-13) and 131993 (Annexure P-16) were challenged by the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 8041 of 1993 before this Court.
On 2741994 the petition was admitted and on the agreement of parties the matter was referred to a Bench of Permanent Lok Adalat.
During the pendency of the petition sanction for release of pro-rata pension was issued on 2121999 and it was disbursed to the petitioner.
On 15112000 the Bench of the Lok Adalat directed respondent 2 to pay interest at the rate of 12% per annum on delayed payment of retiral benefits (Annexure P-20).
The Lok Adalat followed the view taken by the Supreme Court in the case of TS Thiruvengadam v. The Secretary to Govt of India Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, New Delhi and others, 1993(2) SCT 205 (SC) : 1993(2) RSJ 370, for granting 12% interest on pro-rata pension.
4.
The aforementioned directions issued by the Lok Adalat were not implemented and C.M.
No. 5514-15 of 2001 was filed in this Court seeking implementation of the award of the Lok Adalat.
The respondents also filed an application for enlargement of time along with a review petition which are attached with this petition as Annexures P-21 and P-22.
The Court extended the period for implementation of the order by two months.
It is further pertinent to mention that order dated 15112000 passed by the Lok Adalat was challenged by respondent 2 in Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001.
A Division Bench of this Court dismissed the writ petition.
The order of the Division Bench dated 22102001 reads as under :-  "The petitioner-Government had itself sanctioned pro-rata pension and disbursed the same to the respondent-employee during pendency of CWP No. 8041 of 1993.
The limited question that remained open for settlement was that of rate of interest on delayed payment of dues.
This is the only subject matter of Lok Adalat's impugned award dated 15111990 Annexure P-1.
The only plea taken to challenge annexure P-1 is that sanction and payment of pension was inadvertently made by mistake.
In response to a specific question, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner candidly states that the Government order sanctioning grant and payment of pension has not been cancelled, withdrawn or otherwise revoked.
In these circumstances, we find no justification for the challenge to the Lok Adalat Award Annexure P-1.
The writ petition, in our view, appears to be wholly misconceived.
Dismissed."
No further appeal was filed by the respondents.
As already pointed out that during the pendency of Civil Writ Petition No. 8041 of 1993 pro-rata pension has already been sanctioned to the petitioner vide order dated 3181999 and pension payment order No. 63252-99-0026-8 was issued on 2121999 (Annexures P-23 and P-24).
5.
However, on 1712002 after a period of more than 3 years of sanction of pension, a show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner for withdrawal of pension alleging that it was wrongly sanctioned.
A perusal of the show-cause notice shows that after the Lok Adalat passed order on 15112000, the Competent Authority during the implementation of the order discovered that the petitioner was not entitled to pro-rata pension as per the provisions of Rule 37 of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (for brevity, `Pension Rules').
Reliance has also been placed on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and others v. VR Chadha, (1997) 11 SCC 242, along with the decision of this Court in the case of Union of India v. KN Gupta, rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 5199-CAT of 2000, decided on 1442001.
On the aforementioned basis, the petitioner was asked to show-cause as to why the pension already sanctioned should not be withdrawn.
6.
The petitioner replied to the show-cause notice by pointing out all the facts which have already been noticed in the paras above and it was submitted that a Division Bench had dismissed Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001 on 22102001 and issuance of show-cause notice for contempt of court.
The submission made by the petitioner was rejected and respondent No. 2 has ordered withdrawal of pro-rata pension granted to him on 3181999 (Annexure P-27).
The pension payment order issued to him on 2121999 has also been withdrawn.
The operative part of the order reads as under :-  "I have carefully examined the case, instructions of the Govt., show-cause notice issued to Sh. Arora, his representation made in this behalf.
Rule 37 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 regulates the grant of pro-rata pensionary benefits to government servant absorbed in Public Sector Undertakings.
The following two conditions must be satisfied for being covered under the said rules : i) That the Govt. servant should be permitted to be absorbed in the Public Sector Undertaking.
ii) That such absorption should be declared by the Government to be in Public interest.
In fact the appointment of Sh. Arora in ONGC can't be regarded as absorption as contemplated in Rule 37 of the pension rules because it was not after obtaining the necessary permission from the Govt. Sh. Arora took the appointment after resigning from the post which he was holding in the office of the Accountant General Punjab.
Mere acceptance of the resignation or forwarding the application by the Govt. does not create any liability to pay pro-rata pensionary benefits.
In view of the above discussion, I am of the considered view that pro-rata pension is not admissible to Sh. HS Arora as he did not fulfill the necessary conditions as mentioned above.
Therefore, I hereby order the stoppage of pro-rata pension with immediate effect and also order the recovery of pro-rata pension already paid to him."
7.
The stand taken by the respondents in their written statement is that no writ is competent.
It is pleaded that the remedy of the petitioner is to file an original application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for brevity, `the Act') because the petitioner is an employee of the Central Government.
In support of the impugned order Annexure P-27, reliance has been placed on Rule 37 of the `Pension Rules'.
It has been submitted that a government servant who is absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the Government or financed by it, could alone be deemed to have retired from service from the date of such absorption.
Such an employee would be eligible to receive the benefits if he satisfies two conditions : (a) that he was permitted to be absorbed; and (b) such absorption was declared by the government to be in public interest.
The respondents have also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in VR Chadha's case (supra) and KN Gupta's case (supra).
However, the other facts have not been disputed.
8.
Mr. Ashok Sharma Nabhewala, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that once the matter has been finalized by decision of the Lok Adalat dated 15112000 in which directions were issued for payment of interest at the rate of 12% on pro-rata pension released to the petitioner vide orders dated 3081999 and 2121999 (Annexures P-23 and P-24), then there was no scope for the respondents to issue a show-cause notice.
He has further pointed out that Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001 filed by respondent No. 2 against the order of the Lok Adalat has already been dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on 22102001.
The issuance of show-cause notice and withdrawal of pension by the impugned order Annexure P-27 dated 24.2.2002/432003 is absolutely illegal and interferes with the administration of justice.
According to the learned counsel, the principle of `res judicata' would apply as the whole review application Annexure P-22 was based on Rule 37 of the Pension Rules.
The review petition was dismissed as withdrawn.
Same contention based on Rule 37 of the Pension Rules was raised by respondent No. 2 in Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001 and it was rejected by the Division Bench.
Having failed before this Court and various other forums, it was not fair for the respondents to withdraw the pension.
Learned counsel has also argued that there is a delay of more than three years in issuing the show-cause notice and the order is vitiated on that ground also.
On merits, it has been submitted that case of the petitioner is covered by Rules 26, 37 and 47(4-AA) of the Pension Rules.
He has also placed reliance on paragraphs 2(8) and 3 of the Government of India's decision taken under Rule 26 of the Pension Rules read with Rule 31 of the (GPF) Central Civil Service Rules, 1960 and submitted that resignation was technical in nature because the petitioner had applied through proper channel for appointment to a post in ONGC.
He was allowed to compete without any pre-conditions.
His general provident fund was transferred to ONGC without break/forfeiture of service.
The resignation in these circumstances submitted by the petitioner shall be considered to be submitted for taking up a new appointment with proper permission, without incurring forfeiture of service.
9.
Mr. DR Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the petitioner is not competent to file the instant writ petition as under Section 14 of the Act, the petitioner has to be considered as a member of All India Service or a Civil Servant.
Any dispute by such an employee has to be raised before the Central Administrative Tribunal (for brevity, `the Tribunal').
He has also placed relimpnce on Sections 3(d) and (q) of the Act and argued that any claim with regard to remuneration including allowances, pension and other retiral benefits has to be raised before the Tribunal.
Learned counsel has then referred to Appendix 14 of Fundamental and Supplementary Rules issued under Supplementary Rule 2(10) of the Comptroller and Auditor General Manual Volume II, showing the list of officers who are declared as the Head of the Departments.
Referring to Item No. 36 under the Finance Department, the Auditor General of India has been declared as the Head of the Department.
He has also referred to the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 showing that Comptroller and Auditor General is appointed under Article 148 of the Constitution and in matters of discipline he is governed by the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 (for brevity, `1965 Rules').
He has also made reference to the Rules known as Indian Audit and Accounts Department (Senior Accountant) Recruitment Rules, 1988 (for brevity, `1988 Rules') and argued that classification of the post of Senior Accountant would show that the petitioner is a member of General Central Civil Service Group `C' Non-Gazetted Ministerial.
He has placed reliance on paragraph 10 of the Manual of Standing Orders (Administrative) Volume I issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General to show that recruitment to the Indian Audit and Accounts Service is made by the Central Government either by a competitive examination conducted by the Union Public Service Commission (for brevity, `UPSC') or by promotion in consultation with the UPSC.
Relying on the provisions of Rules 2(c) and (h) of 1965 Rules, the learned counsel has argued that the Central Civil Services and Central Civil Post would include a civilian service or a civilian post.
He has emphasized that the `Government servant' means a person who is a member of service or holds a civil post under the Union Government.
Accordingly he has urged that the petitioner is a member of Indian Accounts and Audit Service within the meaning of 1988 Rules and could avail the remedy of filing an original application before the Tribunal.
He has also placed reliance on Rule 4 dealing with the classification of services, Rule 5 concerning constitution of Central Civil Services, Rule 6 classifying the posts and Rule 7 of 1988 Rules dealing with General Central Service and argued that the post held by the petitioner could not be excluded from the operation of aforementioned 1965 Rules.
On the aforementioned basis, the learned counsel has stressed that the petitioner has an effective alternative remedy under Section 19 of the Act and cannot approach this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution  10.
On merits, the learned counsel has heavily relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in VR Chadha's case (supra) as well as the view taken by this Court in KN Gupta's case (supra) and argued that unless there is a proper permission from the Central Government to join the service in ONGC showing that the permission was granted in public interest, the petitioner could not be deemed to have been relieved under Rule 37 read with Rule 26(2) of the Pension Rules or the decision taken in paragraphs 2(8) and 3 by the Government of India under Rule 26 of the Pension Rules.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner has failed to prove the proper permission showing that he was relieved to join ONGC in public interest.
11.
After hearing the learned counsel at a considerable length and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that this petition deserves to succeed.
For the sake of convenience, the discussion is divided into two parts : (a) whether the petitioner is a Central Government employee within the meaning of Section 14 of the Act and he should have availed the remedy under the Act; and (b) whether the petitioner is entitled to pro-rata pension; and interest as awarded by the Lok Adalat vide its award dated 15112000 as upheld by a Division Bench of this Court by dismissing Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001 on 22102001.
12.
In order to decide the controversy as to whether the remedy available under Section 19 of the Act would be available to an employee who hold the post of Accounts Officer in the Department of Audit and Accounts Services, it would be appropriate to make reference to Sections 2(a), 3(d), (q), 14 and Section 19 of the Act as well as Rules 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the 1965 Rules.
The same read as under :-  "2.
Act not to apply to certain persons - The provisions of this Act shall not apply to - 2(a) any member of the naval, military or air forces or of any other armed forces of the Union; ..... ...... ......... ....... 3(d) "appropriate Government" means - (1) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal, the Central Government; (q) "service matters", in relation to a person, means all matters relating to the conditions of his service in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, or, as the case may be, of any corporation (or society owned or controlled by the Government, as respects - (i) remuneration (including allowances), pension and other retirement benefits; (ii) tenure including confirmation, seniority, promotion, reversion, premature retirement and superannuation; (iii) leave of any kind; (iv) disciplinary matters; or (v) any other matter whatsoever; ........... 14.
Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal - Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all Courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to -  (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All- India Service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post under the Union or to a post connected with defence or in the defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a civilian; (b) all service matters concerning - (i) a member of any All-India Service; or (ii) a person (not being a member of an All-India Service or a person referred to in clause (c) appointed to any civil service of the Union or any civil post under the Union; or (iii) a civilian (not being a member of an All-India Service or a person referred to in clause (c) appointed to any defence services or a post connected with defence, and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation (or society) owned or controlled by the Government; (c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the Union concerning a person appointed to any service or post referred to in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of clause (b), being a person whose services have been placed by a State Government or any local or other authority or any corporation (or society) or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government for such appointment.
Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that references to "Union" in this sub-section shall be construed as including references also to a Union territory.)
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, apply with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification the provisions of sub- section (3) to local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India and to corporations (or societies) owned or controlled by Government, not being a local or other authority or corporation (or society) controlled or owned by a State Government : Provided that if the Central Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dated may be so specified under this sub-section in respect of different classes of or different categories under any class of, local or other authorities or corporations (or societies).
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall also exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub-section apply to any local or other authority or corporation (or society), all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that date by all Courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation (for society); and (b) all service matters concerning a person (other than a person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation (or society) and pertaining to the service of such person in connection with such affairs.
..... ....... ........ ........ 19.
Applications to Tribunals - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal may make an application to the Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.
..... ....... ........ ........ 2.
Interpretation.
- In the rules, unless the context, otherwise, requires, -- (a) "Appointing authority", in relation to a Government Servant means, - (i) the authority empowered to make appointments to the service of which the Government Servant is, for the time being, a member or to the grade of the service in which the Government Servant is, for the time being, included, or (ii) the authority empowered to make appointments to the post which the Government Servant for the time being holds, or (iii) the authority which appointed the Government Servant to such service, grade or post, as the case may be, or  (iv) where the Government Servant having been a permanent member of any other service or having substantively held any other permanent post, has been in continuous employment of the Government, the authority which appointed him to that service or to any grade in that service or to that post,  whichever authority is the highest authority; (b) xx xx xx xx (c) "Central Civil Service and Central Civil Post" includes a civilian service or civilian post, as the case may be, of the corresponding class in the Defence Services; (d) to (f) xx xx xx xx (g) "Disciplinary authority" means the authority competent under these rules to impose on a Government Servant any of the penalties specified in the Rule 11; (h) "Government Servant" means a person who - (i) is a member of a service or holds a civil post under the Union, and includes any such person on foreign service or whose services are temporarily placed at the disposal of a State Government, or a local or other authority; (ii) is a member of a service or holds a civil post under a State Government and whose services are temporarily placed at the disposal of the Central Government;  (iii) is in the service of a local or other authority and whose services are temporarily placed at the disposal of the Central Government.
(i) to (m) xx xx xx xx ..... ...... ...... ...... 4.
Classification of Services.
- (1) The Civil Services of the Union shall be classified as follows :- (i) Central Civil Services, Group A; (ii) Central Civil Services, Group B; (iii) Central Civil Services, Group C; (iv) Central Civil Services, Group D; (2) If a service consists of more than one grade, different grades of such service may be included in different groups.
5.
Constitution of Central Civil Services.
- The Central Services, Group A, Group B, Group C and Group D shall consist of the services and grades of services specified in the Schedule.
6.
Classification of posts.
- (1) Civil posts under the Union other than those ordinarily held by persons to whom these rules do not apply, shall, by a general or special order of the President, be classified as follows :- (i) Central Civil Posts, Group A; (ii) Central Civil Posts, Group B; (iii) Central Civil Posts, Group C; (iv) Central Civil Posts, Group D; (2) x x x x x 7.
General Central Services.
- Central Civil Posts of any class not included in any other Central Civil Service shall be deemed to be included in the General Central Service of the corresponding class and a Government Servant appointed to any such post shall be deemed to be a member of that service unless he is already a member of any other Central Civil Service of the same class."
13.
A conjoint reading of the aforementioned provisions shows that there are express provisions excluding certain categories of employees from the purview of the Tribunals set up by 1985 Act.
It excludes the members of the Armed Forces of the Union of India, any officer or servant of the Supreme Court or any of the High Court or the Courts subordinate thereto and also a person appointed to secretariat staff of either of the Houses of Parliament or the State Legislative Assembly.
However, Section 3(q) read with Section 14 of the Act would show the area of jurisdiction to be exercised by the Tribunal apart from all matters concerning recruitment to all India Service or to any other civil service of the Union of India, all service matters concerning All India Services who are discharging their duties in connection with the affairs of the Union under the control of the Government of India are within the domain of the Tribunal.
According to clause (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 14 of the Act, all service matters concerning the affairs of the Union of India in respect of a person appointed to any service or post referred to in clause (b) of Section 1 of the Act are within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
The expression `service matters' has further been defined in clause (q) of Section 3 of the Act to include the matters concerning remuneration, allowances, pension and other retiral benefits.
A reference to Appendix 14 to the Fundamental and Supplementary Rules would show that the Auditor General of India is Head of the Department under Item No. 36 which figures under sub- heading Finance Department.
14.
In accordance with Rules 2 to 7 of 1965 Rules, the classification of various posts has also been given.
According to Rule 7 of 1965 Rules, the Central Civil Post of any class if not included in any other Central Civil Service like All India Service, then the same shall be deemed to be included in the General Central Civil Service of the corresponding class and the Government servant appointed to any such post is to be considered as a member of that service unless he is already a member of any other Central Civil Service of the same class.
In this regard, reference is necessary to the schedule appended to 1988 Rules.
Column 3 of 1988 Rules classified the service of a Senior Accountant as General Central Service Group `C' Non-gazetted ministerial.
It is further appropriate to mention that according to the Manual of Standing Orders Volume I issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General, recruitment to the Indian Audit and Accounts Service is made by the Central Government by holding a competitive examination by the UPSC or by promotion after consultation with the UPSC.
All the aforementioned provisions would show that the petitioner was holding the post of Accounts Officer with respondent 2 and was discharging his duty with the affairs of Union of India.
The dispute raised by him has to be held to be concerning service matters as it pertains to grant of pro-rata pension and other retiral benefits within the meaning of Section 14 read with Section 3(q) of the Act.
Therefore, ordinarily such an employee has to invoke the remedy available under Section 19 of the Act.
No writ by such an employee would be competent under Article 226 of the Constitution  15.
The question then arises is whether the petitioner should be relegated to a remedy provided by Section 19 of the Act.
The detail facts of this case show that the petitioner has already succeeded in Civil Writ Petition No. 8041 of 1993 which culminated in the passing of the order by the Lok Adalat on 15112000, although the Lok Adalat has only awarded him interest at the rate of 12% by following the judgment of the Supreme Court in TS Thiruvengadam's case (supra).
Thereafter, the respondents have filed a review petition relying upon the provisions of Rule 37 of the 1972 Rules and the judgment of the Supreme Court in VR Chadha's case (supra) which was dismissed as withdrawn on 972001.
Still further, Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001 was filed against the order dated 15112000 passed by the Lok Adalat by placing reliance on Rule 37 of 1972 Rules which was dismissed on 22102001 by a Division Bench of this Court.
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of this case, it would not be proper and conducive to relegate the petitioner to the remedy provided by the Act.
16.
Moreover, relegating the petitioner to the Tribunal would result into an anomalous situation because the Tribunal is subject to the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution as has been held by the Supreme Court in L Chandra Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1997(2) SCT 423 (SC) : (1997) 3 SCC 261.
Therefore, it would not be possible for the Tribunal to make any observation in respect of the order passed by a Division Bench while dismissing Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001 on 22102001 and upholding the award passed by the Lok Adalat on 15112000.
It would, therefore, be improper to relegate the petitioner to the remedy under Section 19 of the Act.
Still further, the petition has already been admitted and after admission the objection with regard to alternative remedy is considerably diluted.
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances, the writ petition is held to be maintainable.
17.
The question whether Rule 37 of 1972 Rules would apply to the facts of the present case and the ratio of the judgment in VR Chadha's case (supra) interpreting Rule 37 would govern the issue raised, would pail into insignificance because these questions are deemed to have already been considered by the Division Bench that has passed the order in Civil Writ Petition No. 16753 of 2001.
The same question could not be made the basis once again for passing the impugned order on 24.2.2002/432003 after issuing a show cause notice to the petitioner.
It would no longer lie in the domain of the administrative authority to dilate upon the matters which have already been considered by the Division Bench.
It would also result into nullifying the effect of the order of the Lok Adalat which is considered to be a decree between the parties by virtue of Section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
If such a procedure is permitted to be followed, then the Government would succeed in nullifying the decree of a Court.
Such a course would be impermissible under the well established principle of `Rule of law as well as separation of powers'.
Therefore, the impugned order Annexure P-27 is liable to be quashed.
18.
On merits, the case could be examined on the basis of Rules 26 and 37 of the Pension Rules and the Government decisions taken under Rule 26.
The aforementioned rules and the Government decisions read as under :-  "Rules 26(2) and 37(1) of the Rules 26.
Forfeiture of service on resignation - (1) xx xx xx (2) A resignation shall not entail forfeiture of past service if it has been submitted to take up, with proper permission, another appointment, whether temporary or permanent, under the Government where service qualifies.
xx xx xx  37.
Pension on absorption in or under a corporation, company or body - (1) A Government servant who has been permitted to be absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government or in or under a Body controlled or financed by the Central Government or a State Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service from the date of such absorption and subject to sub-rule (3) he shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits which he may have elected, or deemed to have elected, and from such date as may be determined, in accordance with the orders of the Central Government applicable to him.
Explanation.
- Date of absorption shall be - (i) in case a Government employee joins a corporation or company or body on immediate absorption basis, the date on which he actually joins that corporation or company or body; (ii) in case a Government employee initially joins a corporation or company or body on foreign service terms by retaining a lien under the Government, the date from which his unqualified resignation is accepted by the Government.
x x x x x x x x x x x Paragraphs 2(8) and (3) of the Government of India's decision (2) Procedure to be followed in accepting resignation from service - Instructions issued from time to time on resignation have now been consolidated for facility of reference and guidance of all the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.
xx xx xx 8.
Release of Government servants for appointment in Central Public Enterprises.
- A Government servant who has been selected for a post in a Central Public Enterprise/Central Autonomous Body may be released only after obtaining and accepting his resignation from the Government service.
Resignation from Government service with a view to secure employment in a Central Public Enterprise with proper permission will not entail forfeiture of the service for the purpose of retirement/terminal benefits.
In such cases, the Government servant concerned shall be deemed to have retired from service from the date of such resignation and shall be eligible to receive all retirement/terminal benefits as admissible under the relevant rules applicable to him in his parent organisation.
xx xx xx (3) Procedure to be followed when benefit of past service is allowed.
- Under Rule 26(2) of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, resignation of an appointment to take up, with proper permission, another appointment, whether permanent or temporary, service in which counts in full or in part, is not resignation from public service.
A question has been raised whether in such cases a separate sanction should be issued indicating that resignation has been accepted under the above provisions, in order to enable the Accounts Officer to regulate the consequential benefits in the matter of pay fixation, carry forward of leave, pension, etc.
The matter has been considered in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General and it has been decided that in cases of the above type the order accepting the resignation should clearly indicate that the employee is resigning to join another appointment with proper permission and that the benefit under Rule 26(2) will be admissible to him.
The contents of the above order should also be noted in the service books of the individuals concerned under proper attestation.
The issue of any separate sanction has not been considered necessary.
An entry may be made in the service book of the Government servant concerned under proper attention as laid down above in past cases also where it has been decided to allow the benefits of Rule 26(2)."
A conjoint reading of Rule 26(2) and Rule 37 of the Pension Rules would show that the principle of `forfeiture' cannot be applied in case of resignation by a government servant if the resignation is submitted to take up with proper permission x x x another appointment whether temporary or permanent under the Government where service qualifies for pension.
Under Rule 37, a government servant who has been permitted to be absorbed in service of a Central Government, public undertaking like ONGC in public interest be deemed to have retired from service from the date of such absorption.
Such an employee is eligible to receive retiral benefits in accordance with the orders of the Government applicable to him.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was permitted to be absorbed in ONGC after permission was granted and ONGC is a governmental agency, financed, controlled and run by it.
Reliance can also be placed on the memorandum dated 1661967 which has been discussed in the case of TS Thiruvengadam (supra).
The petitioner having retired on 31.3.1990 although absorbed in ONGC in 1965 would be entitled to the benefit of memorandum dated 1661967 which reads as under :-  "(i) A permanent government servant with not less than 10 years qualifying service on absorption in public undertaking was eligible for pro- rata pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity based on the length of his qualifying service under government till the date of absorption.
The pension was to be calculated on the basis of average emoluments immediately before absorption.
(ii) The pro-rata pension, gratuity, etc. admissible in respect of the service rendered under the Government was disbursable only from the date the government servant would have normally superannuated had he continued in service."
According to the aforementioned memorandum, the terms of the memorandum were to apply only to those employees who were absorbed on or after 1661967.
The petitioner having been absorbed in 1965 has been denied the benefit in similar way as was denied to Shri TS Thiruvengadam who succeeded before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court declared that the action in restricting the benefit of the memorandum dated 1661967 only to those who were absorbed after 1661967 goes contrary to Rule 37 of the Pension Rules.
The observations of their Lordships in TS Thiruvengadam's case (supra) read as under :-  ".....It is no doubt correct that the retirement benefits envisaged under Rule 37 are to be determined in accordance with the Government orders but the plain language of the Rule does not permit any classification while granting the retirement benefits.
When the Rule specifically provides that all the persons who fulfil the pre-conditions prescribed therein shall be deemed to have retired from Government service from the date of absorption and shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits then the Government while granting benefits cannot deny the same to some of them on the basis of arbitrary classification.
All those persons who fulfil the condition under Rule 37 are a class by themselves and no discrimination can be permitted within the said class.
The Government action in restricting the benefit under the revised Memorandum dated June 16, 1967 only to those who are absorbed after the date goes contrary to the Rule and cannot be sustained."
19.
In view of the above, I am of the considered view that the petitioner who has been absorbed in 1965 in a Central Government organisation like ONGC cannot be denied the retiral benefits as per Rule 37 of the Pension Rules read with Memorandum dated 1661967.
Therefore, the judgment of the Supreme Court in TS Thiruvengadam's case (supra) is fully applicable and the petitioner is entitled to pro-rata pension.
The other judgments in the cases of VR Chadha (supra) and KN Gupta (supra) have no application to the facts of the present case.
20.
For the reasons recorded above, the petition is allowed with costs of Rs. 10,000/-.
Order dated 432003 Annexure P-27 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to release the pension of the petitioner along with recovery, if any, effected with interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.