Swatanter Kumar, J - The Governing Body of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, hereinafter referred to as the Institute, in its 102nd Meeting held on 12122002 at Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi, took the following decisions while dealing with the recommendations of the Selection Committee for appointment to the posts, amongst others, for Additional Professors in the departments of ENT, Cardiothracic and Vascular Surgery and Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation :-  "The 102nd meeting of the Governing Body of the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh was held on 12 December, 2002 at 12.00 Noon in the Committee Room, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
The following persons attended the meeting :- 1.
Shri Shatrughan Sinha, Hon'ble President, PGIMER.
2.
Shri Suresh Chandel, MP, Member.
3.
Dr. SP Agarwal, Member.
4.
Sh. Rakesh Behari, Member.
5.
Prof. KN Pathak, Member.
6.
Prof. ON Nagi, Member.
7.
Sh. YS Ratra, Member.
8.
Ms. Neeru Nanda, Member.
9.
Prof. MG Muthukumarsamy, Member.
10.
Prof. Gurjeevan Grewal, Member.
11.
Prof. GK Khuller, Member.
12.
Prof. SK Sharma, Member-Secretary.
Sh. SK Naik, Prof. Vimla Issac, Shri AN Mathur, Smt. Rajinder Bhattacharya could not attend the meeting.
Sh. BP Sharma, Joint Secretary, Govt. of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ms. Meeta Rajivlochan, Deputy Director (Admn.)
and Dr. D Behera, Liaison Officer, PGIMER, Chandigarh attended the meeting as special invitees.
Director PGI welcomed two new members of the Governing Body, namely, Prof. Gurjeevan Grewal and Prof. GK Khuller.
Item No. 4 Consideration of the Minutes of the meeting of the Standing Selection Committee held from 17th to 20th June, 2002 for making selections to various faculty posts.
Sh. YS Ratra, Chief Secretary, Punjab stated that three posts in the departments of ENT, Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery and Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation had been advertised in the grade of Professor but the Selection Committee had recommended that these posts be filled up at the level of Additional Professor.
He desired to know why had this been done when the post of Additional Professor was a promotional post which was filled by a Departmental Promotion Committee.
The Director PGI explained that the members of the Departmental Promotion Committee and the Standing Selection Committee were one and the same and in the past too Selection Committees in PGIMER had been recommending downgradation or upgradation of posts.
However, Mr. Ratra felt that irrespective of the fact that the members of both DPC and Standing Selection Committee were the same, Additional Professor was a purely promotional post and the post of Professor was a purely promotional post and the post of Professor was filled by direct recruitment and the two were different.
Shri BP Sharma also said that the two posts were different and the post of Professor should not be filled up at Additional Professor level.
The Director PGI pointed out that there was provision of lateral entry at the level of Associate Professor if the Institute felt that it was desirable to do so.
Dr. Beheri pointed out that the requirement of experience for a post of Professor was 14 years while that for Additional Professor was 8 years and had the post been advertised as Additional Professor, more candidates would have applied for the same.
The Governing Body decided that while in the past the Selection Committee had been recommending downgradation of posts, this practice should be discontinued and the three posts of Professor in the departments of ENT, Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery and Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation be readvertised immediately and filled up in the grade of Professor."
2.
The petitioner, Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta, Associate Professor, Department of ENT in the Institute, challenges the correctness, validity and propriety of the above decision of the Governing Body in the present writ petition.
However, in the present writ petition, the Court is concerned with the challenge to the post of Professor/Additional Professor, ENT Department in the Institute.
The petitioner challenges the above decision of the Governing Body on the following grounds :-  (i) Name of the petitioner was recommended for the post of Professor in the Department of ENT and he was entitled to be so appointed by the Governing Body; (ii) The minutes of the Selection Committee have been manipulated to the disadvantage of the petitioner and as such the decision of the Governing Body, founded on the manipulated minutes is liable to be set aside; (iii) The authorities including the Director of the Institute has acted with arbitrariness and with intention to help ineligible persons to become eligible, so that they could be appointed to the post of Professor; (iv) The cumulative effect of the action of the respondents, in the facts and circumstances of the case and resultant denial of appointment to the petitioner, offends and violates the "Wednesbury's Principle" as declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The essence of the above submissions is a plain challenge to the procedure adopted by the Institute as well as the manner in which the respondents have attempted to render the decision making process arbitrary and opposed to rules of the Institute.
3.
The Institute issued Advertisement No. 9 in September, 2001 inviting applications in the prescribed form from the eligible persons for different specialities and super-specialisation including one post of Professor, ENT (Lien/Leave Vacancy).
The essential and desirable qualifications for the respective posts were specified in the advertisement itself.
The petitioner, who had been appointed to the post of Associate Professor in the Department of ENT on 171999, being eligible, also applied for this post in response to the advertisement along with other private respondents.
4.
On 1762002 all the three applicants for the post of Professor of ENT Lien/Leave Vacancy had appeared before the experts to comment upon the expertise of the candidates.
On the same date and in fact immediately thereafter the Selection Committee had met and recommended the name of the petitioner to the post of Additional Professor.
It will be appropriate at this stage itself to refer to the minutes of the Selection Committee in relation to the speciality of ENT, as under :-  "Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta was selected as Additional Professor (as recommended by the experts in view of his being Associate Professor of less than 3 years duration).
The Selection Committee recommends downgrading the post to Additional Professor."
The above decision of the Selection Committee was considered on 12122002 as afore noticed and took the decision to re-advertise the post.
The petitioner made a representation to the Director of the Institute as well as subsequently on 26122002 to the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare stating that Dr. Panda was not eligible but was still permitted to appear for the post of Professor.
In his later representation he also requested that the entire selection process to the post of Professor ENT should be reviewed.
One of the members of the Governing Body of the Institute Mr Suresh Chandel, who was also a Member of Parliament at the relevant time, vide his letter dated 612003, wrote to the Minister stating that the expert recommendations were not followed due to illegal selection of some doctors and the entire selection process was cancelled and posts re-advertised.
He forwarded the representation of the petitioner for favourable consideration.
5.
In furtherance to the decision by the Governing Body in its meeting dated 12122002, fresh advertisement being Advertisement No. 3 of 2003, was issued inviting applications for the post of Professor ENT by 262003.
Aggrieved in the above circumstances the petitioner has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying that the proceedings and minutes of the Governing Body dated 12122002 as well the manipulated minutes of the Selection Committee, be quashed.
He further prays for issuance of a direction to the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment of the post of Professor in the Department of ENT on the basis of the Advertisement No. 9 of 2001 for which the petitioner had applied.
Lastly he prayed that only those candidates should be considered who were eligible as on 1762002 and were possessed of 14 years research/teaching experience in a recognised institution in ENT after obtaining Master's degree.
6.
After notice of the writ petition was issued to the respondents, the Institute has filed a detailed reply denying the allegations of arbitrariness and mala fide.
The Institute defends its action of re-advertising the posts.
The competence of the Selection Committee to down-grade the post has also been challenged in the reply filed.
The allegations with regard to minutes of the Selection Committee being manipulated have specifically been denied.
According to the official respondents, when the recommendations of the Standing Selection Committee were placed before the Governing Body, some objections were raised by the Members of the Governing Body whereby it was felt that post of Additional Professor was a promotional post which should have been filled up by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
It was felt that the requirement of experience for the post of Professor was 14 years while for the Additional Professor was 8 years and had the post been advertised as Additional Professor, more candidates would have been found eligible for the same and there was bound to be fairer competition.
The decision of the Governing Body in directing re-advertisement of the posts is, thus, stated to be free from any informity.
According to these respondents at the time of appointment to the post of Professor, respondent No. 3 was having 18 years of teaching experience after obtaining the degree of M.Ch.
whereas the requirement is only 12 years of teaching/research experience.
It is denied that any of the other respondents were ineligible for being considered for the said post.
The representation of the petitioner, which was forwarded to the Health Minister through Shri Suresh Chandel was duly considered by the Ministry Comments of the Institute were also invited and while replying to the said letter, vide letter dated 832003, the Director of the Institute specifically informed the Ministry the decision of the Governing Body, which read as under :-  "The Governing Body decided that while in the past the Selection Committee had been recommending down-gradation of posts, this practice should be discontinued and the three posts of Professor in the departments of ENT, Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery and Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation be readvertised immediately and filled up in the grade of Professor."
7.
Respondents No. 4 and 5 filed an independent written statement wherein they contended that they were fully eligible and are more meritorious than the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4 Dr. Naresh Panda joined as Assistant Professor in the year 1990 on ad hoc basis and his services were regularised in 1992, while Dr. Vikas Nehra joined in 1988.
In between he went abroad and rejoined in 1993 as a regular Assistant Professor.
The petitioner is stated to have joined the Institute in 1993 and his services were regularised in 1995.
Thus, the respondents claim to have international publications of greater importance and number in their favour than the petitioner.
8.
We must notice that the stand taken on behalf of the Institute lacked clarity and we had to make different orders from time to time to seek the required clarity in the stand of the Institute.
The confusion created in the methodology adopted, recording of minutes of the Experts Committee.
Selection Committee and even the Governing Body, have been questioned, which itself shows the extent of errors being committed in the administration and procedure being adopted for appointment to the posts of even Professors in the Institute.
It is a matter of regret and we feel compelled to observe that the Institute must advert its attention of this aspect of the selection process and ensure that no faults of the present kind are committed and there is fairness, transparency and judicious application of mind in making appointments to the highest cadre of the Institute i.e. to the posts of Professors.
Countered with the allegations and counter-allegations made by the parties to the present lis, we were compelled to pass an order in furtherance to which Deputy Director, Administration, of the Institute, had appeared in Court and made statement on the basis of the record which was recorded by us in our order dated 1722004 and reads as under :-  "(i) As per the records available, the name of the petitioner was recommended by the experts for the post of Professor.
(ii) This was treated to be recommendations for Additional Professor by the Selection Committee, who also recommended that the post should be down-graded to the post of Additional Professor.
(iii) The agenda was placed before the Governing Body, who took a decision not to appoint the petitioner and directed the post of Professor E.N.T.
to be re- advertised.
(iv) The opinion of the experts was never circulated to the members of the Governing Body.
(v) The minutes of the Selection Committee were not circulated with the agenda, however, were produced by the Director during the course of the meeting of the Governing Body."
Despite the above order, the Director of the Institute also appeared in Court and filed an additional affidavit clarifying the doubts created by what had been stated by the Deputy Director Administration in Court.
In terms of the said affidavit, the petitioner was considered along with other two eligible persons by the Experts Committee who also subsequently participated in the Selection Committee and the minutes of the Selection Committee were correctly recorded.
There was no manipulation in the minutes.
They have been signed by all the members of the Selection Committee.
The factum of the experts recommending the petitioner for the post of Additional Professor was recorded as the Experts themselves were sitting in the Selection Committee.
Of course, such minutes were not signed by them.
To some extent the variation in the pleadings, records and version of these two highly placed persons in the Institute still persists and the Court is compelled to determine the correctness or otherwise of the same.
At this stage, appropriately reference can be made to the minutes of the Experts Committee.
Three applicants who had appeared before the Committee were graded as under by the Experts Committee :-  Sr. No. Name of the Candidate Overall grading Fit or unfit 1.
Dr. Gupta, Ashok Kumar Very good.
Fit 2.
Dr. Nehru, Vikas Inder Nath Average.
Unfit.
3.
Dr. Pannda, Naresh Kumar Good.
Fit.
However, when the matter appears to have come up before the Selection Committee, it was recorded that petitioner had been recommended for the post of Additional Professor.
This variation apparent on the record, according to the petitioner, is a manipulation, while according to the respondents, it is not a manipulation and in fact the members of the Experts Committee were present during the proceedings of the Selection Committee and had agreed to the down-grading of the post to the one of Additional Professor and appointment of the petitioner to that post.
This certainly is a material variation which is capable of two views and an un-necessary controversy has been raised in this regard.
The Court would go by the record maintained by the Institute in normal course of its business.
The Selection Committee as well as the Governing Body constitutes of reputed persons who are Experts in their respective fields.
The minutes of the Selection Committee are signed by all the eight members of the Committee.
Even in his representation, Annexure P/5 to the writ petition, which the petitioner submitted to the Minister on 14.4.2003, it was not his averment that the minutes have been tampered or manipulated as now alleged in the petition.
The safest course of action to be adopted by the Court in such circumstances, would be to proceed with the matter on the basis of the record produced before the Court.
The record seen in the light of the statement made by the Deputy Director Administration of the Institute and the affidavit of the Director leads to one conclusion alone that the decision of the Governing Body is neither arbitrary nor is unjustifiable.
9.
Serious doubts have been created in the entire process of selection adopted by the Institute for appointment of the post of Professor ENT (Lien/Leave vacancy).
The case of the petitioner himself that ineligible persons have been considered as eligible, though disputed by the respondents, the minutes of the Experts Committee and the Selection Committee, have been manipulated and the Governing Body has failed to take note of the records correctly, which has further vitiated the entire process of selection.
Even, if, for the sake of arguments, the case of the petitioner is assumed to be having some merit, the only reasonable conclusion that can be arrived at is to quash the procedure of selection itself and direct selection afresh in accordance with law, rules and proper progress.
10.
Reliance by the petitioner on Wednesbury's Principle, of course, to some extent, would be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case.
The authorities have acted unreasonably in not maintaining appropriate record and no reasonable, much less a plausible explanation, has been rendered by the respondents as to why the posts were down-graded particularly when down- grading of the post would certainly attract the plea of discrimination much larger from the other eligible candidates.
Once reasonableness is exhibited in the action of the respondents and authority is exercised in a manner opposed to public policy and relevant considerations which ought to weigh with the authorities while making such selections have been ignored, it would by itself introduce the element of unfairness in administrative action, which is impermissible.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dr. Sudha Suri v. Union of India and others, 2002(2) SCT 63 (P&H) : 2003(1) SLR 679, held as under :-  "The cumulative effect of the above discussion is that action of the respondent-authorities lacks fairness and the element of unreasonableness is traceable in various facets of the process of appointment to the post of Dean of the Institute.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Badri Nath v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others, 2000(4) SCT 832 (SC) : (2000) 8 Supreme Court Cases 395, applied the Wednesbury's principle to the facts of that case and held as under :- "Unless there is a strong case for applying the Wednesbury doctrine or there are mala fides, Courts and Tribunals cannot interfere with assessments made by Departmental Promotion Committees in regard to merit or fitness for promotion.
But in rare cases, if the assessment is either proved to be mala fide or is found based on inadmissible or irrelevant or insignificant and trivial material and if an attitude of ignoring or not giving weight to the positive aspects of one's career is strongly displayed, or if the inferences drawn are such that no reasonable person can reach such conclusions, or if there is illegality attached to the decision, then the powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution are not foreclosed."
Their Lordships while further elaborating the applicability of this principle also stated that even if favourable aspects of career of a candidate are dealt with casually and without being given due importance and undue over-emphasis is given to unfavourable aspect of the matter, which itself was old enough, in that event, the case would squarely offend the Wednesbury's principle even in its limited dimensions."
11.
The next question, that is required to be considered by the Court is whether the practice of down-grading adopted by the Selection Committee is proper exercise of power by the said authority ?
This facet of the case need not detain us any longer as the appointing and controlling authority i.e. the Governing Body has already decided that such practice of down-grading the posts by the Selection Committee is not fair and, thus, should be discontinued and directed the post to re-advertise.
This decision of the Governing Body apparently appears to be in consonance with the basic rule of law.
12.
During the course of hearing, all the learned counsel appearing for the parties conceded that there was no provision in the Act called as The Post- Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Act, 1966 and the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Rules, 1967, which empowers specifically the Selection Committee and even the Governing Body for that matter to down-grade the posts which had not been advertised in accordance with rules.
The reasoning given by the Governing Body in its resolution dated 12122002 is in consonance with the spirit of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Once the post of Professor was advertised, obviously the persons who are eligible for that post, could apply and the persons who otherwise may be eligible for appointment to the post of Associate Professor would, obviously not apply and, thus, there would be denial of equal opportunity in relation to employment by the Institute.
Such practice has rightly been stopped by the Governing Body and we do express our pious hope that such policy shall continue in larger public interest, spirit behind the constitutional mandate and to provide a fairer competition to the posts of Professors and/or Associate Professors in future.
13.
Furthermore, the concept of down-grading, in absence of specific law in support thereof, would be an act of discrimination.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of K Shekar v. Indiramma and others, 2002(2) S.C.T.
381 : AIR 2002 Supreme Court 1230, held as under :-  "The plea of NIMHANS that since the post of Lecturer was lower than as Assistant Professor's, it was not necessary to be advertised, if accepted, would amount to a violation of Articles 14 and 16.
The absence of an advertisement necessarily deprived persons who could have applied for the post, of the opportunity of applying for the post.
The Clause in the advertisement which enabled the Section Committee to recommend the candidate for a lower post if the candidate was not found suitable to fill the post applied for, did not give NIMHANS the power to appoint the recommended candidate against an unadvertised post.
The clause, far from allowing NIMHANS the power to dispense with the advertisement of any lower post as a pre-condition to appointment, indicates that only eligible persons could be considered for selection.
Appellant's application clearly showed that he did not fulfil the requisite eligibility criteria for the post he had applied for, because he lacked any post-doctorate experience at all.
The appellant should not have been called for interview.
The power in the Selection Committee to relax the eligibility criteria cannot be read as including the power to do away with the criteria altogether."
The power exercisable by a Selection Committee or such body has to be strictly in adherence to the power vested in them under the rules.
In the case of State of Andhra Pradesh and another v. Saadanandam and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 2060, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Selection Committee do not have the jurisdiction to lay down the criteria for selection unless they are authorised specially in that regard by the Rules framed under Article 309.
Even in the case of Ramachandra Iyer and others v. Union of India and others, 1984(2) SCR 200, it was held that the Selection Committee has no inherent jurisdiction to lay down the norms for selection and such power cannot be assumed and it has to be provided explicitly.
14.
We may also note here that the contention of the petitioner is that the minutes of the Selection Committee dated 1762002 were manipulated to the disadvantage of the petitioner.
It was further alleged that the remarks, "in view of his being Associate Professor of less than 3 years duration," have been introduced later and in any case are uncalled for and contrary to rules.
It was conceded on behalf of the Institute as well as the other respondents that there is again no provision in the rules and/or regulations controlling the appointment to the post of Professor which requires said experience as Associate Professor in the speciality in question.
Once this is constituted, there is hardly any occasion for us to deal with this contention in any detail.
In these circumstances the alleged recommendation of the petitioner for the post of Professor by the Expert Committee would hardly vest any right, much less a legal right, in the petitioner to make a claim to either of the posts i.e.
Professor and/or Associate Professor.
It is a settled canon of law that a right does not arise out of a wrong.
Who has done the wrong looses its significance when the wrong has the effect of vitiating the entire process of selection.
Neither the Expert Committee nor the Selection Committee has any authority to make appointment to either of these posts.
Thus, the petitioner could hardly raise a claim for appointment to any of the posts.
Mere recommendation gives no right.
Even if the petitioner would have legitimate expectancy, the same is ex defectu juris.
15.
Again, half-heartedly it was suggested that such a manner was also being sometimes adopted as a matter of practice by the Institute bodies.
We are unable to grant our approval for such an arbitrary action.
The practice in regard to both the above noted issues cannot be said to be a good practice or a practice in public interest.
For a practice to be good and appropriate so as to be accepted in law as a good practice, such practice should be in consonance with the statutory provisions, should not be opposed to public policy and must necessarily be uniformly followed to achieve the object of equality and fairness.
These two practices apparently and admittedly do not satisfy the prescribed ingredients and, therefore, must essentially be deprecated.
A good practice of the past alone can provide good guidance for future.
Reference can be made to the case of Dr. Sudha Suri v. Union of India and others, 2002(1) SLR 665.
16.
Challenging the correctness of the minutes of the Selection Committee, the petitioner has made various allegations and also relied upon the letter written by Shri Suresh Chandel MP, member of the Selection Committee and the Governing Body, Annexure P/6 to the writ petition.
We have already noticed that the minutes of the Selection Committee have been signed by all the members including Mr. Chandel himself.
Mr. Chandel was a member of the Governing Body, still nothing appears from the record that he had even mentioned it to the members of the Governing Body that minutes were not correctly recorded and there were additions in the minutes or they were contrary to the minutes of the Experts Committee.
Absence of such mentioning on the record and Mr. Chandel himself being member of both the bodies and reading in conjunction therewith the contents of Annexure P/6, the letter by him, wherein such allegations are conspicuous by their very absence, we are not prepared to accept the contention of the petitioner.
We also do not appreciate the practice of the members of the Selection Committee or the Governing Body writing letters indiscriminately and in a routine manner.
Expression of such a view would be fully in consonance with the law enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of The Chancellor and another v. Dr. Bijayananda Kar and others, 1994(1) SCT 524 (SC) : (1994) 1 SCC 169, where commenting upon the functioning of the Selection Committee, the Court held as under :-  "The function of the Selection Committee comes to an end when the proceedings are drawn.
Every member of the Selection Committee has a right to give his fair opinion in respect of each candidate.
Normally, it would not be considered a bona fide act on the part of a member of the Selection Committee to say, after the selection is over and he has signed the proceedings, that he overlooked certain qualifications in respect of a candidate.
The sanctity of the process of selection has to be maintained.
It would be travesty of the selection process if the candidates are encouraged to meet members of the Selection Committee after the selection is over and to obtain letters from them attempting to renege the selection made."
17.
Admittedly, the petitioner was eligible for appointment to the post of Professor ENT, but still the Court has to consider what relief in terms of the prayer of the petitioner or even otherwise can be granted to him.
Even if the case of the petitioner is taken to be at its highest, he was recommended for the post of Professor as `Good' by the Experts Committee.
The Selection Committee recommended his appointment for the post of Associate Professor which was declined by the Governing Body.
We have already discussed that the appointment was declined to the petitioner for valid and good reasons.
Furthermore, it is a settled principle of law that a mere recommendation or even a selection by itself vests no right in the applicant and it is not necessary that in every such case, the Court will issue a mandamus directing the Government or other appropriate body to appoint the selected candidate.
In the present case the petitioner has not been selected for appointment by the appointing authority.
In fact the appointing authority has taken a contrary view.
Recommendation by a recommendatory authority does not vest any right, much less an indefeasible legal right in an applicant to be considered for appointment to the advertised posts.
This view has been taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court consistently till recent times in the cases of The State of Haryana v. Subash Chander Marwaha and ors., 1973(2) SLR 137; Jatinder Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1850 and Mani Subrat Jain etc. etc. v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1977 Supreme Court 276.
Under Section 13 of the Act, the Institute has functions to appoint persons to various posts including to the post of professorship.
The said authority is to be exercised in accordance with the regulations.
Power to make regulation in this behalf is vested in the Institute Authority under Section 32(k).
Further Rule 5 of the Rules indicates that method of recruitment, age limit, educational qualifications and other matters relating to appointment of various posts to the Institute in the manner as provided under the Regulations Regulation 32 of the Regulations read with Regulation 48 would control such appointments.
There is no specific provision referred by any of the counsel appearing before us to show how appointments are to be made to these posts.
It is not disputed that the post of Associate Professor/Professor is selection post and that is why the Selection Committee is constituted for recommending the names to the Governing Body for appointment to the said post.
Once a post is treated as a selection post, greater is the extent of responsibility upon the employer to adhere to the principle of merit and fairness.
18.
This is a case which viewed from the point of the petitioner and/or the respondents would essentially lead to the same conclusion that the view taken by the Governing Body does not call for any interference.
The Court if accepts the allegations of the petitioner as correct, even then the result would be the same as the process of selection would stand vitiated.
The only proper remedy would be to quash the process of selection and direct that the posts be re-advertised and filled up in accordance with law.
19.
During the course of hearing the petitioner also filed Civil Misc. No. 4608 of 2004 under Order 1 Rule 10 of Code of Civil Procedure for impleading two Experts namely, Prof. RC Deka, Head of Department of ENT, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and Prof. AK Gupta, Head of Department (ENT) and Principal, ENT, Medical College Udaipur, as respondents in the petition.
It was argued that keeping in view the different affidavits filed on behalf of the Institute and the averments of the petitioner that there has been manipulation in the minutes of the Selection Committee, it was necessary to add these two persons as respondents in the writ petition.
20.
This application was opposed by the non-applicants.
This application of the petitioner is misconceived and is hardly tenable in law.
The members of the Experts Committee cannot be stated to be necessary or even proper parties for determination of the controversies involved in the present writ petition.
Persons can tell lies but the documents do not.
The records of the Institute produced before us can be safely relied upon by the Court and it will, in any case, serve no useful purpose if rival contentions in relation to this aspect of the case are to be adjudicated upon by the Court.
It would not achieve any object and as such would be entirely exercise in futility.
Even if we allow this application, then we would have to implead all the eight members of the Selection Committee and then to find out whether any averments made by these two Experts are contrary to the records of the Selection Committee or not.
It is more likely that it would not put an end to the controversy but would be beginning of another unreasonable and un-necessary controversy.
The addition of the named parties or otherwise would not in any way materially effect the conclusions of the Court.
The Court has already discussed the case in the alternative as well and has arrived at the same findings which were otherwise recorded.
We find this application as misconceived and it is not necessary for us to add these Expert Committee Members as respondents in the writ petition.
Resultantly, we dismiss this application.
Having dismissed the above application for impleadment filed by the petitioner, we now revert back to the matters in issue with regard to maintenance of records.
The petitioner challenges the minutes of the Selection Committee as manipulated ones.
The Director by way of affidavit has attempted to explain the lacunae appearing in the meetings of Experts Committee and the Selection Committee.
The Deputy Director of the Institute has attempted to put forward even a different version than the one put forward by the petitioner and respondent No. 3 respectively.
Could the respondents avoid this un- necessary controversy ?
The answer to this question has to be in the affirmative.
The element of fairness and transparency in selection to such posts would be sine qua non to avoidance of judicial cataclysm.
Such transparency and fairness has to be reflected in the records maintained by the Institute in the normal course of its business.
What may appears to be trivial may cause serious consequences and disarray.
The tenets of prudent administration would require the authorities to maintain proper records of various stages involved in the process of selection.
The minutes of the Experts Committee if it operates independent of the Selection Committee, should be maintained separately and essentially must form part of the minutes which are placed before the Selection Committee for its consideration and recommendation to the Governing Body.
On the other hand, if the Experts Committee is an integral part of the Selection Committee which interviews the candidates in their presence, we see no reason why separate minutes of the Selection Committee should be recorded.
It will be proper to record cumulative minutes of the Selection Committee in that event.
In either of the situations, it will help in achieving the object of fair selection and would cause least embarrassment to the concerned authorities involved in this process.
It shall be travesty of justice as well as of administrative prudence if the records are maintained by the Institute in the manner in which they have been maintained in the present case.
They shall certainly lead to violation of fundamental protection available to an applicant as well as offend the principle of equality.
We are hopeful that in future the Institute would endeavour its best to ensure avoidance of such re-occurrences.
22.
Administrative norms ought to be mutable so as to meet the demand of change in circumstances.
It is truly said, "What's lasting is not what resists time, but what wisely changes with it."
(Peter Muller).
We do not expect the Institute to have any fear of perfection because one can hardly achieve it as there is always a room for improvement but we certainly in no uncertain terms require the institute to look into its procedures and ensure proper maintenance of records, particularly minutes of its meetings, furthermore, where they relate to appointment to the post of Professors in the Institute.
This observation we are compelled to make as even in some reported cases it has come to the notice of the Court that the management of the Institute is lacking much behind to the prescribed standards of maintenance of records and the manner in which they ought to be dealt with for such appointments.
It is essential that the applicants for such high posts and even the public at large should have faith in fairness of the selection process.
Infirmity or ambiguities in the process of selection are bound to undermine the cause of fair selection, which the Institute must prevent in its own interest.
In view of our above discussion, we find no merit in this petition.
Same is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs, however, further with a direction to the respondents to hold fresh selection in terms of the decision of the Governing Body as expeditiously as possible.
Petition dismissed.