Surya Kant, J - The Petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India with a prayer to issue a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the notice of compulsory retirement dated April 15, 1987 (Annexure P-1) retiring him from service upon attaining the age of 55 years.
2.
The petitioner initially joined the Public Works (Electricity Branch) Department, Government of Punjab on a group D post as Laboratory Attendant on March 10, 1954.
He was promoted as Laboratory Assistant (Group C) on September 21, 1959.
On the re-organisation of the States of Punjab and Haryana, the Petitioner was allocated to the State of Haryana in November, 1966 and on constitution of the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board), his services were transferred to the afore-mentioned Board.
The petitioner was further promoted as Assistant Engineer (Group B) on October 31, 1971 and thereafter reached to the status of Class-I Service when he was promoted as Assistant Executive Engineer (Group A) on February 15, 1984.
It is the case of the petitioner that in his entire service career spanning over 33 years, he was conveyed only one "average" report for the year 1976-77 which contained adverse remarks that "he was an easy going officer who does not carry out the instructions of the senior."
Notwithstanding the spotless service career, studded with repeated promotions, complaints the petitioner, that he was served with a notice dated April 15, 1987 (Annexure P-1) informing him that in exercise of its power under Rule 3.26(d) of Punjab CSR Vol.
I, Part I read with Rule 532(c) of Punjab CSR Vol. II as applicable to the Haryana State Electricity Board, it was decided to retire him from the service of the Board in "public interest" and as such he was given a three months notice of retirement from service on expiry of which he shall stand retired from the service of the Board with effect from July 24, 1987.
The petitioner submitted an appeal by registered post on May 23, 1987 (Annexure P-2) before the Chairman of the Board against the afore-mentioned order, however, having received no response to the same, he has invoked the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court.
3.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of the Board.
The facts regarding more than one promotions earned by the petitioner to see rise in his career from Group-D employee to a Group-A officer, are not disputed.
So is the admitted position with regard to communication of one "average" report for the year 1976-77.
The impugned order of premature retirement, however, is sought to be defended on the premise that in terms of government policy dated August 16, 1983 (Annexure R-2), which has been adopted by the Board, an official/officer is required to possess at least 70% or more good or better annual confidential reports during the last 10 preceding years for his retention in service beyond the age of 55 years.
According to the Respondent, the petitioner had earned only 50% good reports in the last 10 preceding years, the details of which, as given in paragraph 4 of the written statement, are reproduced hereunder :-  S. No. Period Assessment Integrity Remarks 1.
2.6.76 to 31.3.77 Average -- Adverse remarks at CP-63 An easy going officer does not carry out the instructions of the senior.
2.
22777 to 31378 Good Honest 3.
1478 to 31379 Good Honest 4.
1479 to 31380 Average Honest 5.
1480 to 31.3.81 Average Good 6.
13.6.81 to 31.3.82 Good Honest 7.
1482 to 31.3.83 Above Average Honest 8 17.6.83 to 26.2.84 Average Not upto Not to be treated as adverse as per CP-114 9.
1484 to 31784 Average Honest 10.
1.8.84 to 31385 Average Honest 11.
1486 to 31787 Good Above Board Thus, according to the respondent, the petitioner having not earned 70% or more good or better annual confidential reports in 10 years preceding the date of attaining the age of 55 years, was rightly retired prematurely.
4.
I have heard Shri KK Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Naubat Singh Panwar, learned counsel for the Board and have perused the record.
5.
Shri Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner has made three-fold submissions.
According to him, the impugned order dated April 15, 1987 (Annexure P-1) is patently arbitrary and is an outcome of a colourable exercise of power for the reasons that - (i) the uncommunicated average reports could not have been taken into account to constitute the so-called adverse material against the petitioner for justifying his premature retirement; (ii) the average reports, if any, prior to the last promotion of the petitioner as Assistant Executive Engineer (group A), lost their sting and could not have been taken into account for retiring him prematurely as the afore-mentioned promotion was not granted to him merely on the basis of seniority, rather "merit" played a decisive role; and (iii) the petitioner, who earned repeated promotions and was served with only one adverse "average report" for the year 1976-77, could neither be termed as a dead-wood nor a sort of liability upon the employer and his honesty/integrity always remained above board, therefore, the impugned action cannot be termed in public interest.
Shri Jagia has placed reliance upon judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of S Ramachandra Raju v. State of Orissa, 1995(1) RSJ 18 : 1994(4) SCT 430 (SC) and a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ram Kishan v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SLR 452 : 1994(3) SCT 609 (P&H).
6.
On the other hand, Shri Panwar, learned counsel for the Board, contends that from the year 1976-77 onwards the petitioner has been found to be an average official for most of the years and merely because average reports were not communicated to him in terms of the prevailing policy, does not preclude the competent authority from taking such reports into consideration while deciding the case of the petitioner for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years.
According to Shri Panwar, the effect of adverse reports per-se is not wiped out or removed merely because the petitioner earned promotion even after such average reports.
Reliance has been placed upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Hari Krishan Sirohi v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(3) RSJ 140 : 2002(3) SCT 111 (P&H).
7.
The scope of judicial review in relation to an order of premature retirement has been well defined by the Apex Court in the case of Baikunth Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, 1992(2) SLR 2 : 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC), wherein their Lordships laid down the following principles :-  "(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The Government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more important to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If a government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference.
8.
Emphasising that the basic object of compulsory retirement is to weed out inefficient and corrupt persons, who cannot be otherwise removed from service for insufficient evidence, the principles laid down in Baikunth Nath Das's case (supra) were further expanded by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M Patel, 2001(3) SCC 314 : 2001(2) SCT 339 (SC), wherein it was held that :-  "(i) Whenever the services of a public servant are no longer useful to the general administration, the officer can be compulsorily retired for the sake of public interest.
(ii) Ordinarily, the order of compulsorily retirement is not to be treated as a punishment coming under Article 311 of the Constitution.
(iii) For better administration, it is necessary to chop off dead wood but the order of compulsorily retirement can be passed after having due regard to the entire service record of the officer.
(iv) Any adverse entries made in the confidential record shall be taken note of and be given due weightage in passing such order.
(v) Even uncommunicated entries in the confidential record can also be taken into consideration.
(vi) The order of compulsorily retirement shall not be passed as a short cut to avoid departmental enquiry when such course is more desirable.
(vii) If the officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the confidential record, that is a fact in favour of the officer.
(viii) Compulsory retirement shall not be imposed as a punitive measure."
On a combined reading of the afore-mentioned two judgments, it emerges that while considering the case of an employee for retention is service beyond the age of 50 years or 55 years, as the case may be, the entire service record should be taken into account with more emphasis on the record and performance during the later years.
Even the uncommunicated adverse reports can also be taken into account for this purpose.
However, if an official earns promotion(s) despite adverse entries made in the confidential reports, such adverse remarks lose their sting, more particularly, if the promotion earned is based upon merit and not merely on the basis of seniority.
Such factor also needs to be taken into account in favour of the concerned official.
9.
Applying these principles to the facts and circumstances of the present case, I find no merit in the first submission of Shri Jagia that uncommunicated average reports could not have been taken into account while considering the case of the petitioner for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years.
In fact, vide government instructions dated August 16, 1983 (Annexure R-2) only, it was decided that "average reports" should also be conveyed to the concerned official to enable him to represent against the same.
It is not disputed that prior to the afore-mentioned instructions, the average reports were not required to be communicated.
Thus, mere non- communication of "average reports" to the petitioner does not wipe out the effect of such reports against the petitioner.
10.
Coming to the second contention of Shri Jagia, it is not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondent that the petitioner having joined as a Class-IV employee, namely, as Laboratory Attendant on March 20, 1954 in the erstwhile State of Punjab, earned promotions one after the other, including the one as an Assistant Executive Engineer (Group A) on February 15, 1984.
It could also not be disputed by the respondent that these promotions were granted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and not merely on the strength of seniority.
From the details of annual confidential reports, as reproduced by the respondents in paragraph 4 average/above average reports relate to the period upto February, 1984.
Moreover, even according to the Board, the average report for the period from 17.6.1983 to 26.2.1984 is not to be treated as adverse report.
Further, in none of these reports, the honesty of the petitioner has been doubted even remotely as the column pertaining to "integrity" specifically stipulates that he has been an honest officer.
After the promotion of the petitioner to the Class-I post of Assistant Executive Engineer on February 15, 1984, he has been given only one average report for the year 1984-85 though the aforesaid report has been divided into two parts, namely, from 141984 to 3171984 and from 181984 to 3131985.
Even during this period, the petitioner has been found to be an honest officer.
For the year 1986-87, the petitioner has been assessed to be a good officer with `above board' integrity.
Thus, there is absolutely no adverse material on record either to suggest that the petitioner was a corrupt officer or had chequered service record.
In view of the promotion earned by him as late as in the year 1984, he cannot be termed a "dead-wood" as well.
11.
It is true that the instructions dated August 16, 1983 (Annexure R-2) according to which even an average report would constitute as an adverse report for the purposes of retention in service beyond the age of 50 or 55 years, as the case may be, have been upheld by the Full Bench of this Court in Daya Nand v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(4) SCT 646 (P&H) : 1994(3) PLR 652.
However, the Full Bench took specific note of the fact that the afore- mentioned government policy pertains to those average reports which are communicated to the concerned employee.
While overruling the Division Bench judgment in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) SLR 1, their Lordships in the Full Bench held as under :-  "21.
When the entire service record of an officer is considered, especially the record of the later years, the impact/impression of all the entries therein is to be gathered and it is only from such record that the Appointing Authority is to decide whether it would be in the public interest to compulsorily retire a Government servant.
Opinion expressed by the Courts with respect to attaching degree of weight to one or few entries of "average" recorded in the service record cannot be held to be a "Rule of Law" which could be followed as such in subsequent cases.
The purpose of communicating adverse remarks is to give an opportunity to a Government Officer to improve in his conduct and functioning as such officer.
If the State Government decides as a policy that "average" reports which are communicated are to be treated as adverse and taken into consideration at the time of deciding the question of compulsorily retirement of Government officers, no fault can be found with such instructions.
Such remarks would be treated as adverse though ordinarily, literally speaking they may not be extremely bad.
(emphasis applied).
When KK Vaid's case was decided, Haryana Government instructions regarding communication of adverse remarks of "average" to the Government Officers were not in existence.
Now when such a question is to be examined in the light of such instructions the Rule of Law laid down in KK Vaid's case cannot be followed ...." 12.
Similarly, it was not the issue before the Full Bench as to whether or not the average reports, recorded prior to promotion of an employee, would continue to constitute adverse reports for the purposes of compulsory retirement of an employee.
The Judgment in Hari Krishan Sirohi's case (supra), relied upon by learned counsel for the Board is also totally distinguishable on facts.
Guided by the law laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Bainkuth Nath Das's case and in Umedbhai M Patel's case (supra), I am of the view that an "average report" which does not impinge upon the honesty of an official, and rather records a positive notice in relation to his integrity and which does not contain any adverse remarked to render him unsuitable for promotion or for retention is service, would certainly lose its sting and/or adverse impact for the purposes of retention of such employee in service beyond the age of 50/55 years when such report did not obstruct the promotion to him at the due time.
The authorities in the Board failed to take notice of this factual aspect in favour of the petitioner while passing the impugned order of his premature retirement.
13.
I, thus, find no adverse material, whatsoever, on the basis of which the competent authority, be that may, in the exercise of its absolute right of retiring an employee compulsorily from service in public interest, could form even subjective opinion to hold him a dead-wood or a corrupt official or a sort of liability upon the Board, who was required to be weeded out from service prematurely.
The impugned order of premature retirement, therefore, is held to be an outcome of arbitrary exercise of power.
For the reasons stated above, this Writ Petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1541987 (Annexure P-1) is quashed.
Since during the pendency of this Writ Petition, the petitioner has already attained the age of superannuation from service, he shall be entitled for all the consequential benefits including arrears of full pay and the retiral benefits including re- fixation thereof.
Needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.