Surya Kant, J - In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner has sought a writ in the nature of certiorari for partial quashing of the order dated May 6, 1986 (Annexure P-8) to the extent it denies the benefit of pay and allowances to him.
2.
Facts :- The Petitioner joined the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") as a Junior Engineer-II and held the qualification of B.Sc.
in Engineering at the time of his afore-mentioned appointment.
Appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer Class II is regulated by the service regulations known as the Punjab State Electricity Board, Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the "Regulations").
According to the Petitioner, he, being a graduate engineer at the time of his appointment in the Board, was eligible for promotion as Assistant Engineer on completion of 3 years of service against 5% of the total posts reserved under Regulation 99 of the Regulations.
Instead of considering the claim of the Petitioner, vide order dated August 23, 1978 (Annexure P-3), S/Shri Gurcharan Singh Raikhi, Gurmeet Singh and Daljit Singh Arora were erroneously promoted as Assistant Engineers under Regulation 99. though their cases could have been considered under Regulation 97 only.
When the Board wanted to recall the erroneous order of their promotions, Shri Gurcharan Singh Raikhi and his colleagues filed C.W.P.
No. 5073 of 1978 in this Court against the show-cause notice for reversion served upon them.
The afore-mentioned Writ Petition was admitted and an interim direction to maintain status quo was ordered.
The Petitioner moved an application for his impleadment and was impleaded as Respondent No. 3 in the above mentioned Writ Petition which came up for final hearing on February 5, 1986 and was disposed of on the statement made on behalf of the Board to the effect that decision upon the show-cause notices served upon Shri Raikhi etc. will be taken after hearing them as well as other officers likely to be affected.
Thereafter, the Board passed an order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-5) whereby it held that Shri Raikhi and his two colleagues were wrongly promoted under Regulation 99. as they were eligible for such promotion under Regulation 97 only.
Consequently, their original promotion order dated August 23, 1978 (Annexure P-3) was set aside but having found them eligible for promotion under Regulation 97, the dates of their promotion were postponed to March 30, 1983.
Shri Raikhi etc. again filed Civil Writ Petition No. 8903 of 1987 in this Court wherein their reversion was stayed by a Division Bench of this Court on November 27, 1987.
The Petitioner herein again moved an application for his impleadment and having become a party, he sought vacation of the ex parte stay granted to the Writ Petitioners in the afore- mentioned case and also sought a direction to the Board to consider his case for promotion as Assistant Engineer under Regulation 99.
This Court vide an order dated December 18, 1985 (Annexure P-6) directed the Board to consider the case of the Petitioner for promotion from the due date.
It is only thereafter that the Petitioner's claim for promotion was considered and vide an order dated May 6, 1986 (Annexure P-8), he was granted retrospective promotion as Assistant Engineer under Regulation 99 with effect from 29.11.1978.
However, while promoting the Petitioner, the following riders have been imposed :-  "(1) Since RN Aggarwal had not actually worked on the said post w.e.f.
29.11.78 and somebody else had drawn the benefit which is still under dispute in the High Court.
The benefit of notional pay fixation only shall be given to him and no benefit of arrears of pay and allowances shall be paid to him retrospectively.
Actual pay and allowances on the refixed pay shall be allowed to him with effect from the date of issue of these orders.
(2) As regards the benefit of grant of seniority to him w.e.f.
29.11.78 as AE, an opportunity shall be given to other affected persons already promoted during the period from 29.11.78 to 30.3.83 (the date when he had been already promoted) for making representation, further promotion of Er.
RN Aggarwal from AEE to higher ranks shall be subject to the conditions/decision on receipt of those representations, if any.
3.
It is the case of the Petitioner that since he was denied promotion by the Board in an arbitrary manner and for no fault on his part, he cannot be denied the benefit of arrears of pay and allowances from the date of his promotion.
4.
Upon notice, short reply has been filed by the Board.
The denial of pay and allowances to the Petitioner from the date of his deemed promotion is sought to be justified on the ground that his promotion is "subject to final decision of C.W.P.
No. 8903 of 1987."
5.
I have heard Shri Pawan Kumar, learned counsel for the Petitioner and Mrs. Lisa Gill, learned counsel appearing for the Board.
6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the Writ Petition deserves to succeed.
By now, in a catena of judgments it has been held that if the employee is not promoted at his rightful place when he was entitled to and became eligible in accordance with rules, he cannot be allowed to suffer on account of any arbitrary action, whims or fancies of the executive authorities and thus, he cannot be deprived of the monetary benefits when his claim for retrospective promotion is found to be justified in law.
In this regard, reference can be made to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Vidya Parkash Harnal v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SCT 785 (P&H), Ms. Asha Rani Lamba v. State of Haryana and others, 1983(1) SLR 400 as also the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India etc. v. KV Jankiraman, AIR 1991 SC 2010 : 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC).
On a consideration of the case law on the subject, a Division Bench of this Court in case of Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab, C.W.P.
No. 10773 of 1997, decided on February 3, 1998, held as under :-  "In support of his contention, learned counsel relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Vidya Parkash Harnal v. State of Haryana, Ms. Asha Rani Lamba v. State of Haryana and others, as also the Apex Court judgment in Union of India etc. v. KV Jankiraman, (supra).
All the aforesaid judgments were considered by a Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 1234 of 1996, decided on December 10, 1996 (in which one of (RS Mongia, J) was a member), in which another judgment of the apex Court in State of Haryana etc. v. OP Gupta, JT 1996(3) SC 141 : 1996(2) SCT 294 (SC), was also taken note of.
After considering all the judgments, it was held that if the incumbent is not at fault and is always willing and ready to work on the higher post but for some fault or any other reason, he is not promoted from the due date and is later on promoted with effect from the due date, the arrears of pay cannot be denied.
Learned counsel for the respondents could not distinguish the aforesaid authorities on law or facts."
7.
As is patently evident from the facts of the present case, the Petitioner was a Graduate in Engineering at the time of his appointment as Junior Engineer-II in the Board and on attaining of 3 years experience, he became eligible to be considered for promotion as Assistant Engineer under Regulation 99 against the quota of 5% posts meant for such candidates.
The case of the Petitioner, however, was not considered by the Board for years together merely because it had erroneously promoted Shri Gurcharan Singh Raikhi etc. under Regulation 99 though they were eligible only under Regulation 97.
The Board realised its mistake within a short period but having been entangled in litigation by Shri Raikhi and others, it kept on ignoring the undisputed and justified claim of the Petitioner for promotion.
The Petitioner had to become a party in two rounds of litigation merely to remind the authority of his non-controversial claim for promotion.
It is not the case of the Board that there was no vacancy in the 5% quota under Regulation 99., or that the Petitioner was unsuitable and/or ineligible in any manner whatsoever or that he ever refused to work on the promotional post.
The fact that his claim for promotion from the due date i.e. November 29, 1978 has been finally accepted under the directions of this Court speaks volumes of the callousness and irresponsible attitude of the authorities in overlooking and ignoring the rightful claim of the Petitioner.
8.
For the reasons stated above, the Writ Petition is allowed, order dated May 6, 1996 (Annexure P-8) to the extent it denies the benefit of pay and allowances to the Petitioner from the date of his deemed promotion i.e. November 29, 1978, is set aside and the Petitioner is held entitled to the grant of pay and allowances from the afore-said date.
Needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order failing which the authorities shall also be liable to pay interest to the Petitioner @ 9% per annum from the date of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.