Surya Kant, J - The Petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the notice dated December 2, 1986 (Annexure P-3) and the order dated March 11, 1988 (Annexure P-4) whereby a decision was taken to recover the arrears of salary already paid to them in view of a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in Civil Appeals No. 31 and 32 of 1985 (Annexure P-1).
The Petitioners have also sought a writ in the nature of mandamus to command the Respondents not to recover the arrears of salary which had already been paid to them.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are - that the Petitioners were appointed as Science/Math Masters in the Masters Cadre in the Education Department of the State of Punjab pursuant to their selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab.
The Petitioners, however, were paid the fixed any instead of a regular pay scale on the premise that they were not possessing the B.Ed.
qualification and were, thus, untrained Science/Math masters.
At the same time, they were not given the benefit of annual increments though they were performing the duties similar to the so-called trained Science/Math Masters.
After representing to the authorities for the grant of regular grade of Masters to them, some of the untrained Masters, like the Petitioners, approached this Court in CWP No. 656 of 1977 (Tilak Raj and another v. State of Punjab and another) which was allowed by a learned Single Judge vide judgment dated May 18, 1977.
However, in a later case a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 3674 of 1977 decided on September 12, 1979, took a contrary view and over-ruled the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
The Writ Petition bearing No. 1662 of 1978 filed by the present Petitioners was also disposed of in terms of the Division Bench judgment dated September 12, 1979, referred to above.
Against the Division Bench judgment dated September 12, 1979, some of the Petitioners and other untrained Masters approached the Hon'ble Supreme Court by way of Special Leave to Appeal Nos. 765 and 8597 of 1994.
These SLPs were allowed by the Apex Court, by converting them in Civil Appeals No. 31 and 32 of 1985, vide judgment dated December 17, 1984 (Annexure P-1).
Their Lordship directed the State Government to give running pay scale of Masters to the untrained Masters.
The operative part of the judgment reads as under :-  "We, therefore, allow the appeals, set aside the order of the High Court and direct that the State Government shall give the running pay scale of masters to all untrained masters from the date of their appointment in the same manner as they did in regard to the first group of untrained masters as and by way of concession or pursuant to the decision in Tilak Raj's case.
The arrears of salary calculated on this basis shall be paid by the respondents to the untrained masters within 4 months from today.
There will be no order as to costs."
3.
Pursuant to judgment Annexure P-1.
the Respondents issued a letter on February 28, 1985 (Annexure P-2) to all the District Education Officers in the State directing that the regular pay scale of Masters be granted to all the untrained Science and Math Masters with effect from the dates of their appointments and the arrears should also be paid to them immediately.
The Petitioners were, accordingly, granted the regular running grade and were also paid arrears of pay calculating the same from the date of their respective appointment.
However, on December 2, 1986, a notice was issued to the Petitioners stating therein that the arrears of pay to the untrained Masters were to be confined to 38 months only preceding the date of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated December 17, 1984 and since they were erroneously paid the arrears of salary from the dates of their appointments, it was decided to withdraw the arrears of salary.
The Petitioners submitted their reply to the aforesaid notice and contested the claim of the Respondents, inter-alia, on the plea that vide judgment dated December 17, 1984 (Annexure P-1), the payment of arrears of salary was not confined to a period of 38 months, preceding the date of the aforesaid judgment, and therefore, they were rightly granted the arrears of salary.
However, the plea taken by the Petitioners was not accepted and the impugned order dated March 11, 1988 (Annexure P-4) was passed deciding to recover the arrears of salary already paid to them.
4.
This Petition came up for hearing before the Motion Bench on May 24, 1988 and while admitting the same, recovery of the arrears of salary already paid to the Petitioners were stayed till further orders.
5.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of Respondents No. 1 to 3.
There is hardly any dispute on facts except that the Petitioners were granted arrears of salary from the date of their respective appointment by the Apex Court vide judgment dated December 17, 1984 (Annexure P-1).
Rather, in the light of the decision in Tilak Raj's case (supra), the arrears payable to the Petitioners were to be confined to a period of 38 months, and therefore, the Petitioners could not have been paid arrears of salary from the date of their appointments.
6.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
It has been contended by Shri Amit Chopra, learned counsel for the Petitioners, that neither the Petitioners had misrepresented before the authorities nor played any fraud whatsoever, for claiming arrears of salary; the arrears were paid to the Petitioners by the Respondent-authorities on the interpretation of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated December 17, 1984 (Annexure P-1) in the manner they deemed fit and understood it.
The Respondents cannot blame the Petitioners either for misleading the former or alluring them to release these arrears.
The Petitioners, therefore, were rightly paid the arrears of salary from the date of their appointments, particularly, when a learned Single Judge of this Court in Balbhadra Dass and others v. State of Punjab and another, 1988(1) SLR 630, has taken the view that untrained Masters are entitled to the grant of running pay scale from the date of their appointments.
Be that as it may, contends the learned counsel for the Petitioners, the Petitioners having not misrepresented or played any fraud upon the Respondents for the release of the arrears of salary, they cannot be subjected to any recovery even if it is assumed that the arrears were paid to them on misinterpretation of the judgment dated December 17, 1984 (Annexure P-1).
In this regard, the learned counsel for the Petitioners has placed reliance on the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(5) SLR 753 : 1995(1) SCT 668 (SC), and the other one rendered in the case of PH Reddy v. NTRD, 2002(2) SCT 987, and two Division Bench judgments of this Court - (i) Jatinder Kumar Grover and others v. State of Punjab, 2003(1) SLR 669 : 2003(2) SCT 146 (P&H) and (ii) Tej Singh Retired Superintendent v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(2) SLR 243 : 2003(1) SCT 774 (SC).
8.
Learned counsel for the Petitioners further stated at the Bar that during the pendency of this Writ Petition, the Petitioners have retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation.
9.
On the other hand, Shri KK Goel, learned Additional Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State of Punjab, has contended that the claim of the Petitioners was accepted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court for the grant of running grade in the light of the previous judgment in Tilak Raj's case and since the arrears of pay in Tilak Raj's case were confined to 38 months preceding the date of the judgment, the Petitioners ought to have been paid the arrears of salary for a period of 38 months immediate prior to the date of the judgment of the Supreme Court on the same analogy and that it being a case of mis-interpretation of the judgment dated December 17, 1984 (Annexure P-1) by the Respondents, the error could be corrected at any time; hence, the orders of recovery are fully justified in law.
10.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the Writ Petition deserves to succeed.
It is not the pleaded case to the Respondents or otherwise that the Petitioners are responsible, in any manner, to mislead the Respondent-authorities for the grant of arrears of salary from the date of their appointments.
In fact, on a reading of the operative part of the judgment of the Apex Court (Annexure P-1), a view can be legitimately formed that the Petitioners were entitled to be paid the running pay scale from the dates of their appointments.
The Respondent-authorities, thus, interpreted and understood the afore-mentioned judgment in a manner as if it had granted the running pay scale to the Petitioners from the dates of their appointments.
The Petitioners, therefore, cannot be blamed of any misrepresentation or playing fraud with the Respondent-authorities in the formation of such a view or in the matter of mis-interpretation of the judgment in question.
The Respondents themselves understood the judgment in such a manner and granted the arrears of pay.
At this belated stage when the Petitioners have already retired from service and the Motion Bench had stayed recovery from them, even equity demands that no recovery should be allowed to be effected from the Petitioners.
In my considered view, the Petitioners being not at fault in the matter of grant of arrears of salary from the dates of their appointments, the consistent view taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as this Court, noticed above, squarely applied to the facts and circumstances of this case.
11.
The Writ Petition is accordingly allowed and the impugned order dated March 11, 1988 (Annexure P-4) is quashed.
The Respondents are directed not to effect any recovery of arrears of salary already paid to the Petitioners.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.