Hemant Gupta, J - State is in appeal against the judgment and decree passed by the courts below in a suit for declaration holding the order of termination dated 371969 as illegal, void and plaintiff was held to be in service of the defendant.
2.
The plaintiff-respondent was employed as a conductor in the Punjab Roadways at Jalandhar.
He was charge-sheeted on 411979 on the allegations that he had not issued tickets to passengers and had collected the fare from them.
An inquiry officer was appointed.
However, it was the case of the plaintiff that his reply was not considered before appointing the Inquiry Officer and an order of termination of the services of the plaintiff was passed.
3.
The plaintiff has alleged that the charge-sheet was defective.
He was not supplied with the list of witnesses and the list of documents.
Thus, he was prejudiced in his defence.
He has averred that he was not given an opportunity to state his defence under Rule 8(16) and evidence led by the defendant was not put to him as contemplated under Rule 8(18) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
4.
The defendant contested the suit and took up the objection that the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the suit.
The allegations of the plaintiff was controverted that proper charge-sheet was not served.
Inquiry was ordered after considering the reply of the plaintiff.
The inquiry was conducted in accordance with the Rules and the plaintiff was given opportunity to produce his defence and he has examined himself as a witnesses.
5.
The trial court framed the following issued for trial in this case :  1.
Whether the order dated 371979 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jullundur, terminating the services of the plaintiff is illegal, ultra vires and not binding upon the plaintiff ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the Civil Courts at Jullundur have no jurisdiction to try and entertain the present suit ?
OPD.
3.
Relief.
6.
In evidence, the plaintiff has appeared as his own witness and got produced inquiry file Ex. P.1 apart from notice Ex. P2 and postal receipt Ex. P.3.
Defendant relied up on the inquiry file Ex. P.1.
7.
The trial court held the order of termination to be illegal and void in view of non-compliance of the provisions of Rules 8(16) and 8(18), which were found to be mandatory apart from holding that necessary witnesses are not examined and material was used against the plaintiff without proof.
The said finding was returned on the basis that the passengers were not produced as a witness but their statements given to the inspector of the Roadways was considered by the inquiry officer.
The appeal against the said judgment and decree has been dismissed.
8.
Before adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties it will be beneficial to reproduce Rule 8(16); 8(17) and 8(18) of the Rules :  "(16) When the case for the punishing authority is closed, the Government employee shall be required to state his defence orally or in writing as he may prefer.
If the defence is made orally it shall be recorded and the Government employee shall be required to sign the record.
In either case, a copy of the statement of defence shall be given to the presenting officer, if any, appointed.
(17) The evidence on behalf of the Government employee shall then be produced.
The Government employee may examine himself on his on behalf, if he so prefers either at the outset or after the conclusion of examination of the witnesses produced by him.
The witnesses produced by the Government employee shall then be examined and shall be liable to cross-examination, re- examination and examination by the inquiring authority according to the provision applicable to the witness for the punishing authority.
(18) The inquiring authority may, after the Government employee closes his case, and shall, if the Government employee has not examined himself, generally question him on the circumstances, appearing against him in the evidence for the purpose of enabling the Government employee to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him."
9.
Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently argued that non- examination of a passenger is not fatal in inquiry proceedings.
Departmental proceedings are required to be conducted keeping in view the principles of fair play and natural justice.
Strict provisions of the Evidence Act are not applicable to the departmental proceedings.
Even probable evidence can be relied upon in departmental proceedings.
Reference was made to State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 1512 and a Full Bench Judgment of this court in The State of Haryana and others v. Shri Ram Chander, 1976(2) SLR 690.
10.
It was further contended that the provisions of Rule 8(16) and 8(18) of the Rules are not mandatory.
The delinquent employee is required to prove the prejudice which he may suffer on account of such denial of opportunity.
Reliance was placed upon Rule 8(17) and it was submitted that the plaintiff was given opportunity to examine himself.
He has given a statement that he does not want to lead any evidence and that his reply to the charge-sheet be considered.
Thus, there is no violation of the Rules nor the plaintiff has suffered any prejudice and therefore, the judgment and decree passed by the courts below suffers from patent illegality.
11.
The following substantial questions of law arise in this appeal for consideration of this court :  1.
Whether inquiry proceedings are vitiated on account of non- production of passengers in the inquiry proceedings ?
2.
Whether the finding of the courts below that Rule 8(16) and 8(18) were not complied with, is based upon evidence ?
3.
Whether the plaintiff has suffered any prejudice in view of the proceedings during the course of inquiry ?
12.
In respect of question No. 1, it is suffice to say on the basis of Supreme Court judgment referred to above as well as Full Bench judgment mentioned above, rules of evidence are not applicable.
Even probable evidence can be relied upon in departmental proceedings.
The principles of natural justice have been complied with while admitting the statement of the ticket verifiers.
There is no illegality in consideration of such evidence while passing the order of termination of the services of the plaintiff.
13.
A perusal of the inquiry file Ex. P.1 shows that on 2631979 the plaintiff has communicated to the Inquiry Officer that he be supplied copies of the statements of the witnesses whose statements have been recorded in his presence so that he can produce the defence witnesses on 441979.
On 441979 the plaintiff has addressed communication to the General Manager, Punjab Roadways to the effect that he does not want to examine any witness in his defence.
His statement, which he has given in reply to the charge sheet be read in his defence.
The Inquiry Officer has also recorded a separate statement to the effect that the plaintiff does not want to examine any other witness in his defence on 4.4.1999.
14.
In view of the said factual position it is apparent that the plaintiff was given an opportunity to examine the witness in his defence.
However, the plaintiff has preferred not to examine any person including himself and was satisfied with the reply already given to the charge-sheet.
Said statement is signed by the plaintiff.
Thus Rule 8(16) was complied with.
15.
Still further, the plaintiff has stated in his application that he does not want to lead any other evidence.
Such opportunity was given to him in terms of Rule 8(17).
16.
Thus the findings of the courts below that there was violation of Rule 8(16) is not correct.
Said finding is based upon no evidence.
17.
In respect of Rule 8(18) i.e. non-examination of the delinquent after conclusion of the trial is yet to be examined.
A Single Bench of this court in Avtar Singh, Ex Conductor v. State of Punjab, 1992(3) Service Cases Today 218 has held that Rule 8(18) is mandatory only when the employee has not examined himself during the inquiry.
However, in the present case, the delinquent has not appeared as a witness but stated that he has nothing to add than what he has stated in the reply to the charge-sheet.
18.
Thus, it cannot be said that the provisions of Rule 8(18) had been complied with.
The ex-employee has not been examined in terms of Rule 8(18) by the Inquiry Officer after the statement of the plaintiff on 4.4.1999.
19.
In respect of third substantial question of law, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sunil Kumar Banerjee v. State of West Bengal and others, AIR 1980 SC 1170 has held that where delinquent has examined the prosecution witnesses and also examined the defence witnesses, the employee was fully alive to the allegations against him.
There is no prejudice by the failure of the Inquiry Officer to question him in accordance with para materia Rule 8(19) of All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969.
Relevant part of the judgment reads as under :  "We are similarly of the view that failure to comply with the requirements of rule 8(19) of the 1969 rules does not vitiate the enquiry unless the delinquent officer is able to establish prejudice.
In this case the learned Single Judge of the High Court as well as the learned Judges of the Division Bench found that the appellant was in no way prejudiced by the failure to observe the requirement of Rule 8(19).
The appellant cross- examined the witness himself, submitted the defence in writing in great detail and argued the case himself at all stages.
The appellant was fully alive to the allegations against him and dealt with all aspects of the allegation in his written defence.
We do not think that he was in the least prejudiced by the failure of the Enquiry Officer to question him in accordance with rule 8(19)."
20.
In view of above, it is apparent that the plaintiff has cross-examined the witnesses.
He has given statement that he does not want to examine any witness in defence and reply to the charge sheet be read in this defence.
In view of the such facts, it is not a case where the plaintiff can be said to have suffered any prejudice.
Consequently, it is held that since the plaintiff has not either alleged or proved any prejudice, there is no illegality in the Inquiry proceedings.
The Courts below were not thus within their jurisdiction to set aside the order of termination of the services of the plaintiff.
Thus, the present appeal is allowed.
Judgment and decree of courts below is set aside and the suit dismissed.
Appeal allowed.