SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) : The petitioner seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 27091985 Annexure P-8, passed by respondent No. 2, asking the petitioner to submit his resignation under the Rules.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Conductor in the State of Punjab in the year 1970.
His appointment was on regular basis.
In the appointment order, it was mentioned that he is liable to be transferred to any office of the Punjab Transport Department and that his conditions of service would be governed by the Punjab Roadways (Operational State Service Class-III) Rules, 1977 and the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
The Punjab Government took a policy decision and transferred certain posts and buses to the Municipal Corporations, Amritsar, Jalandhar and Ludhiana.
The posts and buses were to be operated and plied by the respective Municipal Corporations.
Consequently, some of the staff of the Punjab Roadways was also transferred to the Municipal Corporations.
The petitioner was one of the conductors so transferred.
The transferred employees, thereafter, became the employees of the respective Municipal Corporations.
Their conditions of service and emoluments were adversely affected.
It was found that the posts in the Corporations were not pensionable.
There was loss of some other benefits also.
Various writ petitions were filed against the action of the respondent-State of Punjab in transferring the petitioners to the Municipal Corporations.
One such Civil Writ Petition No. 4350 of 1980 was allowed on 25051981.
Thereafter, some other employees filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5476 of 1982 (Avtar Singh Inspector v. State of Punjab and others).
The aforesaid writ petition was decided at the motion stage itself on the basis of the statement made by the learned counsel for the parties with the following observations :-  "The learned counsel for the parties agree that the writ petition is covered by the ratio of decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 4350 of 1980 (Ajmer Lal and others v. State of Punjab and others), decided on May 2, 1981, with the result that the impugned order dated January 1, 1980 (P-1) is liable to be quashed.
The writ petition is consequently allowed and the impugned order of Director, State Transport, Punjab, dated January 1, 1980 (P-1), is quashed.
No order as to costs".
3.
Against the aforesaid judgment, State of Punjab filed Special Leave Petition which was granted and numbered as SLP (Civil) No. 1219 of 1981.
This appeal was disposed of by the Supreme Court on 03011989 with the following observations :-  "There are 73 employees who are concerned in this case.
They were originally the employees of the Punjab Roadways.
They are now working as drivers, fitters, mechanics, inspectors, clerks, carpenters etc. under Jullundur Municipal Corporation.
Having regard to the facts of this case, we feel that the Punjab Roadways should be directed to take back these employees as and when the vacancies become available in the Punjab Roadways in the categories in which these 73 employees belong.
In other words, if a vacancy in the category of drivers arises in the Punjab Roadways a driver amongst these 73 employees shall be taken back by the Punjab Roadways.
Similarly, if a post of clerk falls vacant in the Punjab Roadways an employee who is working as a clerk amongst these 73 employees shall be taken back by the Punjab Roadways and so on.
If when the vacancy of a driver or a clerk etc. arises in the Punjab Roadways and there are two or more employees answering the said discription amongst these 73 employees, the senior most amongst them shall be re-absorbed in the vacancy concerned.
The entire period of service of the employees who are re-absorbed as per this order shall be treated as part of the qualifying service in the Punjab Roadways for purposes of pension.
Such employees obviously are not entitled to any payment from the Provident Fund account.
This process shall continue until all the 73 employees are taken back into the service of the Punjab Roadways.
On such re-transfer to the Punjab Roadways the employees concerned shall be assigned the seniority which they originally held before their transfer to the corporation.
If any of the employees concerned has either already ceased to be or ceases to be in the service of the Corporation before it is possible to re-absorb him in the service of the Punjab Roadways, he shall not have any right to be treated as the employees of the Punjab Roadways.
This order shall not however, be treated as a precedent.
This order is passed in substitution of the order passed by the High Court.
We also make it clear that no other employee who is transferred to the service of any of the Corporation under the scheme of transfer, shall be entitled to prefer any claim on the basis of this order, since nearly a decade has already passed from the date of the transfer of the employee to the corporation concerned.
The Civil Appeal is disposed of accordingly.
No costs".
4.
Relying on the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court, a large number of other employees including the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4842 of 1982.
This Court allowed the aforesaid writ petition on 07011991, in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court quoted above.
It was observed as follows :-  "Since the petitioners in this case have been transferred under the same policy which was under challenge before the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (Supra), it would be appropriate to dispose of the present writ petitions in terms of Avtar Singh's case (supra).
Apex Court has given positive directions in the said case.
Accordingly, the present writ petitions are disposed of in the same terms and with the same directions as were given by the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (Supra).
No costs".
5.
In the meantime, the Punjab Roadways advertised some posts of Inspectors in the month of May, 1982.
The petitioners applied against one of the said posts.
He made an application for no objection certificate to respondent No. 2- Municipal Corporation, Amritsar.
The no objection certificate was actually issued to the petitioner on 25051982.
Another certificate to the same effect was issued in the year 1984.
The petitioner was selected for appointment on the post of Inspector on 04031985.
He was given appointment order on 11091985.
The petitioner sought the relieving orders from respondent No. 2.
However, on 27091985, the petitioner has been directed to submit his resignation under the Rules to join the new assignment in the Punjab Roadways.
The order passed by respondent No. 2 is as follows :-  "No.
1743/ECC/Ant., Dated 27.9.85.
Sub: Selection as Inspector in Punjab Roadways.
Reference your application dated 14995.
The Learned Commissioner vide his order dated 23.9.85 has ordered that you are required to submit your resignation under the rules to join your new assignment in Punjab Roadways".
Sd/-  General Manager  Nigam Transport Amritsar.
It is this order which has now been challenged by the petitioner by filing the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
On 04021986, this Court passed the following order :-  Present : Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Mr. DS Brar, AAG, Punjab, for respondents Nos. 1 and 3.
Mr. RS Bindra, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Vinod Sharma, Advocate, for respondent No. 2.
Adjourned sine die to await the decision of the SLP filed by the State in the Supreme Court.
In the meantime, the petitioner, if so advised, may resign from the present post and join the Roadways, which shall be subject to the decision of this petition.
Sd/-  (PC Goyal) Judge Sd/-  February 4, 1986.
(Pritpal Singh)  Judge".
In view of the aforesaid order, the petitioner joined the Punjab Roadways as an Inspector on 28.02.1986.
In view of the above, the petitioner is clearly entitled to the benefit of continuity of service from the date when his services were illegally transferred to respondent No. 2.
6.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 2, it is candidly admitted that the writ petitioner is one of the employees whose services were placed at the disposal of respondent No. 2.
It is also stated that respondent No. 2 passed a resolution that the writ petitioner shall be entitled to enjoy the same terms and conditions on which he had been earlier working with respondent No. 1.
The only ground put forward to deny the relief to the petitioner is that at the relevant time the writ petitioner did not file the writ petition.
Therefore, he was not entitled to take the benefit of the orders which have been passed in the writ petitions filed by the other employees.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
8.
In my view the matter is no longer res integra.
The decision rendered by the Supreme Court in SLP (Civil) No. 1219 of 1984, is fully applicable.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the present case, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the decision rendered by this Court in CWP No. 4842 of 1982 as there is no distinction between the present writ petition and in the earlier writ petitions.
In view of the above, present petition is allowed.
Order dated 27091985 Annexure P-8, is quashed.
The petitioner is held entitled to all consequential benefits in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in SLP (Civil) No. 1219 of 1984 and the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4842 of 1982.
No costs.
Petition allowed.