Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner Zila Parishad has approached this Court through the present writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The prayer made in the writ petition is for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing the award dated June 2, 1992 passed by the learned Labour Court, Gurdaspur.
A copy of the aforesaid award has been appended as Annexure P.1 with the present petition.
3.
Respondent No. 2 Mohinder Singh was working as Clerk in the office of Zila Parishad.
He was promoted as a Head Clerk on August 4, 1975.
4.
The case of petitioner Parishad is that respondent was asked to give an option for transfer to the provincialised post in the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur, respondent No. 2.
Accordingly, respondent No. 2 gave the option in the affirmative.
On the aforesaid option, respondent No. 2 was sent to the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur on December 29, 1975.
Petitioner Parishad claims that from December 29, 1975 respondent No. 2 had no connection or lien over the post from which he stood transferred to the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur.
However, Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur did not allow respondent No. 2 to join the duty.
According to petitioner Parishad, respondent No. 2 remained absent from duty with effect from December 29, 1975 uptil July 3, 1979.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 was again adjusted as a Clerk in the office of petitioner Parishad.
On that basis, it was claimed that in fact respondent No. 2 having not worked with petitioner Parishad from December 29, 1975 till July 3, 1979 was not entitled to any wages.
The aforesaid period was in fact treated as leave without pay.
However, respondent No. 2 approached the learned Labour Court under the provisions of Section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
He claimed his wages for the aforesaid period with effect from December 29, 1975 till July 3, 1979.
The claim of Rs. 37,715.50 was made by respondent No. 2 against petitioner Parishad.
5.
The claim of respondent was contested by petitioner Parishad by filing a written statement before the learned Labour Court.
The pleas, as noticed above, were also taken before the learned Labour Court.
However, no evidence whatsoever was led by petitioner Parishad before the learned Labour Court despite many opportunities were given.
Thereafter, the learned Presiding Officer of the Labour Court held as follows :  "There is no dispute about the fact that the applicant had been working as clerk with the respondents since 22.7.56 and he retired from service on 30488 after attaining the age of superannuation.
The case of the applicant is that he was promoted as Head Clerk w.e.f.
4875 for which post he worked with the respondents No. 2 from 4875 to 29.12.75 and had been paid wages as Head Clerk for the said period.
Then he was posted to the office of Civil Surgeon Gurdaspur as head clerk wef 30.12.75 but for some reasons or other, he was not allowed to join duty there, despite his reporting for duty in the office of civil surgeon.
He agitated the matter with respondent No. 2 who accepted his plea and directed that the applicant Mohinder Singh be adjusted Clerk in place of Shri Iqbal Singh in the office of Zila Parishad, Gurdaspur and the period of his absence from duty be treated as leave of kind due.
It was further ordered that the wages be paid to the workman after creating a new post in the office of Zila Parishad.
There is no rebuttal to the assertion of the applicant that his remaining away from duty w.e.f.
29.12.1975 to 371979 was not due to his part.
He was neither allowed to join duty in the office of Civil surgeon neither he was allowed to do duty in his parent deptt.
i.e. Zila Parishad from where he was transferred.
As regards the fact, whether he is entitled to the payment of Head clerk or not, the matter is pending before the Hon'ble High Court.
However, there is no dispute that as far as his payment of wages as clerk is concerned, the workman is entitled to the same as admitted by respondent No. 2 from 29.12.1975 to 371979 as detailed in the annexure filed with the application.
There is no rebuttal from the side of the respondent to show that the workman has demanded more than what he has shown in the annexure.
As regard his another demand of Rs. 100/- pm as officiating Accountant from 191979 to 3151986, the applicant has failed to prove as to how he is entitled to this extra amount of Rs. 100/- pm There is no written order in the file passed by the respondents stating therein that the workman will be paid Rs. 100/- pm extra as officiating Accountant.
So, his averments that he is entitled to this extra amount does not stand the test of legality.
The issue is decided accordingly."
6.
In view of the aforesaid observations, the claim of respondent No. 2 was allowed and he was held entitled to an amount of Rs. 29.615.80 as arrears of salary of Clerk for the period from December 29, 1975 to July 3, 1979.
A copy of the award dated June 2, 1992 passed by the learned Labour Court, Gurdaspur has been appended as Annexure P.1 with the petition.
Petitioner Parishad is aggrieved against the aforesaid award and has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
7.
In the petition, it has been averred that since respondent No. 2 had not worked as a Clerk with petitioner Parishad for the aforesaid disputed period, therefore, he was nut entitled to claim any pay on the principle of "no work, no pay".
It has further been averred that in fact no request at any point of time was made by respondent No. 2 to petitioner Parishad for taking him back in service during the aforesaid period.
8.
After having heard Shri PS Patwalia, the learned senior counsel for respondent No. 2, I find no merit in the aforesaid contention raised by petitioner Parishad in the petition.
In my considered opinion, there is no merit in the present petition.
The learned Labour Court has categorically found it as a fact that respondent No. 2 was working as a Clerk with petitioner Parishad.
He was posted to the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur as a Head Clerk with effect from December 29, 1975.
However, he was not allowed to join his duties in the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur.
Thus, it has been found it is a fact that respondent No. 2 could not be faulted for not joining the duty in the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur.
In fact, it was not respondent No. 2 who was at fault but it was on the order of petitioner Parishad, respondent No. 2 was asked to join his duties in the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur.
Once respondent No. 2 was directed to resume back his duty in the office of Zila Parishad with effect from July 4, 1979, then it could not be suggested at all by petitioner Parishad that he was not entitled to any salary for the period i.e. with effect from December 29, 1995 to July 3, 1979.
In fact, the observations made by the learned Labour Court are not shown to reasons in any manner.
There is no error of jurisdiction.
Thus, I do not find any scope of interference in the present petition and the same is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.