MM Kumar, J - The legal question raised in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is whether further departmental proceedings could be ordered to be held by the punishing authority under Rule 9(1) of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for brevity, `the Rules').
2.
Both the petitioners are working on the post of Conductor in the Punjab Roadways and were posted as Adda Conductor at Main Bus Stand, Ferozepur during the year 1997-98.
It was found that the ticket vouchers issued by the petitioners were not in order as some of the ticket vouchers bearing the same serial number were issued twice.
A charge-sheet was issued to the petitioners by respondent 2.
On the basis of evidence led before the Enquiry Officer who was a General Manager (Head Office), Divisional Manager, Chandigarh came to the conclusion that the charges levelled against the petitioners were not clearly proved on account of the fact that the original way bill and docket for the period April, 1997 to September, 1997 were not produced because that would have proved as to whether petitioner Virsa Singh had deposited the cash or not.
In other words, if the ticket vouchers bearing duplicate numbers were sold and the cash was deposited, then the petitioners would not be guilty but if it is otherwise, then they would be guilty of misappropriating the public funds by practising fraud.
The concluding para of the enquiry report dated 5122001 in respect of petitioner Virsa Singh reads as under :-  "So I have reached to the conclusion that the charges levelled by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur vide his charge-sheet No. 17775/TA dated 5.11.99 against Sh. Virsa Singh, Conductor No. 696, are not clearly proved, due to not producing the original way bill and docket for the period from 4/97 to 9/97 of the official, by which the official was depositing the cash.
Because if the cash has been deposited in view of the original way bill and docket then there is no fraud and if the same has not been deposited, then there is fraud.
So the original way bill and docket of the official for the period 4/97 to 9/97 be verified at their own level.
Sd/-  Enquiry Officer  General Manager (Head Office) Divisional Manager,  Chandigarh."
3.
When the enquiry report was examined in the office of the Director, State Transport, Punjab, it was found that the relevant record was not produced before the Enquiry Officer as is noticed by him and on account of non- availability of the record, the Enquiry Officer did not record any finding.
It was directed that both the cases be enquired again.
After perusing the relevant record, it was further advised that in case the original record is not available, then duplicate record may be seen and the complete findings of the Enquiry Officer were required to be sent within a period of three months.
A copy of the order was sent by the office of the Director, State Transport, Punjab to the General Manager respondent No. 2 for onward communication to the petitioners.
Order dated 2572002 passed by the Office of the Director, State Transport, Punjab Chandigarh is placed on the record as Annexure R-1 and the orders dated 682002 communicating the order to the petitioners have been placed on the record as Annexure P-2 and P-3.
The letter dated 682002 issued by respondent No. 2 reads as under :-  "In compliance of the letter issued by Head Office, Punjab, Chandigarh vide Endst.
No. CA3/20/214/11635 dated 25702 for conducting the departmental enquiry again, against Sh. Virsa Singh, C. No. 696 (under suspension) and Sh. Sukhdev Singh, Enquiry Officer (HQ) is hereby appointed as Enquiry Officer and Senior Assistant, who is working with him, is hereby appointed as Presenting Officer."
4.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioners have approached this Court by urging that the punishing authority could have recorded a dissenting note disagreeing with the Enquiry Officer but could not have ordered enquiry again which amounts to holding a de novo enquiry which is impermissible in law.
It has been further alleged that Rule 9(1) of the Rule has been flagrantly violated and it does not permit holding of a de novo enquiry.
5.
The stand taken in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 is that after holding a preliminary enquiry, financial irregularities were found and both the petitioners were served with separate charge-sheets.
Petitioner No. 1 was alleged to have committed a fraud of Rs. 5,770/- by issuing forged ticket vouchers while performing his duties as advance booker at Main Bus Stand, Ferozepur.
In the separate charge-sheet issued to petitioner No. 2, it was alleged that he has committed a fraud to the tune of Rs. 20,012/- by issuing forged tickets while performing his duty as advance booker at Main Bus Stand, Ferozepur.
As such, both the petitioners were alleged to have embezzled government funds.
On account of the fact that the original way bills and dockets were not produced showing whether payment in respect of the duplicate ticket vouchers issued by the petitioners has been deposited, the Enquiry Officer did not record any conclusion and left it open to the punishing authority to look into the original record and then record the findings.
The Director, State Transport, Punjab directed the Enquiry Officer to further enquire into the matter either on the basis of the original record or the duplicate record and then submit his report by recoding clear findings.
It is claimed that sufficient reasons have been disclosed in the order dated 2572002.
6.
Mr. Gaurav Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that a perusal of Annexure P-2 and similar order Annexure P-3 would reveal that a fresh enquiry has been ordered to be conducted by the Director, State Transport, Punjab and the same is impermissible under Rule 9(1) of the Rules.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of KR Deb v. CCE, (1971) 2 SCC 102.
He has also placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of Karnail Singh, Kanungo Agrarian v. The State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) SLR 376 : 1992(2) SCT 27 (P&H) and a Division Bench judgment of Calcutta High Court in the case of Calcutta Municipal Corporation and others v. Dr. S Wajid Ali and another, 1993(2) SLR 631 : 1993(1) SCT 195 (Calcutta).
The learned counsel has further argued that Annexures P-2 and P-3 are also liable to be set aside as no reason has been disclosed for issuing the order for conducting the departmental enquiry again.
According to the learned counsel, these orders are violative of Article 14 of the Constitution being arbitrary.
Another submission made by learned counsel for the petitioners is that the Director, State Transport, Punjab who has addressed letter dated 2572002, Annexure R-1 for conducting the departmental enquiry again is not an authority competent to take a decision and the same was required to be taken only by the General Manager who was the appointing and punishing authority of the petitioners.
7.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned State counsel has submitted that orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 have been completely misconstrued by learned counsel for the petitioners because both the orders have to be read in consonance with the order dated 2572002 passed by the Director, State Transport, Punjab vide Annexure R-1.
A conjoint reading of orders, Annexures P-2 and P-3 with Annexure R-1 would make it clear that as a matter of fact a further enquiry has been ordered with specific direction to look into the original record and if the same was not available, then to take into consideration even the duplicate record.
After examining the original/duplicate record, the Enquiry Officer has been directed to record his findings against the delinquent petitioners.
The State counsel has maintained that once orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 are read with Order Annexure R-1, it becomes evident that plausible reasons have been recorded for conducting of enquiry further as is permissible by Rule 9(1) of the Rules.
The learned counsel urged that orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 cannot be held to be illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, as sufficient reasons have been recorded in the original order dated 2572002.
It has further been pointed out that duplicate way bills were produced before the Enquiry Officer which would fully support the charges.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, we are of the view that this petition lacks merit and the same is liable to be dismissed.
A perusal of order dated 2572002, Annexure R-1 makes it evident that no direction has been issued to the Enquiry Officer for holding a de novo enquiry.
It has in fact been directed that the Enquiry Officer is to peruse the original or the duplicate record for the purposes of recording his findings.
Such a course is fully permissible by Rule 9(1) of the Rules which reads as under :-  "9.
Action on the inquiry report.
- (1) The punishing authority if it is not itself the inquiry authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiry authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of rule 8 as far as may be."
A perusal of the above rule shows that the punishing authority after recording reasons in writing may remit the case to the enquiry authority for further enquiry and report.
The Enquiry Officer is under an obligation to proceed and to hold further enquiry in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8 of the Rules as far as it may be possible.
9.
The first argument of learned counsel for the petitioners that de novo enquiry has in fact been ordered, suffers from a misconception because the orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 have not been read in the light of the original order dated 2572002.
There is nothing on record of this case showing that the earlier enquiry report has been set aside by the punishing authority or any other authority and de novo enquiry has been ordered.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in KR Deb's case (supra) proceeded on the basis that the punishing authority is not clothed with the power to set aside the previous enquiry report on the ground that the report of the Enquiry Officer did not appeal to the punishing authority.
In other words, the punishing authority cannot keep on remitting back the case to the Enquiry Officer by indirectly suggesting him to record a finding of guilty against the delinquents.
The judgment in KB Deb's case (supra) was further considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and others v. P Thayagarajan, (1999) 1 SCC 733.
In that case, the disciplinary authority noticed some procedural lapses on the part of the Enquiry Officer which was contrary to the relevant rules affecting the rights of the parties.
The disciplinary authority on that ground remitted the case back to the Enquiry Officer.
When reliance was placed on paragraph 12 of the judgment in KR Deb's case (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court rejected the contention of the delinquent by recording the following reasons :-  "A careful reading of this passage will make it clear that this Court notices that if in a particular case where there has been no proper enquiry because of some serious defect having crept into the enquiry or some important witnesses were not available at the time of the enquiry or were not examined, the disciplinary authority may ask the enquiry officer to record further evidence but that provision would not enable the disciplinary authority to set aside the previous enquiries on the ground that the report of the enquiry officer does not appeal to the disciplinary authority.
In the present case, the basis upon which the disciplinary authority set aside the enquiry is that the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer was contrary to the relevant rules and affects the rights of the parties and not that the report does not appeal to him.
When important evidence, either to be relied upon by the Department or by the delinquent official, is shut out, this would not result in any advancement of any justice but on the other hand, result in a miscarriage thereof.
Therefore, we are of the view that Rule 27(c) enables the disciplinary authority to record his findings on the report and to pass an appropriate order including ordering a de novo enquiry in a case of the present nature."
In view of the above, no room is left to further dilate upon the question by detailed examination of other two judgments on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioners.
It is suffice to say that the judgment in KR Deb's case (supra) has no application to the case in hand because no de novo enquiry had been ordered and further in P Thayagarajan's case (supra), the judgment in KR Deb's case (supra) has not been followed by the Supreme Court itself.
The other argument raised by learned counsel for the petitioners half- heartedly that the orders, Annexures P-2 and P-3 are based on the order dated 2572002, Annexure R-1 passed by the Director, State Transport, Punjab would also not require any detailed consideration because nothing has been pointed out as to how it is going to affect the rights of the petitioners adversely.
The argument has not been substantiated.
In fact the petitioners are fully entitled to participate in the proceedings of further enquiry.
Therefore, we do not find any substance in the aforementioned contention raised on behalf of the petitioners.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
On account of the fact that this Court has stayed further proceedings in the enquiry, the respondents are directed to now proceed with the enquiry in accordance with the directions dated 2572002 issued by Annexure R-1 and finalise the whole proceedings within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition dismissed.