MM Kumar, J - This is defendants appeal filed under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity the Code) challenging the judgment and decree dated 27.2.2990 passed by the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, in favour of the plaintiff-respondent decreeing his suit for declaration that the order dated 371975, which became operative with effect from 16.3.1977 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot, compulsorily retiring the plaintiff-respondent from service is illegal and void.
The suit of the plaintiff-respondent was dismissed by the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Mukatsar vide his judgment and decree dated 2131987.
2.
Facts in brief are that the plaintiff-respondent joined the service of the defendant Punjab Government as Assistant Sub Inspector Police (ASI) on 1.4.1941.
After passing the departmental examination, the plaintiff- respondent was promoted as Sub Inspector (S.I.)
on 1121946.
On 141948, he was reduced to the rank of ASI on account of some misconduct and was reinstated in service on 16.3.1950 as ASI.
On attaining the age of 55 years on 18.5.1975 his case was to be examined for retention in service upto the age of 58 years.
On examining his case, a notice was issued by the defendant-State on 1331975 disclosing that the plaintiff-respondent would stand retired from service on attaining the age of 55 years with effect from 18.5.1975.
The plaintiff-respondent applied for leave preparatory to retirement which was granted to him from 5.7.1975 to 1.11.1975 on full pay and from 2.11.1975 to 1531977 on half pay.
It has been asserted that the plaintiff-respondent was retired on his own request on the expiry of three months notice and no extension of three years in service was granted to him.
It has further been asserted that only leave was granted to the plaintiff-respondent and as such notice served upon him was not considered at the time of his voluntary retirement.
The defendant-appellants further pleaded that the plaintiff- respondent was retired on his own request after granting him leave preparatory to retirement.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  "1.
Whether order dated 371975 is null and void ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is within time ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the written statement is not proper verified ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPP.
5.
Whether the written statement has been filed by a competent person ?
OPD.
6.
Relief."
The trial Court decided issues No. 1, 2 and 4 against the plaintiff-respondent and issues No. 3 and 5 against the defendant-appellants.
On account of the finding that the order dated 371975 is not null and void and the suit is time barred in respect of issues No. 1 and 2, the suit of the plaintiff- respondent was dismissed.
3.
The findings on issues No. 1 and 2 were the subject matter of challenge before the learned Additional District Judge.
The learned Additional District Judge held that the order dated 371975 was illegal and void because the notice dated 13.1.1975 intimating the plaintiff-respondent to retire him compulsorily on the expiry of three months was not acted upon nor the plaintiff-respondent has ever sought his voluntary retirement.
The order Ex. P-3 was passed on 271975 but the plaintiff-respondent was to retire in accordance with the notice with effect from 18.5.1975, which in turn shows that the notice dated 1331975 was not acted upon and no fresh notice was served on the plaintiff-respondent.
Dealing with the application Ex. P-2 filed by the plaintiff-respondent, the learned Additional District Judge held that the application was filed after the service of three months notice dated 1331975 communicating that the plaintiff-respondent had already made a representation, which was under consideration and in case it was finally decided to retire him, then the plaintiff-respondent had requested for grant of leave of the kind due.
Referring to the instructions dated 1511980, the learned Additional District Judge further held that an employee is entitled to grant of leave of the kind due to him at the time of his retirement and as such concession has to be given even if the employee is prematurely retired or if he seeks voluntary retirement.
4.
On issue No. 2, the learned Additional District Judge held that an illegal and void order is non-est in the eyes of law and, therefore, the plaintiff- respondent was not bound to file a suit for declaration for setting it aside.
Reliance in this regard was placed on the view taken by the Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Syed Qamrali, 1967 Service Law Reporter 228 and State of Punjab v. Malkiat Chand, 1988(4) SLR 243.
In view of the afore-mentioned findings, the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court was reversed and the suit of the plaintiff-respondent was decreed.
5.
Mr. Jagjit Singh, learned AAG, Punjab, appearing for the defendant- appellants has argued that it is now well settled by a catena of judgments of the Supreme Court that even a void and illegal order has to be challenged within the period of limitation provided by Article 113 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Gurdev Singh, JT 1991(3) SC 465 : 1991(3) SCT 91 (SC) and Ramesh Chand v. Udham Singh Kamal, JT 1999(8) SC 289 : 1999(4) SCT 500 (SC).
The learned counsel has further argued that a specific stand has been taken in the written statement, which shows that the plaintiff-respondent filed a writ petition before this Court, which was dismissed and even the appeal filed against the order of the High Court was dismissed by the Supreme Court.
Therefore, no suit was maintainable after the plaintiff-respondent has availed the remedy of writ under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
Mr. Ajay Tewari, learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has argued that even if the suit is held beyond the period of limitation by applying the principle laid down in Gurdev Singh's case (supra), the plaintiff-respondent would still be entitled to the grant of consequential benefits flowing from the declaration that the order is void and illegal.
According to the learned counsel, the plaintiff-respondent at best can be deprived of his pay with effect from 1631975 to May 1978 but with regard to pension, no period of limitation could be invoked.
The learned counsel has maintained that period of limitation of three years would not be applicable to the claim of pension as it is a recurring claim and everyday gives a new cause of action.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of Neeti Rajan Singh v. State of Punjab, 2003(2) RSJ 324 : 2003(3) SCT 745 (P&H).
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the judgments of both the Courts below, I am of the considered view that this appeal deserves to be accepted because according to issue No. 2 framed on question of limitation, the suit was required to be filed within a period of three years from the date the order was passed.
The notice of three months for premature retirement was issued on 1331975 and it was to take effect on 371975.
The plaintiff-respondent was given the benefit of leave of the kind due and he was retired with effect from 16.3.1977.
The suit in the present case was filed on 1261986 and by no stretch of imagination, it could be said that the suit was within limitation.
According to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra), it has been categorical held, that in accordance with Article 113 of the Act, the suit has to be filed within a period of three years from the date the right to sue accrues.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Syed Qamrali case (supra) was discussed and explained holding that even Syed Qamrali had filed a suit within the period prescribed by the Limitation Act and, therefore, in the instant case, the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent has to be held as time barred.
It is, therefore, evident that issue No. 2 regarding limitation as decided by the learned Additional District Judge has not been decided in accordance with the law laid down by the Supreme Court and the same is decided against the plaintiff-respondent.
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff-respondent is held to be time barred.
8.
Once it is held that the suit of the plaintiff-respondent is time barred, the question remains as to whether the claim of the plaintiff-respondent for grant of pension could be considered under the prayer concerning consequential relief.
It is true that in matter concerning pension, there is no period of limitation but for that purpose, the basic order retiring the plaintiff- respondent from service has to be successfully challenged.
Once the plaintiff has failed in getting a declaration that the order dated 371975 operative with effect from 16.3.1977 could be challenged then it is not possible to conclude that the plaintiff-respondent would be entitled to the grant of pensionary benefits.
As long as the afore-mentioned order stands, no pensionary benefits could be allowed to the plaintiff-respondent.
The reliance on the judgment of this Court in Neeti Rajan's case (supra) is also not helpful to the plaintiff-respondent because in that case, the judgment of this Court in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Jagdish Ram Mittal, 1989(1) RSJ 41 was relied upon to hold that there was no period of limitation for challenging the void order.
That view obviously is in conflict with the judgment of the Supreme Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra).
It may be further mentioned that in the present case, the plaintiff-respondent had challenged the order of his premature retirement upto Supreme Court and the same has been upheld.
Moreover, the grant of benefit of leave of the kind due to the plaintiff-respondent would not deface the order of premature retirement.
Therefore, the appeal is liable to be accepted.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal succeeds.
The findings of the learned Additional District Judge on issues No. 1 and 2 are set aside.
It is held that the order dated 371975, which became operative on 16.3.1977 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot, does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
The suit of the plaintiff-respondent is hopelessly time barred.
Therefore, the judgment of the learned Sub-Judge is restored.
The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
Appeal allowed.